- THE ANNUAL TESTIMONY OF THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY ON THE STATE OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE ANNUAL TESTIMONY OF THE SECRETARY
OF THE TREASURY ON THE STATE OF THE
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 9, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-101

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-906 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 9, 2024.................................................     1
Appendix:
July 9, 2024.................................................    51

WITNESSES
Tuesday, July 9, 2024

Yellen, Hon. Janet L., Secretary, U.S. Department of the Treasury     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Yellen, Hon. Janet L.........................................    52

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Gottheimer, Hon. Josh:
Letter to Acting Comptroller of the Currency Hsu, Treasury
Secretary Yellen, and FinCEN Director Gacki re: AML/BSA,
from Representatives Gottheimer, Luetkemeyer, and Sherman,
dated July 8, 2024.........................................    55
Hill, Hon. French:
Letter to Treasury Secretary Yellen and Secretary of State
Blinken re: seizure of Russian assets, dated May 31, 2024..    57
Statement of Administration Policy on H.R. 4763, dated May
22, 2024...................................................    60
Huizenga, Hon. Bill:
Department of the Treasury Office of Foreign Assets Control
Directive..................................................    61
Letter to Treasury Secretary Yellen dated July 4, 2024.......    62
Waters, Hon. Maxine:
Written statement of the Atlantic Council....................    64
Written statement of the Bank Information Center (BIC).......    65
Written statement of Sir William Browder KCMG................    70
Written statement of the Center for Economic and Policy
Research (CEPR)............................................   111
Written statement of the FACT Coalition......................   116
Written statement of Global Financial Integrity (GFI)........   119
Written statement of Emily Kilcrease, Center for a New
American Security..........................................   125
Written statement of the ONE Campaign........................   129
Written statement of Razom for Ukraine.......................   132
Written statement of the Royal United Services Institute for
Defence and Security Studies (RUSI)........................   135
Written statement of Transparency International..............   138
Yellen, Hon. Janet L.:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
McHenry....................................................   146
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Casten......................................   176
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Davidson....................................   185
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Fitzgerald..................................   163
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Flood.......................................   183
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Garcia......................................   187
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Gottheimer..................................   178
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Green.......................................   191
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Hill........................................   165
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   192
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................   190
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Rose........................................   174
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Waters......................................   159

THE ANNUAL TESTIMONY OF THE
SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY ON
THE STATE OF THE INTERNATIONAL
FINANCIAL SYSTEM

----------

Tuesday, July 9, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:09 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas, Hill,
Loudermilk, Mooney, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Norman, Meuser,
Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Flood, Lawler, Nunn, Houchin;
Waters, Velazquez, Sherman, Meeks, Scott, Lynch, Cleaver,
Himes, Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Casten,
Horsford, Tlaib, Torres, and Nickel.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Annual Testimony of the
Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the International
Financial System.''
I will note at the outset that this hearing has a hard stop
of 1 p.m., which we will strictly observe.
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Secretary Yellen, I appreciate you being here today.
From Europe to the Middle East to Asia, global unrest is
creating additional challenges for the international financial
system. There are also rising risks emerging from our own
domestic failures here at home. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) recently warned that U.S. deficits and debt now present,
``a growing risk to the U.S. and global economy and should be
urgently addressed.''
In last year's negotiations surrounding the debt ceiling,
House Republicans secured historic guardrails on Federal
spending with the Fiscal Responsibility Act. Unfortunately, the
Biden Administration has undermined this bipartisan progress at
every turn with reckless and expensive executive action.
The government debt isn't just a challenge for America, nor
is inflation a challenge for America alone, although it is
distinctly worse than the rest of the globe. Total public debt
globally is at a record high. Much of it is held by emerging
market economies with poor creditworthiness and depressed
interest rates that do not accurately reflect the default risk.
This problem is exacerbated by opaque Chinese
infrastructure lending through its Belt and Road Initiative.
Communist China is now the largest creditor to the developing
world. To add insult to injury, it remains one of the largest
annual borrowers from the World Bank, despite assurances that
these loans would be phased out.
The Biden Administration is failing to leverage U.S.
standing at the international financial institutions (IFIs) to
block financing for the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). At the
same time, Treasury is proposing a multiyear process to stand
up an entirely new bureaucracy to regulate private U.S.
investment to China. To be sure, the recently-proposed
rulemaking is a step in the right direction, and more
responsible than other proposals that have been floated about
this town. However, this approach will take years to implement,
and lacks the urgency necessary to confront the generational
threat posed by the CCP.
We have an existing, time-tested sanctions regime that can
have an immediate impact, and I urge you, Secretary Yellen, and
I urge the Biden Administration to use it and use it
forcefully.
Any serious effort, whether legislative or administrative,
to block global funding for the Chinese military-industrial
complex must include the full blocking sanctions in Congressman
Andy Barr's Chinese Military and Surveillance Company Sanctions
Act.
Treasury has also implemented its beneficial ownership (BO)
reporting regime as the Administration's principal effort to
crack down on the line of foreign actors in the U.S. financial
system. There is bipartisan support in Congress for this
reporting regime for two reasons: first, it was supposed to be
narrowly targeted to strengthen our national security tools;
and second, it was supposed to protect small businesses from
duplicative reporting regimes. Thus far, Treasury has failed to
adhere to congressional intent on both counts.
America faces grave strategic challenges in Europe and the
Middle East. The Biden Administration has rightly provided
historic military and financial support for Ukraine following
Russia's invasion, yet Treasury has undermined its own sanction
efforts by allowing Putin to continue funding his war machine
through a glaring loophole in its so-called oil price cap.
Similarly, this Administration has wavered in both rhetoric
and action after a promising initial response to Hamas'
barbaric terrorist attacks on Israel last October. To begin to
right the ship, Treasury must redouble its efforts to cut off
funding for Iran and its proxies.
If nonsensical and contradictory policies like these
continue, allies will continue to question America's, and
specifically this Administration's, leadership on the global
stage.
I yield back.
The Chair will now recognize the ranking member of the
committee, the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 4
minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
I would like to welcome you, Madam Secretary, before the
committee today and applaud the work of both your leadership
and President Biden's leadership. The Biden-Harris
Administration is fighting every day for people by creating
15.7 million new jobs, doubling the average monthly number of
jobs created during Biden's term when compared to Trump's first
3 years before the pandemic, increasing wealth and wages
broadly, and steering our economy out of the throes of a
pandemic made worse by the previous Administration.
I also applaud President Biden for never backing down in
the face of opposition. When the Supreme Court blocked his plan
to cancel student debt, President Biden sought other ways to
help America's student loan borrowers. To date, the Biden
Administration has forgiven $144 billion in Federal student
loans for nearly 4 million borrowers. This is what it looks
like when we have a leader who puts the well-being of the
American people above his need for revenge. From signing into
law the American Rescue Plan and the bipartisan infrastructure
law, which is making the U.S. economy the strongest in the
world, to taking on companies saddling Americans with illegal
junk fees, to cutting child poverty in half, our economy is
stronger because of President Biden.
I also commend Secretary Yellen's work to stabilize the
banking system after last year's regional bank failures, as
well as deploying $12 billion for community development
financial institutions (CDFIs) and minority depository
institutions (MDIs), and $10 billion for small businesses
through the State Small Business Credit Initiative (SSBCI). I
am working on a bill to build on the successes and the
effectiveness of the SSBCI, and I look forward to working with
you on that.
And there is still more work to be done, especially on
issues like housing, and President Biden has made housing a top
priority of his Administration. On the other hand, the MAGA
operatives have made their priority loud and clear. They have
conceived a 920-page plan to undermine our government, our
social safety nets, and our values as Americans. This Project
2025 is diabolical, so insidious, and so disturbing that
everyone in this country needs to read it. They need to read it
so they can understand the plan to take away their rights,
their freedoms, and their democracy, and turn this country into
a Christo-fascist state. You can read this garbage at
www.project2025.org.
Now, Project 2025 was written by former Trump White House
staffers, Trump Administration officials, and the ultra right-
wing Heritage Foundation. Banning abortion and contraception,
abolishing the Department of Education, and taking over the
Department of Justice so a Republican President can use the FBI
to settle political scores are just a few of the low lights.
Project 2025 would also gut agencies like the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) and the Federal Reserve, and
dangerously restructure the Department of the Treasury, the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and other
agencies critical to the economy.
Moreover, Project 2025 describes plans to withdraw from
international financial institutions like the IMF and the World
Bank, both of which have advanced U.S. democratic ideals all
around the world.
I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Luetkemeyer,
the Chair of our Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit
Finance, and International Financial Institutions, for 1
minute.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, welcome, Secretary Yellen.
Since we heard from you during last year's annual
testimony, the global debt crisis has only grown worse. Russia
continues its war against Ukraine, and with help from Iranian
funding, Hamas perpetrated a heinous attack on Israel, our
closest ally in the Middle East. Meanwhile, Communist China
continues to threaten global economic security through unfair,
even illegal trade practices, and threatens regional security
with escalating aggressive actions against the Philippines and
Taiwan.
It is therefore bewildering, despite that behavior, why and
how the CCP still receives over a billion dollars annually from
World Bank commitments. Indeed, the global economic and
security situation has deteriorated so dramatically during the
3\1/2\ years of the Biden Administration that I can't help but
ask what have they been doing that could account for this?
In the international financial system, the Administration's
weakness on Iran sanctions and on energy in general is one
obvious culprit. At the IFIs, the continued push for the green
agenda through the evolution roadmap is another, prioritizing
climate over the needs of 700 million people who remain mired
in extreme poverty.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The Chair now recognizes the ranking
member of our Subcommittee on National Security, Illicit
Finance, and International Financial Institutions, Mrs. Beatty,
for 1 minute.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters. And Secretary Yellen, thank you for being here today to
testify.
I would like to echo the remarks made by Ranking Member
Waters. Over the last 3\1/2\ years, President Biden has helped
restore the United States' leadership in a global economy. We
are experiencing unprecedented levels of job creation,
historically-low unemployment, declining inflation, and growing
wages and wealth, the rebuilding of an economy that works for
everyone.
I want to thank you, Secretary Yellen, for the work that
you have done to restore our leadership at the international
financial institutions and to protect our economy and our
national security.
I also want to thank Leader Hakeem Jeffries and the
Democrats for governing by giving the votes necessary to pass
the debt ceiling, although we aren't in the Majority.
I look forward to continuing to build on the historic work
that you and President Biden and the Administration have done.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Today, we welcome the testimony of the
Honorable Janet Yellen, the 78th Secretary of the Department of
the Treasury.
Secretary Yellen, thank you for being here. You will be
recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral presentation of your
testimony. And without objection, your written statement will
be made a part of the record.
We welcome you back before the committee, and I will now
recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JANET L. YELLEN, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the
committee, thank you for the invitation to testify in my
capacity as Chair of the National Advisory Council on
International Monetary and Financial Policies.
The United States built the international financial
institutions 80 years ago with our allies and partners. Today,
U.S. leadership at them is essential to our national and
economic security.
We work through the multilateral development banks (MDBs)
to fight poverty and drive sustainable and inclusive growth,
strengthening developing and emerging markets that are key
trade and investment partners for the United States and
addressing global challenges such as climate change, pandemics,
and conflict and fragility that threaten to undermine global
economic growth. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) provides
crucial support to countries to help resolve debt problems,
minimize negative spillovers to the global economy, strengthen
governance, and restore growth.
These institutions' strong balance sheets make U.S.
contributions to them safe and highly cost-effective. They
crowd in support from other partners, and the United States
works as the largest or near-largest shareholder in all of them
to make sure they use their funds well.
These institutions are also the only realistic option for
the United States to offer high-quality and transparent
development financing at the scale needed to be a U.S.-led
value proposition that competes with China's. We must show
leadership and contribute strong financial support as it has
only become more important to provide credible alternatives to
lending options that can be opaque and coercive, potentially
undermining borrower countries' sovereignty and long-term
economic sustainability.
Over the past year, we continued to push for evolution at
the MDBs so that they are efficient, effective, and can better
help countries address global challenges. Congress enabled a
$250 million contribution to the World Bank's IDA Crisis
Response Window, demonstrating U.S. commitment to providing a
critical lifeline to the world's poorest and most vulnerable
countries. We made the largest pledge to the replenishment of
the International Fund for Agriculture and Development, a
strong partner in increasing food security. We also helped lead
successful negotiations around capital increases and important
reforms for IDB Invest, the private sector arm of the Inter-
American Development Bank, and a key partner in Latin America
and the Caribbean, and for the European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD) to enhance its lending capacity,
including for continued support of Ukraine.
We now ask that Congress authorize our participation in
these capital increases and in the African Development Bank's
callable capital increase so that it can continue to lend at
current levels to countries that otherwise would be forced to
look elsewhere. The President's budget also requests $1 billion
that would enable up to $36 billion in new lending capacity at
the World Bank, as we continue to press international partners
to join us in efforts that could expand lending headroom by
$100 billion.
I thank Congress for authorizing lending $21 billion to the
Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust, making us the largest
contributor and further showcasing our strong commitment to
supporting low-income countries. We also led successful
negotiations on the 16th general quota review so that the IMF
is adequately resourced to continue to play its crucial role at
the center of the global financial safety net and to preserve
our quota share and veto, solidifying U.S. influence at this
vital institution. We request authorization to increase the
U.S. quota to cement this significant achievement.
Let me stop there. I would be happy to answer your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Yellen can be found on
page 52 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Let's start with the notice of proposed rulemaking on
outbound investment. We have talked a good bit about this. As I
said in my opening statement, I think what the Administration
has done is a step in the right direction. I welcome it. But we
have time-tested tools of sanctions that are clear red light/
green lights, what is permissible/what is not permissible.
So we have a notice of proposed rulemaking, and there is a
line established about, what are investments, investable
technology that is prohibited versus a reporting regime, and it
is not clear.
So, just wanting to have one question as an example, the
difference between artificial intelligence (AI) being used for
an MRI in a medical setting to identify cancer, and by a drone
operator using location targets' imaging to targets in a
weapons setting--how do you draw the distinction between those
two different AIs?
Secretary Yellen. We recognize that, in artificial
intelligence, it is widely used for many different purposes.
And the regime that we have proposed is really oriented toward
those uses that are clearly national security risks. We want to
make sure that China and other countries of concern don't gain
access to technologies and products that are critical for----
Chairman McHenry. Why not just name names and say, ``Don't
invest in these companies?'' Isn't that the clearest route to
stem the flow of capital going into Chinese technology?
Let me give you another example. The regulation says that
AI that operates at either the 10 to the 24th, 10 to the 25th,
or 10 to the 26th computational operations would not be
investable for Americans.
What is the real-world difference between these operational
levels and the significance of one being used in a military
capability setting?
Secretary Yellen. We have tried to target technologies that
are critical and can contribute to military intelligence or
cyber capabilities in countries of concern. We want to make
sure that what we are doing here is narrowly targeted at clear
national security risks----
Chairman McHenry. Why not just use sanctions for that? Why
not just use direct sanctions that say, ``Do not invest in
these companies?'' Red light/green light, there is no complete
clarity here. Why not just go with that approach?
Secretary Yellen. Sanctions usually are put in place after
something has occurred that creates a problem, and these are
very rapidly-evolving areas. We know that there is a gap in our
regulatory framework, and we want to make sure that American
firms and persons are not contributing, through their
investment activities, to enabling firms in China or other
countries of concern to----
Chairman McHenry. Yes. We are trying to get at the same
thing. I am saying clearly that we have sanctions that we can
proactively take on companies that are using this technology,
and it is far clearer. And that is a far clearer way to stem
the flow of U.S. investment capital into China.
Let me switch to one additional topic, which is the
beneficial ownership regime. As I said in my opening statement,
we wanted clarity here. We didn't want redundancy.
Why did the Treasury bifurcate the beneficial ownership
rules and move forward without the third rule? And when can we
expect Treasury to publish the customer due diligence (CDD)
rescission rule?
Right now, you have two reporting regimes on small
businesses. This is onerous. What is the timeline to clear that
up?
Secretary Yellen. That is something that we are working on
revising to make sure it is consistent with the requirements of
the Corporate Transparency Act. I believe that we are hoping to
get something out this fall.
We are engaging right now with other stakeholder agencies
to discuss the substance of the proposal, and we want to have a
notice that will enable the public to weigh in with their own
comments.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. Well, right now, because of rules 1
and 2 going live, every small business in America has a new
reporting requirement that they are most likely unaware of, and
this needs to be cleared up.
I will now recognize the ranking member of the committee,
Ms. Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Yellen, I don't have much of a question to ask
you. I want to thank you basically for the work that you have
done.
There is a lot of talk about in helping small businesses
and minority businesses, but under your leadership, working
with the President of the United States, you have done a
magnificent job. I want to thank you for the Community
Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), an alternative to
the big banks who don't give loans to small businesses; they
don't want them in the bank. But because of CDFIs, people have
a place to go to present their case and get loans.
The other thing I want to thank you for is the Minority
Business Development Agency, which you put $125 million into in
order to teach and to train and to make sure that small
businesses have the assistance that they need, the technical
assistance to these businesses so that they have the legal, the
accounting, and business advice that they need to grow and
prosper.
And, of course, I want to thank you for the SSBCI. We put
in this committee $10 billion to create 10 million loans, and I
want you to know that it is making a difference.
I want you to know that the other side has not done any
significant work for small and minority-owned businesses.
We are trying to close the wealth gap. I give you credit
for your leadership, and for your understanding.
If I wanted to ask you a question, I would ask you, do you
think that these kinds of efforts will help us to close that
wealth gap?
Secretary Yellen. I absolutely do, and I very much want to
thank you for the strong endorsement that you have given
Treasury's work. I know how important this is to you, and it is
important to the country. It has been our focus to use the
funds that Congress has provided most effectively since day one
of the Biden Administration.
And addressing the wealth gap is a top priority. At
Treasury, we are trying to use every single tool that we have
to make headway on this. As you know, this is something that is
difficult to eradicate, but I think our efforts are making a
difference. And, as I have traveled around the country, I have
often had the chance to visit businesses that are getting help
from CDFIs in low-income or minority communities. And I have
seen small businesses get the support they need through CDFIs
or through SSBCI to develop and thrive. This is a clear focus
of all the work the Biden Administration has done.
Ms. Waters. I think it is important for people to know that
this is all over the country. And I am trying to get my
colleagues on the opposite side of the aisle to work with us so
that rural communities and small communities and towns can have
more access. The infrastructure is not there with nonprofits
and others to work with what you are doing for all of us. And
maybe, there is something you can say or do to encourage those
who have small towns in their areas that don't know about the
programs. And, when we take it to them to ask them, ``Don't you
want to participate in CDFIs, and don't you want some of the
money that comes to your States with SSBCI's?'' What can we do
to get them more interested so that more of this money can get
into rural communities?
I know that you don't have time. This is not the proper
place to educate them now. But perhaps you can volunteer to
meet with some of my colleagues to get them interested from the
opposite side of the aisle on how they can take advantage of
what you are doing, what the President is doing, and what we
are learning so we can help equal the playing field so that we
can have financial services working for everybody, and that we
can have women- and minority-owned businesses, et cetera, that
have been excluded for so long, participating because of the
work that you are doing.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you very much. And we would be glad
to work with you or with others who are interested in bringing
these benefits to low-income and rural communities. We do try
to do significant outreach, and we are certainly prepared to do
more, and would welcome the collaboration.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hill. [presiding]. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Madam Secretary, it is great to have you here before the
committee.
It has been more than 2 months since President Biden signed
the REPO Act into law, and I would like to see it swiftly and
fully implemented by the President. I wrote to you in May,
joined by Congresswoman Waters and Congressman Meeks, to
encourage the Administration to do that. And, while I support
doing all we can to help Ukraine eject Putin, I have several
concerns about the extraordinary revenue acceleration loan
package announced by the G7 leaders last month. I question
whether this plan can really work in practice.
Under the REPO Act, the President already has the authority
to go after Russian sovereign assets in the United States, and
I believe these frozen assets should be legally seized, the
ownership converted, and those funds deposited in the REPO
contemplated trust fund. I think that is in the best interests
of Ukraine, the U.S., and our G7 allies. And I think it sends
the right message that we are leading. Congress, on a
bipartisan basis, passed this law. We want tough sanctions. We
want Ukraine to have the arms they need. And we need the
financial deterrence that the REPO Act brings. As Margaret
Thatcher told us years ago, ``This is no time to go wobbly.''
I would like to know how we are implementing that law. Will
you commit to meet the mandatory deadlines as required by
Section 104 of the REPO Act, starting July 23rd?
Secretary Yellen. We will meet the requirements of the Act,
but let me say we were very pleased with the passage of the
REPO Act. It provides Treasury and the Administration with an
important set of tools, and we think all options should be on
the table.
However, we also believe the strength of our response to
Putin has been that we have a global alliance that has worked
together in support of Ukraine, and we have looked for an
approach that our allies, particularly the G7 and the European
Union, could be supportive of, that would deliver significant
revenues to Ukraine. And, as I think you know, the G7 leaders
in June did----
Mr. Hill. I do know, Madam Secretary. Let me reclaim my
time just to use it effectively. And I thank you for your
leadership, but the REPO Act, as Mr. Meeks and Ms. Waters and I
point out, does give more strength. We should be leading and
use that full tool, because we know the support is there in
Europe if we will provide that leadership.
What is the total amount, now that you have had this 2
months, of frozen Russian Central Bank assets held in the
Federal Reserve here in the United States?
Secretary Yellen. It is a relatively small amount.
Mr. Hill. I understand that. Could you give us the amount,
please, ma'am?
Secretary Yellen. It is on the order of $5 billion or $6
billion. And most of the assets are held in Europe.
Mr. Hill. I understand that. I understand where the assets
are held. Thank you.
Let me switch subjects to the Financial Innovation and
Technology for the 21st Century Act (FIT21). I want to thank
you, and I want to thank Under Secretary Liang for the work you
did on looking at our digital assets regulatory framework,
which we worked on mightily over the last year, on a bipartisan
basis. I particularly want to thank the White House for the
Statement of Administration Policy, which says that you are
eager to work with Congress on developing legislation for
digital assets to ensure a comprehensive and balanced
regulatory framework.
Do you continue to commit for the balance of this Congress
to work with the committee and in the Senate to achieve a
regulatory framework for digital assets?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, very much so. I am happy to make
that commitment, and we have worked productively together. It
would be nice to see this reach a good conclusion.
Mr. Hill. On another topic related to digital assets, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) are consistently taking
opposite legal positions in Federal court on digital assets.
In your capacity as the Financial Stability Oversight
Council (FSOC) leader, what are you doing to bring the CFTC and
the SEC together and be on the same page about this matter?
Secretary Yellen. It is not the job of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council to adjudicate----
Mr. Hill. No, but you are supposed to quarterback for
financial risk. Are you quarterbacking between the CFTC and the
SEC on this dispute?
Secretary Yellen. Not really. We have done a report on the
risks connected with cryptocurrency and digital assets.
Mr. Hill. Okay. In my final----
Secretary Yellen. The risks have to do with holes where
there is a lack of authority.
Mr. Hill. Right. I agree. And you are working
constructively with us. Thank you.
I am going to submit some questions in writing for the
record on the multilateral banks and what I think is a
preference that China is seeking, and we need Treasury to push
back on that.
My time has expired.
I recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Velazquez,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, welcome, Secretary Yellen. Thank you for being here
this morning.
As you know, many working-class families and small
businesses are concerned about inflation. You recently told
Yahoo Finance that you expect inflation to come down, and, as
we get into next year, you believe inflation will get back to
the 2-percent target, and you do not see the basis for a U.S.
recession.
Can you explain how the policies of the Biden-Harris
Administration have helped temper the rate of inflation and
given you this sense of optimism?
Secretary Yellen. I am optimistic, because I believe that
the big inflationary impulse that we saw in 2022 largely was
global, and it largely reflected supply problems stemming from
the pandemic and its impact around the world. And, due to the
work of the Biden Administration, and firms in the economy, and
the pandemic being resolved, many of those supply issues are
now fully resolved. So, much of the pressure has diminished.
On top of that, we have a strong labor market that has
attracted many new people into the labor market. Labor supply
has surged. And, although the labor market was initially very
tight, now we have a strong labor market, but one with fewer
pressures that would create inflationary concern. Inflation is
coming down.
The measure the Fed focuses on is now running at 2.6
percent over the last year, and I believe that it will continue
to come down over time.
Rents and housing costs continue to be higher than we would
ideally like.
Ms. Velazquez. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. And it will be a while before housing
costs come down to a more normal level, but that process is
in----
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, in his opening statement, Chairman McHenry
mentioned the IMF's warning about the U.S. debt burden.
However, in the same Yahoo Finance interview, you were also
critical of the tax cuts passed by Donald Trump and
Congressional Republicans, saying that decision was responsible
for many of the problems that we face now with our fiscal
trajectory.
Can you explain the fiscal problems that arose from Donald
Trump's tax cuts and how the Biden Administration is working to
reduce these effects?
Secretary Yellen. It was a tax cut that had a very large
impact on the deficit and the national debt. It was costly. It
was regressive. It did not pay for itself. And, in a way, it
concealed its true cost by including delayed raisers,
phaseouts, and sunsets, some of which Congress will have to
deal with next year. We did not see the investment boom that
was promised by the Act. And President Biden believes it is
important to be on a fiscally-sustainable path.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. I hope the other side is
listening.
Secretary Yellen, millions of businesses are required to
report their beneficial ownership information to FinCEN by
January 1st. Yet, according to several conversations I am
having with businesses in my district and across the country,
many legitimate businesses are unaware that this requirement
exists.
How are FinCEN and the Treasury Department working to
increase awareness of this requirement, particularly amongst
rural and underserved businesses in which English is not a
primary language?
Secretary Yellen. FinCEN has a very active program of
outreach and of education, and I believe that you
participated--and I want to thank you for that--by hosting an
event designed to inform people and business owners about what
the requirements entail. There is other language to support----
Ms. Velazquez. If I could just make a suggestion? I would
like to see better coordination--Mr. Chairman, please give me
just a second--to work closely with the Small Business
Administration (SBA). We have a network of Small Business
Development Centers (SBDCs) across the country----
Mr. Hill. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Secretary Yellen. I will do that.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Yellen, for being here today.
I think the Chair mentioned beneficial ownership. How is
your office going about educating the 32.6 million businesses
that have never heard of FinCEN? You have a penalty of a
quarter of a million dollars plus 2 years imprisonment on
something that has been ruled unconstitutional by a court in
Alabama. What are you doing to: one, inform the businesses who
are the lynchpin for this economy; and two, is there any
thought to extending the 12-month deadline to another year, to
2 years?
Secretary Yellen. As I mentioned, there is an extensive
outreach and education program that is taking place across the
country. People with FinCEN are hosting events. And we are
happy to work with Members of Congress to explain what this is
about in different parts of the country. So, if you have an
interest in that, please just contact us. But there is an
extensive outreach effort. It is a very simple process; it
takes 15 or 20 minutes, I believe, for most firms to be able to
file. There is a very user-friendly website where the
information can be input. It is not a difficult process. We
have seen a good response so far and I don't think it is going
to be necessary to extend the timeframe. It goes through the
end of this year.
Mr. Norman. What are the numbers that have already
complied, in your opinion?
Secretary Yellen. I believe 2.7 million is the most recent
number.
Mr. Norman. 2.7 million out of 31 million. That is kind of
a low percentage.
Now, if the penalty is going to stay in place--you say this
is simple. But, for the businesses, these businesses are
struggling. They are just trying to make ends meet with this
Biden Administration, what they are doing with inflation, what
they are doing with the supply chain, all of the above. And to
put another regulation on them at this point in time and not
know--put me on your list for what FinCEN is doing.
Secretary Yellen. Okay.
Mr. Norman. Your average plumber is not going to go on a
website and try to find out how to comply with the beneficial
ownership. So, if you could supply--and I will send you a
letter after this, if you could comply and consider extending
it. A quarter of a million dollars fine is ridiculous.
Secretary Yellen. The fine is for, ``willful violation,''
as I understand----
Mr. Norman. Define, ``willful violation?''
Secretary Yellen. ----the rules. And your plumber example
is not somebody who is willfully violating the rules. FinCEN is
not going to prioritize going after small businesses who are
unaware----
Mr. Norman. Secretary Yellen, you realize that is in the
print? You realize the fine is printed?
Secretary Yellen. For, ``willful.''
Mr. Norman. How do you define, ``willful?''
Secretary Yellen. Someone who knows they have an obligation
and fails to----
Mr. Norman. Does that apply to the plumber who doesn't know
what FinCEN is? In the example I used, does that contractor,
that plumber, that welder, if he has a business, is it willful
if he just doesn't comply?
Secretary Yellen. There is a massive education and outreach
effort. And personally, I wouldn't regard that as willful.
Mr. Norman. Okay. Well, if you could clarify that in
writing, not just verbally, I think that would mean a whole
lot.
Now, on another subject, I am in South Carolina. The
Chinese are buying up farmland all over this country. What is
the role of the Secretary of Agriculture, and what is your role
in, I guess, allowing this to take place, if any?
Secretary Yellen. The Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States (CFIUS) has the ability to ban land purchases
or, in some cases, even insist on divestiture of activities
taking place----
Mr. Norman. Are they doing that now? Define how they ban
it. It is taking place now. They are doing it through separate
entities, LLCs. I only have 12 seconds, so I will write you a
letter, if you could define for me what, ``banning,'' means and
how specifically you stop this.
Secretary Yellen. We work closely with the Defense
Department. This is national security-oriented. And yesterday,
we issued a new proposed rule that adds 50 additional military
bases to the existing ones and changes some of the perimeters
of some of them.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
Secretary Yellen. It follows a thorough Department of
Defense review.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Madam Secretary, I want to commend you and the
entire Biden economic team. Over the last couple of years, we
have seen the greatest decline in the inflation rate at any
time this century, and at the same time, we have kept
unemployment at historically-low levels. I want to thank you
and the entire team for that effort.
I also want to compliment you for the Direct File system
that has allowed millions of taxpayers to be able to file their
tax returns in an electronic form without paying $130 to Turbo
Tax. To quote your good words before the Senate, you said that
one day, information that taxpayers receive on the W-2 forms
and the 1099s could be used to prepopulate the program, and I
look forward to the day when the majority of Americans can file
their tax return in less than 2 minutes simply by seeing the W-
2 form and the 1099 information. They have already achieved
that in about a dozen countries in Europe.
The gentleman from Arkansas mentioned the REPO Act. Those
assets should be used to go to Ukraine, but there are Americans
who have claims against those assets, judgments against those
assets, and I would hope that we wouldn't send all of the money
to Ukraine, and then tell the Americans with claims that they
are out of luck.
The anti-money laundering laws are important. I want to
bring to your attention that Florida, and now Tennessee, have
laws designed to--and it is perhaps a good purpose of these
laws--say that you shouldn't be denied financial services
because of your political opinions or religious beliefs. But I
hope that you will work with those States and preempt those
laws as necessary to protect the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). We
shouldn't be in a circumstance where you lose your account
because you have all of these suspicious activity reports
(SARs), and the bank can't tell you about the suspicious
activity reports, and all of a sudden you think it is because
of your political beliefs.
In the past, when you have come here, I have talked to you
about how China has incentives for its domestic taxpayers to
invest in Chinese companies but denies those for investments in
the United States, but we have incentives for Americans to
invest--we call it capital gains allowance--and we provide it
to those who invest in China.
But I want to focus instead on India. India has cut its
corporate tax rate from 40 percent to 22 percent, but they have
excluded branches of foreign companies. So many U.S. companies
can just form a subsidiary and take advantage of that 22-
percent rate, but American financial institutions have
branches, and as a technical matter, they can't form a
subsidiary. Can I count you on you to bring this up with the
Indian Ministry of Finance, that American companies should have
the same tax rate as Indian companies in India?
Secretary Yellen. I would be glad to have my staff discuss
this with you in greater detail to understand the issue.
Mr. Sherman. I look forward to that.
I want to commend you for sanctioning individuals who use
sexual violence as a weapon of war in Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (DRC), and South Sudan. But the greatest
use of sexual violence in war this century is the 100,000
Tigrayan women who have been subjected to sexual violence in
northern Ethiopia.
Can you commit to applying the same standards that you did
for Sudan, the DRC, and South Sudan to individuals,
particularly in the Ethiopian and Eritrean military, who have
carried out this campaign of sexual violence against Tigrayan
women? Can I count on you to use the same standards?
Secretary Yellen. This is really a determination that has
to be made by the State Department rather than Treasury. But
certainly, human rights violations have been a concern.
Mr. Sherman. And finally, the Russian Central Bank has
urged the use of crypto to evade Western sanctions. A
stablecoin offers no particular advantage in that it is stable.
You can't make money by holding it, and it usually doesn't pay
interest, certainly not the interest you get on money market
funds. Its sole advantage is evading our sanctions and other
laws, including tax laws. And I hope that in enforcing our
sanctions on Russia, you will not facilitate that by
facilitating a stablecoin.
Secretary Yellen. We are very attentive to the use of
crypto currencies and stablecoins. We don't think it is a very
substantial thing that Russia is doing. But, as our sanctions
bite more and more, it becomes a concern.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being here today.
Back in September, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(CFPB) announced that it is considering a Fair Credit Reporting
Act (FCRA) SBREFA that includes a broad and novel definition
of, ``data broker.''
Secretary Yellen. Of what?
Mr. Garbarino. As I mentioned to CFPB Director Chopra, I am
very concerned that this proposal may not recognize how
consumer data is used for identity verification and fraud
prevention. Use of data for these purposes is not the same as
using it for credit eligibility purposes and, therefore,
shouldn't be subject to the FCRA.
Further, the companies that provide identity and fraud-
prevention technology to financial institutions should not be
regulated under the FCRA, as they already fall under the Bank
Secrecy Act, the USA PATRIOT Act, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley
Act. It would be a serious mistake to limit our fraud-
prevention tools in the system.
Secretary Yellen, given that the CFPB's proposal may
severely impact the ability to prevent fraud and conduct
identify verification, has the CFPB spoken to anyone at FinCEN
or Treasury regarding its SBREFA proposal?
Secretary Yellen. I would have to ask. I don't know what
contact there has been. I have not talked to Director Chopra
about this, but my staff may well have done so.
Mr. Garbarino. If they haven't, will you commit to engaging
with the CFPB on this?
Secretary Yellen. Certainly. I would be happy to look into
it.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. Wouldn't it make sense for the CFPB to
minimize its impact on the Bank Secrecy Act compliance and
other law enforcement and privacy statutes?
Secretary Yellen. If it has that impact, it would make
sense.
Mr. Garbarino. Okay. I appreciate that. Thank you very
much.
Over the last 2 decades, China has unleashed a global
lending spree, mainly through its Belt and Road Initiative,
showering mostly developing countries with hundreds of billions
of dollars in an effort to expand its influence and become a
political and economic superpower.
China has opaque loans, different from most other loans to
developing countries by advanced nations or institutions like
the World Bank, that usually carry higher interest rates and
shorter maturities, requiring financing every couple of years
and frequently using national assets as collateral.
As more countries are on the cusp of default, rising
interest rates are only going to make it more expensive to pay
off debt denominated in dollars and other key currencies.
Secretary, what should the role of international financial
institutions be in addressing the needs of those that have
outstanding Chinese debt and are currently in desperate need of
relief from Beijing?
Secretary Yellen. We are working extremely hard to relieve
the debt burdens of low-income countries that clearly need to
restructure their debt and are trying to do so in the context
of an IMF program. And, as you say, China is often the holdout
and the most difficult lender to deal with, and we have been
addressing that in all that we do. It is a topic I have raised
in all of my bilateral meetings with my Chinese counterparts.
We have raised this with the IMF and the World Bank. A
sovereign debt roundtable has been created to deal with some of
the issues that China continues to raise in multiple debt
restructurings. And while I still have serious concerns, some
progress has been made in the context of Common Framework debt
restructurings. Zambia and Ghana, for example, are countries
where progress has been made; China has come to the table. But
there is clearly more to do.
Mr. Garbarino. You have said that you have spoken with the
World Bank and the IMF about this. Estimates peg China's
lending to the developing world at a trillion dollars, which
makes them a bigger lender than the World Bank and the IMF, but
China is still considered an emerging and developing economy
under the eyes of the IMF.
Do you believe that the U.S. should now use its influence
in international organizations to change China's status as a
developing country specifically at the IMF?
Secretary Yellen. I guess I need to look at that. I am not
prepared to give you an answer on that.
Mr. Garbarino. Again, it is my understanding that the IMF
considers China an emerging and developing economy, which
allows them better terms under certain loans. And, if they are
giving out a trillion dollars a year to other countries, I
think we should look at it.
Secretary Yellen. We oppose, in the World Bank and all of
the MDBs, any lending to China whatsoever given China's income
level and extensive lending around the world. And we have
pushed, and they have reduced very substantially the lending
that they do. We vote against all of it.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
I just to want say this: International banks play an
important role in our nation's economy, particularly in New
York. I recognize that the Basel III Endgame is not in your
current jurisdiction, but the financial impact of these rules
cannot be understated. I would encourage you, as Treasury
Secretary, to talk with banking regulators and other FSOC
members about the impact of this rule.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Yellen, you remember the last time you were here,
I raised concerns about the balloon going over the United
States by China and how concerning that was, and since that
time, this issue of national security and agriculture is going
hand in hand. Our farm bill--my good friend, Chairman Thompson,
and I, as two leaders on the House Agriculture Committee, have
framed this as a national security issue. And here's why: The
FBI has now labeled the Chinese Government's action as the
greatest threat. FBI Director Christopher Wray warned us in
April that, ``Chinese hackers have infiltrated U.S. critical
military infrastructures and are now poised to cause
significant damage at any given moment's notice.'' So, we have
a national security issue here of soaring magnitude, and we are
working in a bipartisan way, obviously, to solve this problem.
I want to ask you some specific questions here. Under your
proposal going forward, you now have more than 50 new
facilities that will be added to the lists of sites where
surrounding property transactions may be reviewed by the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS)
and now is totaling 227. So, I want to thank you. You all are
moving.
Secretary Yellen. We are.
Mr. Scott. And this has to be our number-one national
security issue, largely because it is a delicate dance. Many
people don't know--we do know China is our greatest threat, but
it is also our greatest and largest trading partner. So, it is
a very delicate dance that we have to do.
Now, tell me, how did you ultimately decide which military
bases would be included in this latest expansion?
Secretary Yellen. We worked very closely with the
Department of Defense in issuing the notice of proposed
rulemaking that came out yesterday, and they undertook a
comprehensive assessment of military installations and
considered a number of factors--operations, assets, missions,
training at each installation, and what was appropriate in
terms of coverage under CFIUS----
Mr. Scott. Pardon me. I want to get to a couple more
questions. My understanding is that three or more military
installations were removed from that list.
Secretary Yellen. Congressman, my understanding is that
nothing is actually removed from the list, but when areas were
expanded or new bases were added to the list, some existing
bases may have fallen within the radius of another base that
either was expanded or added. I don't think that there were any
bases that were actually removed.
Mr. Scott. Okay. Now, let me ask you this. To the best of
your knowledge, is there any indication that the Chinese
Government is looking beyond land purchases and farm land and
expanding into buying other types of small businesses around
military bases?
I also want to thank you for working with my staff on this
issue, and I hope that we continue to work together, because it
is now the number-one issue facing us as far as agriculture is
concerned, and now, as far as the national security of our
nation.
Secretary Yellen. I can get back to you on whether or not
we are looking at small businesses, but----
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. ----I believe that would be within the
scope of CFIUS's----
Mr. Scott. I look forward to working with you on that.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. [presiding]. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from California, Mrs. Kim,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Yellen, thank you for joining us today. As you
know, the House unanimously passed my bill, H.R. 540, the
Taiwan Non-Discrimination Act. This will support Taiwan's
membership at the IMF where statehood is not a prerequisite to
join the international organizations, and the IMF has no
conditions where statehood is not a requirement.
And as you know, Taiwan belongs to the World Trade
Organization (WTO) and the Asian Development Bank. So if Taiwan
seeks its membership at the IMF, would you support it?
Secretary Yellen. Taiwan has not expressed any interest in
joining the IMF. This is not a decision that the United States
Government----
Mrs. Kim. With all due respect, Secretary Yellen, that is
why we passed the Taiwan Non-Discrimination Act, and we are
hoping that you will work with us and fully support Taiwan's
membership in the IMF. And obviously, it goes without saying
that the world would benefit from having the input and
expertise of the world's 21st-largest economy. So, I hope you
will work with us, and the legislation has already passed out
of the House.
Secretary Yellen. Sure. I guess what I can say is that we
have supported greater engagement between the IMF and Taiwan,
even with Taiwan being a nonmember.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. We have urged surveillance activities----
Mrs. Kim. Yes.
Secretary Yellen. ----and other IMF activities to work with
Taiwan to include them.
Mrs. Kim. Taiwan has indicated their expressed interest to
join, so when that happens, I hope you will support that.
Let me move on to my next question. This is something that
I know Representative Garbarino mentioned earlier, so I echo
his comments to address the growing problem of indebtedness of
low-income countries. G20 nations and the Paris Club agreed to
the Common Framework with the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
Can you speak of any of your efforts to force the CCP to make
its sovereign lending more transparent through the Common
Framework?
Secretary Yellen. We have engaged thoroughly over a long
period of time, and deeply, in every way we can, with China to
bring them to the table to participate actively in
restructuring through the Common Framework. It has been
frustrating, but I think that there has been some progress. We
have urged the IMF and the World Bank--they have set up a
sovereign debt roundtable, which is a forum to discuss issues
that China routinely raises that aren't really case-specific,
but broader.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. And I think we have made some progress
there.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen. And there are several countries where we
have achieved----
Mrs. Kim. Thank you, Secretary. Let's continue to be more
vigilant in making sure that with like-minded countries, and
with our allies, we can force the CCP to be more transparent.
I am going to move on to the next question. We cannot
afford to cave in to CCP demands that private creditors should
be ignored in debt restructuring negotiations. There should be
comparable treatment between public and private creditors. As
you know, private capital is a powerful tool to counter the
CCP's debt diplomacy.
Earlier this year, the U.S. and the CCP launched a
bilateral U.S.-PRC Counternarcotics Working Group to counter
the manufacturing and trafficking of all illicit synthetic
drugs, but I am afraid that we are giving away some of our
leverage by lifting some sanctions, and once again, we are
yielding to the empty promises made by CCP officials. Can you
tell us about the role of Treasury and your role in the Working
Group?
Secretary Yellen. We participate in the Counternarcotics
Working Group. And Treasury has also--under the auspices of a
financial working group, we have established, with our
counterparts led by the People's Bank of China, an anti-money
laundering forum where we are working on best practices, which
also relates to counternarcotics. We have seen China take some
action against firms that are involved in producing precursor--
--
Mrs. Kim. I know late last year, when Xi Jinping and
President Biden met, they also started the fentanyl working
group and the narcotics working group early this year. But we
know from experience that we cannot solely rely on commitments
made by Xi Jinping and CCP officials. So, I hope that you will
do more to ensure that the CCP abides by the commitments that
are established by the Working Group. I know you are
participating, but please be more firm.
Secretary Yellen. Yes. And we have taken sanctions actions
ourselves against Chinese firms on this.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady yields back.
With that, we go to the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Beatty,
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters.
Secretary Yellen, I would just like to make a quick comment
about FinCEN's beneficial ownership reporting rule, which has
been discussed by many of my colleagues this morning. I know
you are collecting the data to protect our national security
and our financial system, and you are doing it because Congress
actually mandated it in the Corporate Transparency Act.
However, I, too, am concerned that many of our small businesses
don't know about this new requirement, but I am going to do my
part to spread the word and to educate the business owners in
my district.
As a matter of fact, I am excited about hosting Treasury
Under Secretary Nelson and FinCEN Director Gacki in Columbus
next week for our FinCEN small business information test. We
may want to get a little quote from you in light of your words
today to help relax some of them that this is not an attack on
them.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you for participating in this. It
is much appreciated. And we want them to know about it, but we
are not looking to penalize small businesses that learn about
it and take the actions they need to file.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Well, thank you for that. We will
certainly, in my opening remarks, include that and share that
with the businesses, because we found out that many of them
absolutely have no idea about this reporting.
Secretary Yellen. Right.
Mrs. Beatty. But the good news is there were some who not
only knew about it; they had actually completed their
transparency forms. So, we are going to continue----
Secretary Yellen. It is pretty simple, filing for a small
business.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you.
Let me now go to the first question I have. Secretary
Yellen, the World Bank's International Development Association
(IDA), as you know, is undergoing a replenishment this year. As
the largest single provider of development finance to the
poorest countries, the IDA is essential to addressing the most
critical development challenges and setting high standards
across the field.
What role does IDA play in addressing the critical
challenges caused by climate change in developing countries,
and how is Treasury pushing IDA to advance its development
priorities for the next 3 years?
Secretary Yellen. It plays an absolutely critical role in
providing concessional demands to the poorest countries, and it
addresses a wide range of needs from food insecurity to
education, to climate, to pandemic preparedness, and other
things. We look forward to an ambitious IDA21 refinancing, and
we want to make sure that the funds are used effectively, given
the enormous pressures that these countries are under, given
all that has happened in terms of climate change, and also, in
terms of pressures on food and energy prices.
Mrs. Beatty. Okay. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen, under President Trump, the United States
became more isolationist as it exited the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) and engaged in close contact with
dictators. How has the United States Treasury, under the Biden
Administration, helped restore and reassert U.S. leadership in
the global economy?
Secretary Yellen. Thank you. Since day one, it has been a
priority at Treasury for us to work closely and collaboratively
with other countries around the globe to address common
problems, whether it is food insecurity, development aid for
countries so that they can grow, addressing debt problems, or
addressing pandemic preparedness. We have worked closely on
trying to set a floor on corporate income tax rates globally to
stop what has been a decades-long race to the bottom.
And certainly when it comes to our support of Ukraine, the
United States has shown global leadership, and we have worked
very closely with our global colleagues on support for Ukraine
and sanctions against Russia. So, a wide range of things that
is just a very partial list, and we really try to turn the
clock 180 degrees in terms of cooperation and involvement in
international fora.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you. And my time is up.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Flood, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Flood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being here today.
Before I begin, I want to make a brief statement on
something that is admittedly not within the scope of this
particular hearing but is very important to my district and
agriculture producers across the country. With the 45Z Clean
Fuel Production Credit going into effect in less than 5 months,
Nebraska's agriculture and energy producers need full and
accurate guidance promptly.
I was disappointed to see Treasury release guidance in
April for the 40B Sustainable Aviation Fuel Credit that
rejected the best available scientific data and tied the hands
of our nation's agricultural producers with an unworkable, one-
size-fits-all limitation.
Nebraska's farmers don't need the Federal Government to
come in at the eleventh hour and dictate which practices are
acceptable and not acceptable. And I will continue to advocate
for greater flexibility that fully recognizes the role
Nebraska's producers play in the future of transportation fuels
and for an all-of-the-above energy policy that puts our farmers
first. I plan to submit some questions, Madam Secretary, for
the record on this issue, and I would appreciate a quick
response.
Switching gears, Secretary Yellen, in response to a letter
from Chairman McHenry, among others, regarding FSOC's calls to
fill the spot market gap in digital assets, it was noted that,
``crypto asset platforms engage in practices commonly subjected
to greater regulation, including operating order book style
markets and custody crypto customer assets.''
Those activities sound a lot like activities undertaken by
centralized intermediaries, and centralized intermediaries are
undoubtedly an important piece of the regulatory puzzle for
digital asset regulation. That is why this committee and the
Agriculture Committee collaborated together on the Financial
Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century (FIT21) Act,
which provides a new regulatory framework with sufficient
responsibility and resources for the CFTC to effectively
regulate spot markets for digital assets that are not
securities.
However, I think it is important that we think about some
of the unique characteristics in decentralized systems as well.
These protocols will allow willing buyers and willing sellers
to find one another and make a trade based on the rules of the
protocol to any of the market participants.
Here is my question: What do you think about decentralized
trading protocols that do not create order book style markets
or involve the custody of customer's crypto assets? Wouldn't
these markets, which are unique relative to most of our
understanding of traditional centralized markets, require a
different approach to regulation?
Secretary Yellen. You are talking about decentralized
finance (DeFi) type of activities and----
Mr. Flood. We have to recognize there is going to be a
decentralized angle to all of this in digital assets, and so
far, everything seems very centralized, so yes.
Secretary Yellen. And your question is, what about the
regulatory approach to those markets?
Mr. Flood. When you look at this whole regulatory regime,
how do you think about decentralized trading protocols
basically that do not create order book style markets, or
involve the custody of a customer's crypto assets? Have you
given that a lot of thought?
Secretary Yellen. This is certainly something that the
regulators are looking at, the SEC, and, to some extent, the
CFTC. Perhaps, some of these activities may fall under the
regulatory umbrella of the banking agencies as well and----
Mr. Flood. And I would add this, Madam Secretary. FSOC
released a report in late 2023 which dedicated an entire
section to the risks associated with digital assets. One such
risk the report mentioned was, ``concentrated risk.'' I would
like to focus on a couple of aspects of concentration risk on
which I would like your views.
If there are only a small number of entities that are able
to serve as custodians of digital assets for registered
investment advisors, would you agree that such an arrangement
could constitute a concentration risk?
Secretary Yellen. It could potentially, but I would need to
know more about the details.
Mr. Flood. I will note that a witness representing the
registered investment advisors spoke in front of Our Digital
Assets Subcommittee early last year and testified that his firm
had, ``three, maybe four,'' options for digital assets custody
currently, and indicated the number could reduce what the SEC's
custody rulemaking.
I guess, Madam Secretary, in the time I have left, if there
are only a small number of entities that are able to serve as
custodians of the now-approved spot Bitcoin's ETFs, would you
view that arrangement as a potential concentration risk?
Secretary Yellen. I just have to know more about the
details. I would need to really look carefully at the case you
have in mind.
Mr. Flood. I will leave you with this: I emphasize that
there are only a handful of custodians for spot Bitcoin ETFs,
and most issuers only have one custodian.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. And thank you for
your time.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, it is so nice to see you here again. I am
grateful for your time today. I want to chat about this ongoing
risk from climate change to our financial markets, and
specifically to what is happening in insurance sectors. There
has been a lot of reporting that I am sure you have seen--The
New York Times said that homeowners' property insurance firms
lost money in 18 States in 2023, so a third of our union----
Secretary Yellen. Yes.
Mr. Casten. ----at least as far as the Senate counts
things. In Texas, home insurance rates went up 23 percent in
2023. We have seen 15 companies that just left Florida after
Hurricane Ida, and 12 insurers went totally insolvent after the
hurricanes in 2021, and 20 in Louisiana. And I know we have had
this conversation with you, and with your staff. Whether this
presents a systemic risk to the G-SIBs is one question, but
with over a third of Americans' wealth tied up in their homes,
it is clearly disruptive.
I am grateful for what the Federal Insurance Office (FIO)
is doing to try to get the data. I have some concerns, though,
that the data call from FIO is relying on the National
Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). And I have
heard--I don't think this is public, but I have heard
anecdotally and privately from folks whom I trust, that there
are at least nine States that are not participating in that
data call, and that those States tend to be ones that are most
exposed to climate risk.
So, my first question is, are you aware of those data gaps
in the FIO data call, and what can FIO do to fill in those gaps
to make sure we get a robust picture of where the financial
risks are now?
Secretary Yellen. I knew that a couple of States were not
participating, but I thought it was the case that most of the
States, where there are great concerns, are participating. I am
happy to look into that in greater detail and get back to you.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I don't know if that is public, but maybe
we can share with staff what we are hearing, and we can just
compare notes and see what we are seeing.
Secretary Yellen. FIO and NAIC were able to collaborate,
and we thought that was a better approach to trying to collect
detailed, meaningful data that would give us insight into this
problem. And so, that is the route we have taken.
Mr. Casten. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. We expect to learn a lot from this data
collection. And as you say, it is potentially a very serious
problem.
Mr. Casten. Are you able to get--I don't know if you saw,
there was a New York Times story today that referred to a
National Bureau of Economic Research paper from last month, I
think Keys and Mulder were the authors, but they essentially
looked at insurance payments that are made and were able to
subtract out public information on property tax and mortgages
to get the inferred insurance that was paid as part of the
escrow.
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry, I haven't seen that.
Mr. Casten. Well, check out the New York Times today. It is
fascinating, because it would seem to imply that there is a way
to back into the data, at least as far as what is happening
with----
Secretary Yellen. We infer it----
Mr. Casten. ----rates and where some of the exposures are,
and we can get wonkier here than our time will allow, but it
seemed to suggest that there is a real dichotomy between States
that have a very pro-consumer regulatory structure, that
therefore are not keeping rates high enough to attract
business, and States that have a very pro-insurer regulatory
structure that are letting antitrust issues run amuck and
driving rates up. And meanwhile----
Secretary Yellen. The State regulatory regime, I think,
definitely matters to what is happening in individual States.
Mr. Casten. Sometimes, 5 minutes bothers me. We should have
longer conversations. The concern I have is that insurance is
going to be this canary in the coal mine, except it is more
like a gorilla in a very small closet, I guess. It is all
regulated at the State level. In theory, we have FIO. In
theory, I think this committee has jurisdiction over insurance
generally, whatever that means. But it just feels like this
huge Whack-A-Mole when we are trying to get data. And I am
curious if you think that you or FIO, or maybe more broadly,
FSOC--do you have the authority just to go and ask the right
questions so that we can understand where these risks are
pooling, or do we need to find other workarounds, maybe even
more regulatory fixes?
Secretary Yellen. FIO has looked very carefully at this and
considered whether the collaboration with the insurance
commissioners was an adequate way to collect this data, and on
balance felt this was the best approach, and that we would
collect information that would be very useful and provide a lot
of insights.
As you know, this is normally a State matter, and not a
Federal matter, but there have been increasing calls. And given
what is happening, I think the Federal Government should be
looking very carefully at this, not just to provide
information, but because there may be a call for Federal
action.
Mr. Casten. Yes, exactly. And I see where the risk is
pooling.
I am out of time, so I yield back. Thank you very much.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being with us today. I
want to highlight--I think we all agree that national security
is at the top of the list, certainly at Treasury and here in
Congress as well, and national security means standing up to
Russia, China, and Iran. It is not about overly burdening small
businesses in my home State of Iowa.
So, let's get started today. I want to thank Secretary
Yellen. My home State has 270,000 small businesses. In fact, it
makes up 99 percent of our business in Iowa. And they are
facing a tremendous amount of paperwork coming largely from
Treasury, which is why we invited FinCEN Director Gacki to come
out and hear directly from Iowans, and she did a great job, but
she also got an earful. She heard and admitted that FinCEN has
alerted only 2 million of more than 3.2 million small
businesses of their obligation to fill out beneficial ownership
information. That is an abysmal number, particularly when we
have less than 6 months left in your timeline to help be able
to execute.
So here is my ask today, Madam Secretary: Would you support
our bipartisan Small Business Red Tape Relief Act, which would
extend the deadline for small businesses to be able to be
compliant with Treasury?
Secretary Yellen. FinCEN has 2.7 million reports so far,
and they are engaging in a very extensive outreach and
education effort. And it is their judgment that it is not
necessary to extend the deadline, but----
Mr. Nunn. Madam Secretary, I appreciate that. Let me share
with you what was delivered directly to Ms. Gacki. The very
fact that we have only alerted 2 million out of more than 30
million is harmful. If they fail to meet it in the next 6
months, it will be $500-a-day to small businesses. We are not
going after the bad guys; we are going after small businesses
in Iowa. I would ask you, as the Treasury, to extend this
deadline and work on a bipartisan level with us to make sure
that our small businesses are taken care of. I hope you hear me
on that.
Secretary Yellen. Look, we are not trying to go after small
businesses that do their best to meet their responsibilities, I
think because they don't----
Mr. Nunn. Most of them don't know what their
responsibilities are because they have not been informed by
FinCEN at this point.
Secretary Yellen. The CTA penalizes willful violations of
the law, and we are not looking to take some sort of,
``gotcha,'' enforcement actions against small businesses that
are doing their best.
Mr. Nunn. I certainly hope that is the case, because my
folks back home see a $500-per-day fine as not only,
``gotcha,'' but as a very painful impact.
In that vein of setting deadlines, one of the things I
would ask is, will Treasury be able to meet their November 1,
2024, rulemaking deadline on 45Z, the Clean Fuel Production
Credit?
Secretary Yellen. This is the successor to the Sustainable
Fuels.
Mr. Nunn. That is correct.
Secretary Yellen. That is something that Treasury is
working on but I can't give you an exact--there are many----
Mr. Nunn. I hope you meet your deadline, Madam Secretary,
because you have laid out a very strict $500-a-day deadline for
small businesses in Iowa that work largely in renewable fuels.
I hope that Treasury can meet its own deadline that you have
laid out of November 1st.
I would like to change briefly now to Iranian illicit oil
sales. I think we have all seen the threat in the Middle East,
what it has done for Hamas, Hezbollah, and the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC). Americans have died;
Americans are still in the firing line; Treasury is the lead
for sanctions. Can you tell us today, are there any U.S.-based
firms providing insurance to Iran's illicit ghost fleet of oil
tanker ships?
Secretary Yellen. I can't speak to particular entities.
What I can say is that we are working to crack down----
Mr. Nunn. Let me give you what the New York Times has,
Madam Secretary, which is a list of 27 tankers currently
supporting the illicit sale of oil from Iran to some of our
worst adversaries. General Michael Kurilla of U.S. Central
Command (CENTCOM) noted that Iran continues to sell 90 percent
of its oil directly to China and fund a terrorist war in his
area of responsibility (AOR) as a result of this.
I have asked 5 times now for Treasury to be able to find a
list, both in the classified and unclassified versions, of how
we are cracking down on insurance violators here in the United
States. Are we going to be able to do anything, or are you
going to be able to have an answer for us on the insurance
companies here domestically based that are providing insurance
to a terrorist regime?
Secretary Yellen. Most of the insurance companies that I am
aware of that do this are outside the United States.
Mr. Nunn. But there are some here in the United States, you
would agree?
Secretary Yellen. I am not able to comment on specifics of
investigations that we are doing.
Mr. Nunn. I would like a follow-up.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Gottheimer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Yellen, the average price of childcare in this
country is now higher than the average cost of rent. In my home
State of New Jersey, the average family pays more than $440-a-
week in childcare costs. What forms of tax relief are available
for hardworking families struggling with these high costs, and
what is the Biden Administration doing to combat the effects of
these rising costs, please?
Secretary Yellen. We certainly have proposed extending the
Child Tax Credit, which was immensely helpful, and we are
supportive of the legislation that has gone through the House,
and would urge action in the Senate that would extend the Child
Tax Credit along with other provisions.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. And I think it would be great if
we could actually get that passed. It would lift 400,000
children above the poverty line.
Switching gears a little bit following on the questions
that were just asked, I applaud your recent decision to impose
additional sanctions on a shadow banking network that has
enabled Iran to fund proxy terrorist groups, including Hamas,
Hezbollah, and Houthis. Holding Iran accountable has been a top
priority for me, and for many of us, which is why I was proud
to help pass the bipartisan Iran-China Energy Sanctions Act and
the Stop Harboring Iranium Petroleum (SHIP) Act. Can you
elaborate more on these sanctions and additional actions the
Administration is taking to reduce the risk of Iran-funded
terrorism against America and our allies?
Secretary Yellen. We have taken a wide array of sanctions
actions to try to stop the flow of illicit funds from Iran that
funds terrorist groups--the Houthis, Hezbollah, and others. We
have worked jointly with other countries to impose--we are
really using every tool that we have to crack down on that as
well as sources of revenue, including oil revenues that enable
Iran to have the funds to distribute to these terrorist groups.
Mr. Gottheimer. Do you think we need to do more to address
cooperative sanctions of Asian between Iran and our other
adversaries, including Russia, China, and Venezuela?
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry, what specifically do you have
in mind?
Mr. Gottheimer. Are we doing anything there? Is that
something that is on your front burner, that you are concerned
about, the sanctions of Asians?
Secretary Yellen. We note that there are oil shipments that
Iran has, and we have systematically tried to shut that down
and recently taken very significant actions that military
groups in Iran have used to support their activities, oil
shipments.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, are you familiar with the recent State
laws that require banks to provide an explanation with specific
reasons for closing or denying an account, including in
situations where the decision was related to financial crimes
risk?
Secretary Yellen. Yes.
Mr. Gottheimer. I am concerned that these State laws may
conflict with Federal requirements, especially the obligations
that banks have under the Federal anti-money laundering laws
that prevent terrorists and illicit financing of the U.S.
financial systems. I presume you share those concerns?
Secretary Yellen. It is a Federal obligation to file
suspicious activity reports and comply with the requirements of
the Bank Secrecy Act, and that is something that we require and
expect all banking organizations to do.
Mr. Gottheimer. Are you doing anything to address this
issue, this conflict here?
Secretary Yellen. I am certainly stating that it is an
obligation of banks and that we would enforce it.
Mr. Gottheimer. Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into
the record a bipartisan letter signed by my colleagues on this
committee, Representatives Luetkemeyer and Sherman, please.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you.
We urge you and your counterparts at the OCC and FinCEN to
look into this issue, please, and act. And I hope--if it is
okay, I would love for our teams to sit down together and talk
about actions that we can take.
Secretary Yellen. I would be glad to do that.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you so much.
In my last 30 seconds, I just want to zoom in on a terror
financing issue for just a minute. With respect to Iran, do you
agree that the IRGC's designation as a Specially Designated
Global Terrorist organization, as a foreign terrorist
organization, should not be lifted until such time that it has
demonstrated that it has permanently ceased the conduct for
which it was designated in the first place?
Secretary Yellen. I haven't looked into the exact
requirements, but that is probably reasonable.
Mr. Gottheimer. Yes, I am concerned about that, and, of
course, looking at the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
(UNRWA) employees who participated on October 7th, and I hope
you are looking that as well.
Secretary Yellen. We think that those who were responsible
for the atrocities should be held to account.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we will go to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Lawler, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, when was the last time you met with
President Biden in person?
Secretary Yellen. I meet with President Biden over a wide
range of issues--the economy, China, Russia.
Mr. Lawler. When was the last time you met with him in
person?
Secretary Yellen. I am not going to comment on my meetings
with the President. Those are private.
Mr. Lawler. Well, as a Cabinet Secretary, have you noticed
any mental or cognitive decline in any of these meetings?
Secretary Yellen. The President is extremely effective in
the meetings that I have been in with him. That includes many
international meetings that are multi-hour, like his meetings
with President Xi. I have met with him with other leaders who
are in----
Mr. Lawler. So, are you testifying that you have not seen
any mental or cognitive decline?
Mrs. Beatty. Mr. Chairman, a point of inquiry. She is not a
physician.
Mr. Lawler. She is a member of the Cabinet.
Mrs. Beatty. You are asking her a medical question.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Let's keep the comments to the subject of
today.
Mr. Lawler. It is not a medical question; it is her
interpretation as a Member of the Cabinet.
Mrs. Beatty. And I move to have those words taken down. Mr.
Chairman, I move to have those words taken down. She is not a
physician.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Will people please not go between the
witness and the committee? Okay.
Mr. Lawler, she has answered the question. Let's move on.
You are recognized for the balance of your time.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, have there been any discussions among
Cabinet Secretaries about invoking the 25th Amendment?
Secretary Yellen. No.
Mr. Lawler. Okay. The supplemental appropriations bill
enacted in April contained two of my bills, the SHIP Act, which
requires the imposition of sanctions on foreign ports and
refineries that knowingly process Iranian oil, and the Iran-
China Energy Sanctions Act, which requires you to close
corresponding accounts for Chinese banks if they are involved
in petroleum transactions with the Central Bank of Iran or
another sanctioned Iranian financial institution. This applies
no matter how minor or infrequent the transaction may be.
In March, General Kurilla, the head of CENTCOM, testified
before the Armed Services Committee that Iran continues to sell
90 percent of its oil to China, funding Tehran's subversive
activities across the region. That is a quote. Anyone who
participates in the sale of Iranian oil plays a role in helping
the regime evade U.S. sanctions. Engaging in this trade is
tantamount to aiding and abetting a terrorist state, and it
must end.
These sanctions create a significant financial incentive
for ports and refineries to stop dealing in Iranian oil, or
else lose access to the U.S. economy. Since Joe Biden took
office, Iranian oil sales are up over $100 billion, a $100
billion increase. Can you speak to where you are in
implementing these laws, the SHIP Act and the Iran-China Energy
Sanctions Act, and will you commit to swiftly implementing
these sanctions as required by the law?
Secretary Yellen. I need to look into the details of where
we are with respect to these particular Acts, but we have put
in place a wide array of sanctions on Iran, including for oil
dealings. We have sanctioned firms in other countries that are
involved with the Iran oil trade, and we are constantly
evaluating additional sanctions to put in place----
Mr. Lawler. Since the supplemental aid package passed, have
you had any meetings on the SHIP Act or the Iran-China Energy
Sanctions Act?
Secretary Yellen. I have regular meetings with my staff----
Mr. Lawler. Have you had any discussions on those two
provisions of the supplemental?
Secretary Yellen. I have discussed Iranian sanctions with
them.
Mr. Lawler. Specifically, the SHIP Act and the Iran-China
Energy Sanctions Act?
Secretary Yellen. That is not the way we organize our
discussions. We talk about our Iranian program and what we are
doing.
Mr. Lawler. I am going to interpret your answer to be, no,
you have not had discussions on the SHIP Act and the Iran-China
Energy Sanctions Act, and the Treasury Department has not
advanced sanctions with respect to those two laws.
Secretary Yellen. I have not said that.
Mr. Lawler. Well, is it yes or no?
Secretary Yellen. I have had discussions with them, and it
has covered a wide array of sanctions issues in connection with
Iran. I am not sure specifically which actions have to do with
which aspects of the law----
Mr. Lawler. Okay. I sent a letter----
Secretary Yellen. ----and that is not how it is presented
to me.
Mr. Lawler. I sent a letter specifically on the SHIP Act
and the Iran-China Energy Sanctions Act to you and Secretary of
State Blinken a few weeks ago. We have not heard back. We
certainly would appreciate a detailed response as to what has
been done to implement the law that was passed under the
supplemental aid package.
And in my remaining time, have you communicated the
sanctions risk to Beijing at all with respect to the Iran-China
Energy Sanctions Act?
Secretary Yellen. We have discussed with them our concerns
about Chinese businesses and others involved with these
matters.
Mr. Lawler. But not specifically on the Iran-China Energy
Sanctions Act?
Secretary Yellen. We have discussed an array of sanctions
issues.
Mr. Lawler. Okay.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Just a reminder to the committee that getting into the
personal business of the President, as well as Mr. Trump, is
inappropriate for this committee.
With that, Ms. Tlaib from Michigan is recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary, for being here. As you probably
know, many of the countries in the global south are facing a
tremendous debt burden, almost--I think that is almost half of
the world's population right now, 3.3 billion people are
impacted by this, living in countries that spend more on the
interest on their debt than the healthcare or education in
their communities. And you know the IMF issues fees called
surcharges on heavily-indebted countries.
Secretary Yellen, do you believe that developing countries
suffering through a perfect storm of global crises, including
shocks to the food and fuel prices, soaring interest rates,
climate change, and so much more, should be required to pay
these fees on top of the interest they pay on their debt?
Secretary Yellen. The surcharges framework we think is
important to create appropriate incentives to repay the IMF in
a timely way and to contain borrowings. But the IMF, with our
support, is currently reviewing this policy.
Ms. Tlaib. Do you support that review?
Secretary Yellen. Yes, we are supportive of the review.
Ms. Tlaib. Perfect.
Can you explain to our residents what the Special Drawing
Rights (SDRs) are at the IMF?
Secretary Yellen. Special Drawing Rights are essentially a
system in which countries agree to provide lines--the way I
think of it is providing countries with additional lines of
credit that are in proportion to their quotas at the IMF, and--
--
Ms. Tlaib. I love telling my residents that it actually
is--it would provide immediate relief to countries across the
globe while costing the U.S. taxpayer nothing, absolutely
nothing. Is that correct? Does it cost our U.S. taxpayer any
money?
Secretary Yellen. No. No, we earn interest on special if we
provide hard currency for Special Drawing Rights. We earn
interest on that, and it doesn't cost us anything.
Ms. Tlaib. And, Secretary Yellen, is the United States
actually standing in the way of new issuance or looking at the
Special Drawing Rights?
Secretary Yellen. We thought at the onset and after the
pandemic struck, which hit so many countries, and created a
global shortage of liquidity, that an SDR allocation was
appropriate, and one took place, a large SDR allocation. At
this point, we don't think an SDR allocation is needed or
appropriate----
Ms. Tlaib. So, you don't think a new issuance is required?
Secretary Yellen. ----but we have----
Ms. Tlaib. I don't want to send a message that our country,
Secretary, doesn't--that our message to developing countries is
that the U.S. is unwilling to respond to the debt crisis.
Secretary Yellen. We have been very supportive of an
expansion of the poverty reduction in growth trust. Congress--
--
Ms. Tlaib. But why not just help them? I don't understand.
Secretary Yellen. It does help them because it gives
interest-free loans to the countries that are most in need.
Ms. Tlaib. So, more debt. The way the international
financial institutions are governed is inconsistent----
Secretary Yellen. It is that SDRs are, in a way, debt too--
--
Ms. Tlaib. I know, but----
Secretary Yellen. ----because countries that use them do
have to pay interest on them. So, it is not that different.
Ms. Tlaib. Yes. The way the international financial
institutions are governed is inconsistent with the democratic
ideals we seek at home. And in the IMF, for example, the U.S.
and other G7 countries get 41 percent of votes despite only
having 10 percent of the global population. So, Secretary
Yellen, what would you say to countries who feel we don't
practice what we preach when it comes to democratic decision-
making and to international financial institution?
Secretary Yellen. We have certainly been supportive of
governance reforms that increase the role and the voice of
borrowing countries so that they have more say and
representation. We have supported adding directors who
represent low-income countries. And we have supported the idea
of reviewing the formula that would determine quota allocations
in the future. We have been opposed to an ad hoc quota review
that would reallocate in a sort of ad hoc way voting rights,
but we are supportive of the IMF reviewing the formula that
determines voting rights.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you. Thank you, Secretary.
I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentlelady from Indiana, Mrs. Houchin, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Houchin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
ranking member.
And thank you, Secretary Yellen, for your testimony and for
being here today. Like many of my colleagues, I have concerns
about the ways in which this Administration continues to
support policies and practices at international financial
institutions that do nothing to further American interests, and
instead, seem to only help China and our competitors continue
to make gains at our expense. From allowing mission creep into
social and climate issues, to giving our adversaries the upper
hand in key geostrategic regions, this Administration has been
allowing America's influence abroad to be undermined, and it
has to stop.
Starting with the first of this month and running until the
end of next June, the World Bank is aiming to devote 45 percent
of its financing to climate-related programs. In the Bank's
latest annual report, climate was referred to some 200 times,
largely in the context of the Bank's green energy investments
and reducing the reliance of developing countries on fossil
fuels.
At the same time, China has been taking an all-of-the-above
approach to energy investments, pushing renewable energy while
also developing oil and gas resources. One of our foremost
concerns when it comes to China and the CCP is the extent to
which they exert their influence over developing countries by
providing funding for basic necessities. When half the
population of Sub-Saharan Africa does not have access to
electricity to begin with, it is not hard to see why China's
influence in that area might be growing.
Secretary Yellen, if 45 percent of the Bank's resources are
chasing arbitrary climate targets, why wouldn't developing
countries keep looking to China and to Chinese lenders to meet
their core developmental needs?
Secretary Yellen. The World Bank and the MDBs are heavily
focused on broad development goals, relieving poverty, and
ensuring sustainable growth. But achieving those goals is also
linked to addressing climate, which is increasingly
compromising the development goals, especially in the poorest
places, and climate and access to electricity are linked.
At the spring IMF World Bank meetings, President Banga----
Mrs. Houchin. Secretary Yellen, I'm sorry, I only have 5
minutes, so I am going to go on to another question.
Sixty percent of the U.S. electricity generation does come
from fossil fuels, but as part of this Administration's climate
agenda you are voting against virtually all World Bank fossil
fuel projects in Africa. Why is the Treasury holding Africans
to a standard that the wealthiest countries in the world cannot
meet?
Secretary Yellen. This reflects the goals that Africa
itself has that very often, most often, renewables aren't the
cheapest way of developing energy, and it is a question of
bringing electricity in Africa--six hundred million Africans
lack electricity and renewables. Both address climate change
and resilience, and are the cheapest way of bringing
electricity to those who don't have it.
Mrs. Houchin. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. There is a goal of bringing----
Mrs. Houchin. One of the most egregious examples of the
World Bank empowering China in its efforts to expand its
geopolitical influence has been through allowing the CCP to
overbuild its production capacity in certain products in order
to flood the markets in other countries. They have done that
with industries like aluminum extrusion and now, they have done
it with solar technology.
Last May, the President doubled U.S. tariffs on Chinese
solar cells. And since the World Bank is aiming to direct 45
percent of its financing in the next year to climate projects,
the Bank's money may still just go to purchase Chinese solar
panels, batteries, and the like. This seems to be supporting
China financially in their efforts to expand their geopolitical
footprint. Why is the Treasury supporting this if the
Department is concerned with Chinese overcapacity and the CCP
dominating the market in green energy industries?
Secretary Yellen. We are very concerned about and attentive
to procurement strategies and make sure that all of the MDBs
have open processes and that American firms know--American
firms rarely bid on these contracts, and we want them to do so.
Mrs. Houchin. Does Treasury intend to roll back the
reliance on Chinese solar panels in order to prevent them from
profiting financially from the United States in this way?
Secretary Yellen. If American firms or other firms can
provide these solar panels and bid on those contracts, then
certainly, there would be less use of Chinese products in
those----
Mrs. Houchin. We would certainly hope that U.S. companies
would be chosen over Chinese companies when it comes to solar
panels. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Torres.
Mr. Torres. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, what impact on Treasury rulemaking do you
expect from the loss of Chevron deference? Do you expect the
impact to be disruptive, minimal, or is it too early to tell?
Secretary Yellen. I am concerned about the Chevron
decision. As the White House has indicated, it limits the use
of agency expertise in designing rules or deferring to rules
that we put in place subject to congressional legislation, but
we intend to go on with rulemaking efforts, and protect the
American people through those rulemakings, and our legal team
is evaluating whether or not there is specific implications. I
am not aware of anything specific so far.
Mr. Torres. I have a question about the semiconductor arms
race with China. According to a report by the Boston Consulting
Group and the Semiconductor Industry Association, by 2032, the
United States will account for 30 percent of advanced
semiconductor production, compared to only 2 percent for China.
Do you believe, as I do, that these projections demonstrate the
success of the Biden strategy, the combination of chips
investment in America and the export controls on China?
Secretary Yellen. I do. Yes, I would agree with that.
Mr. Torres. And Madam Secretary, you have been sounding the
alarm about China's overcapacity----
Secretary Yellen. Yes.
Mr. Torres. ----of legacy chip making. According to the
same report, by 2032 China will account for one-fifth of chips
in the range of 10 to 22 nanometers and one-third of chips
above 28 nanometers. What actions should the United States take
to combat China's overcapacity of legacy chip making, and when
should we take those actions?
Secretary Yellen. The recent actions of putting tariffs in
place did include some legacy chips. And of course, the
semiconductor in the CHIPS Act is designed to promote
additional production in the United States to secure our supply
chains and to gain the dynamic benefits that come from
producing and learning in the process of production, and
developing new technologies.
Mr. Torres. On a separate topic, the Financial Times has
reported that Chinese organized crime operates a network of
underground banks that launder money for both Mexican cartels
who are trafficking in fentanyl and Chinese nationals whose
capital is fleeing China. Chinese money laundering is
essentially financing the deadliest drug crisis in American
history, a crisis whose latest death toll surpasses 100,000
Americans. What role is the Treasury Department playing in
policing the illicit finance at the heart of America's
deadliest drug crisis?
Secretary Yellen. I certainly agree that it is a national
tragedy, what has happened with drugs, particularly fentanyl
and other synthetic opioids, and Treasury is using every tool
at its disposal to try to crack down and reduce the flow of
illicit drugs into the United States. That includes by direct
sanctions that we put on firms in China and elsewhere that are
providing precursors.
We have an agreement to work collaboratively with China to
reduce the activities of Chinese firms in supplying precursors
to Mexico. We are working collaboratively with Mexico. We have
announced many new sanctions actions, and are cracking down----
Mr. Torres. I do worry that the CCP is stringing us along--
97 percent of the fentanyl precursors are manufactured in
China. Xi Jinping has the power to unilaterally shut down the
supply chains that account for almost all of those fentanyl
precursors. At what point does the United States impose
sanctions on China for perpetuating the deadliest drug crisis
in American history?
Secretary Yellen. We have seen China take some positive
steps in recent months, and we will try to build on that, but I
wouldn't rule out anything in the future.
Mr. Torres. Okay. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary, thank you for appearing before the committee
today. I think you would agree that the health and resiliency
of the global financial system is tied to the capital levels of
global banks. Treasury's core mission is, of course, to provide
for a strong economy and to protect the integrity of the
financial system.
During our discussion when you last appeared before the
committee, you largely deferred to the Fed, the FDIC, and the
OCC on the details of the Basel Proposal. I have been
particularly focused on the negative impact the proposal would
have on our capital markets, which are critical to the U.S.
economy, and I hope this is an area to which you are also
paying close attention.
We are in a situation where the Chairman of the Fed today,
during Senate testimony, said he still expects major revisions
and would like to reopen the proposal for comment. At the FDIC,
the current Chairman has announced that he will resign to
restore confidence in the agency, while his replacement is
awaiting Senate confirmation hearings. And at the OCC, we have
an Acting Comptroller who has not been confirmed by the Senate.
At the very least, given the expected revisions, reopening the
proposal for further comment seems reasonable.
Secretary Yellen, is it still your stance not to take a
public position on the details of the Basel Proposal?
Secretary Yellen. I am not going to take a stand on the
details. I think that is up to the banking agencies and the
rulemaking process that they will go through. As you noted, the
agencies are planning significant revisions in response to all
of the comments that they have received, and I am certainly
supportive of their going through that process and revising as
appropriate.
Mr. Lucas. Secretary, I appreciate the position you are in,
and given your history at the Fed, you are uniquely positioned
to understand the far-reaching impact of the Basel Proposal and
the potential for unintended consequences.
Now, shifting focus, I would like to discuss the U.S.
Treasury market. The global financial system depends on a well-
functioning Treasury market, the deepest and most-liquid market
in the world, where any disruptions could create risk across
capital markets. You have heard my concern about the Basel
Endgame's impact on the Treasury market, paired with
significant market structure reforms coming from the SEC. You
have assured the committee that you are monitoring this, along
with your interagency counterparts. Given the importance of the
Treasury market to the United States and the world, we should
ensure robust participation.
Under Secretary Liang has suggested that excluding excess
reserves held in the Federal Reserve System from the leverage
ratio would be effective during times of market distress. The
Fed did this in 2020, and it was effective.
Secretary Yellen, do you agree that there are beneficial
reforms that could increase participation in the U.S. Treasury
markets?
Secretary Yellen. That certainly is a reform that was
worthy of discussion. And at the time, I thought it was very
appropriate to take that step and would be supportive of
greater liquidity in the Treasury market. But again, this is a
decision for the banking regulators, but I would hope that they
would take this into account.
Mr. Lucas. The U.S. Treasury market is the most important
market in the world and the bedrock of the global financial
system, and I would encourage you to support those efforts to
boost market liquidity and resilience.
One last question. Two pieces of legislation led by myself
and Representative Luetkemeyer officially added the Secretary
of Agriculture to CFIUS, and improved the referral process of
the agricultural transactions for review. Could you describe
how CFIUS scrutinizes transactions in the agriculture sector
and the relationship with the USDA, if you can?
Secretary Yellen. For land transactions that occur in the
vicinity of military installations that have been identified as
the Department of Defense's critical ones, there is scrutiny of
transactions, and, in some cases, there has even been
outright--I think that in the MineOne case, the President
ordered divestment of activities that were going on in the
vicinity of a military installation. And yesterday, Treasury
issued a notice of proposed rulemaking that follows a
comprehensive study by the Department of Defense that adds 50
additional military bases, and changes the geographic
limitations of others.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Secretary.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the effort that you and I
have put into making this possible.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
The gentleman yields back. I think it is very important
that we address this situation. I appreciate your working with
us, and I appreciate the Secretary's work on it as well.
The gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the ranking member.
Madam Secretary, it's good to see you again.
Housing remains the number-one issue in my district that I
hear about from my constituents, but that should be no
surprise, as Nevada is currently bearing the brunt of this
country's affordable housing crisis. Supply or, rather, a key
lack of supply remains the driver behind our affordability
emergency, which has left southern Nevada with only 13
affordable and available rental units for every 100 low-income
households. This is an unconscionable level of scarcity, and
incentivizing construction is the only feasible path forward.
It is going to take strong public-private partnerships, as well
as coordination with housing developers, to spur the investment
necessary to make housing affordable for everyone.
To do so, we must work with the tools available to us to
leverage our Tax Code and make increased construction of these
projects feasible across the country.
Under your purview is the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit
(LIHTC) program, one of the most powerful incentives that we
have to provide the necessary support for the development of
affordable housing. However, I have heard from my local
developers that this effective credit could be more efficient,
which would expand the population that it can serve.
There are necessary improvements that the program could
achieve which are included in my legislation, the Housing
Market Transparency Act. The bill would create a central
repository for State housing agencies to provide critical
information on housing developments, such as the construction
costs, quality of living spaces, health and safety information,
and ownership data. The public-private partnerships of the
LIHTC program that make it such an effective method of bringing
affordable units to a community also create inherent issues
with transparency.
So, Madam Secretary, could Treasury and the IRS make LIHTC
more efficient if you were able to capture comprehensive data
on these properties? And, additionally, what other improvements
to the LIHTC program do you recommend to help further
incentivize the badly-needed construction of more affordable
developments?
Secretary Yellen. Treasury certainly supports efforts to
improve transparency and accountability that are consistent
with legal requirements. And we are very happy to review the
bill that you have introduced and try to provide technical
assistance. We could work with the IRS on administration of the
LIHTC and see if there are interactions there that would be
favorable.
I completely agree that we have a real crisis with respect
to affordable housing. I would say generally, Treasury is
trying to think of how it can use every single tool at our
disposal to improve the supply of affordable housing.
I was in Minneapolis a few weeks ago and was able to
announce that we are using $100 million that is income from our
investments in the CDFIs to plow it back into affordable
housing. And, of course, with respect to LIHTC, the President's
budget proposes increased funding of LIHTC, which would be very
important. The President proposed a program that would expand
affordable housing by 2 million units, and I would love to see
that become law.
Mr. Horsford. I agree with the need to build more housing
to address the affordability housing crisis.
Madam Secretary, I also wanted to note the incredible
success from the Direct File program, and I am pleased that
Treasury recently announced that you will be making this Direct
File program permanent. Nevada had the fifth-best uptake of the
program of any State in the country. Notably, 90 percent of the
respondents rated the program as excellent or above average.
So, I believe that we need to continue to promote the Direct
File program and expand and permanently reauthorize it so that
Nevadans will be able to have that support all year to learn
about their options to direct file and to earn the tax credits
and benefits that they deserve. Especially as we have debates
about who should get the tax benefits, it should be the working
people of America, not big corporations or billionaires.
Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Mr. Horsford. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Welcome, Secretary Yellen. It's good to see you again
today.
We have discussed this issue in the past. My concern
initially was a very slow response with regard to sanctions
that were put on all things that could be helpful to Russia
whenever they invaded Ukraine, and I asked you the last couple
of times you have been here, in your position as head of FSOC,
is there a committee or a group that is being put together to
be able to have sanctions immediately ready to put on China
when China invades Taiwan? Our own generals say it is going to
happen over the next 3 years.
Therefore, I think we need to have a plan in place so it
doesn't take several months like it did with Russia, because I
think, in order for us to be impactful, we have to do this very
quickly. You indicated the last time you were here that there
is a committee that is working on this. Would you like to
discuss that a bit more?
Secretary Yellen. Sure. There are interagency discussions
around Taiwan.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do those discussions include working with
our allies to be able to identify different entities, different
groups, to be able to sanction and make it more difficult for
China to economically continue once they invade, and we put
sanctions on them?
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry. I am not really able to
discuss what----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I don't want specifics; I just want
generalities here. I understand. But I think it is important
for us to know as a committee, in order to provide our
oversight, that there is a concern about this, number one, and,
number two, that there are discussions going on, and that they
include allies to be able to address this issue when and if it
occurs.
Secretary Yellen. We have many discussions about common
issues with our allies.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Secretary Yellen. And I would include this in that list,
but I am not able to provide any specifics.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I understand. Thank you very much.
The next question is a bit different. What is your greatest
concern when it comes to foreign finance issues like this?
Secretary Yellen. When it comes to what?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. With foreign finance. We are talking about
foreign financial institutions and different issues today with
regards to the international financial system. What is your
greatest concern about all of this?
Secretary Yellen. About foreign financial institutions?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes. Things that you are involved with,
things that are concerning to our country, whether it be CFIUS
or whether it be sanctions or whether it be artificial
intelligence. What is the biggest concern you have when it
comes to international financial relationships and issues?
Secretary Yellen. I have many different concerns, but in
the realm of sanctions, we have very powerful sanctions that
are available because of the important role of the dollar in
international transactions. The ability to cut off foreign
banks or other businesses or individuals from the ability to
transact through the U.S. financial system and to participate
in the dollar rise----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. So basically, your protection of the
dollar is one of your greatest concerns?
Secretary Yellen. I think that is important, and the more
we have used sanctions, the more countries look for ways to
engage in financial transactions that don't involve the dollar.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. According to Executive Order 13818,
a foreign person is to be sanctioned if the Treasury Secretary
finds them responsible for, or complicit in, or directly or
indirectly engaged in serious human rights abuse.
With regards to Russia, we sanctioned Vladimir Putin and
the Foreign Minister following the invasion of Ukraine. With
respect to the Uyghur genocide, is it Treasury's position that
the standard for sanctions applies to--with respect to the
Uyghurs, is it Treasury's position that this standard applies
for sanctions against Xi Jinping? And, if not, why has the
Chinese leadership been spared?
Secretary Yellen. We have engaged in sanctions related to
the Uyghurs under the forced----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. My question is, you sanctioned the
leadership of Russia, but you haven't sanctioned the leadership
of China. Why? That is the basic question.
Secretary Yellen. This is a basic foreign policy issue that
is better addressed----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Well, sanctions fall under your
jurisdiction. So, the Administration and you working together
have not felt that this is important yet?
Secretary Yellen. This is a question I would suggest that
you refer to the State Department.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. I know that one of our Members
talked about the sanctions against various banks in China with
regards to drug money and the laundering of Mexican cartel
money. I think it is important that we continue that. I sit on
the Chinese Select Committee, and it is a really big deal that
we continue to sanction those banks that facilitate the money
laundering of money from the drug cartels because that is one
of the ways we can kind of thwart that.
With that, I yield back.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you so much, Secretary Yellen, for being
here today.
I was very glad to hear you commit to Congressman Hill that
you will continue to work with Congress to create a regulatory
structure for digital assets and that you hope it will reach a,
``good conclusion.''
I think it is especially important that we continue to work
on this issue in a bipartisan way. This Congress is on track to
be one of the least-productive in our nation's history, but
this is a place where we have had good bipartisan agreement,
and I hope you will continue to make it a priority for this
Administration.
I also want to talk about your role as Chair of FSOC and
want to echo Congressman Flood's concerns with the
concentration risk in the market for crypto custody due to the
SEC's misguided Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 121 (SAB 121)
which makes crypto less safe for consumers. We have the best
banks in the world. They ought to be able to take care of this
custodial banking piece. But I appreciate your attention to
these important issues. And I certainly want to applaud you and
your agency's important leadership on the global stage so that
you can move forward American interests, repair alliances, and
isolate dictators.
My first question is about Russian oil. In April, I joined
a bipartisan fact-finding mission in Ukraine to show our
support in their war against Putin's aggression and unprovoked
attack on their country. After I met with President Zelensky,
it was clear to me that we need to do as much as we can to
prevent Russia from fueling the war with profits from their oil
exports. If we fail, we hand over Ukraine to Russia, and we
know an emboldened Putin will continue on to eastern Europe.
The U.S.-led oil price cap has reduced Russian export
earnings significantly, but there is a lot more to do. On the
whole, we are seeing countries comply with the price cap
restrictions, but China, India, and Russia have access to
limited non-G7 shipping and insurance services which don't have
to comply with the cap.
Secretary Yellen, what is the strategy to address the price
cap circumvention? And how do you propose that we hold these
countries and entities accountable?
Secretary Yellen. As you said, at first, we had a very big
impact on Russian revenues. And then, to circumvent the price
cap, they invested very heavily in the shadow fleet of vessels
and insurance coverage so they would free themselves of
dependence on Western services, including shipping. That is
expensive, and they have really diverted a lot of resources
from other uses in order to build that fleet.
Then, we took the step this past year of sanctioning some
of the ships, the Sovcomflot ships that are involved in this
trade and that appeared to be effective in widening the
discount that they received on Russian oil. And we continue to
look at expanding those sanctions.
Our goals from the outset with respect to the price cap
were twofold: we want to reduce Russian revenues or,
alternatively, raise their costs of selling oil; and we want to
keep the market well-supplied. And so, as we contemplate
additional sanctions, we really also look at what impact do we
think that our actions could have on the global oil market. If
our sanctions raise global oil prices significantly, that would
be a negative not only to American drivers but also to
countries around the world that are dependent on foreign oil.
So, we are going to be careful about doing it, but we continue
to look at additional sanctions.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much.
As the world looks for alternatives to Russian and Iranian
oil, nuclear energy must play a role. Governments around the
world are shifting policies toward nuclear power as a clean,
reliable source of 24/7 electricity. I am very glad the
Administration has rallied the world and secured pledges from
22 countries to triple their nuclear energy capacity by 2050.
Unfortunately, Russia and China continue to dominate the
global nuclear market. Meanwhile, U.S. companies are competing
against foreign governments without meaningful support from the
Federal Government. When countries in key strategic areas
around the world need civil nuclear energy, I don't want them
to rely on Russia and China.
What should Congress be doing to assist the Administration
in deploying nuclear energy around the world?
Secretary Yellen. All I can really say here is that
Treasury is supportive of using all available technologies,
including nuclear. Our role is with the multilateral
development banks. They, with the exception of the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), don't touch
nuclear, and we have been supportive of having them review
their policies in this area.
Mr. Nickel. My time has expired.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Madam Secretary, it's good to see you again. I want to
start with an issue that is important to a sizable population
in my district, in the Battle Creek-Springfield area of
Michigan, which is home to about 5,000 Burmese citizens. Last
year, the Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) issued a
directive that prohibited Americans from providing any such
services directly or indirectly that would benefit the Myanma
Oil & Gas Enterprise, also known as MOGE. And actually, I would
like, Mr. Chairman, to submit a copy of that for the record.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Huizenga. And last year as well, in consultation with
the State Department, Treasury--you--determined that MOGE is a
political subdivision of the military junta in Burma, in other
words, the Burmese Government. The MOGE generates a billion
U.S. dollars annually, and is by far their largest foreign
revenue for Burma and, by extension, the junta.
Unfortunately, late last year, Treasury stopped short of
listing the MOGE as a Specially Designated National (SDN)
which, as you know, not only blocks the assets but then puts
other countries on notice that they shouldn't be doing business
with this designated entity.
So, Madam Secretary, why hasn't Treasury used its authority
to block the MOGE from receiving financial support from around
the world which is funding an abuse of government? And,
frankly, what I would like to know is what would you have to
say to my constituents, and what am I supposed to tell these
folks, many who have fled the civil war in Burma, the genocide
that is happening, the continued bombings that are happening,
for their family members who are still living in these horrific
conditions?
Secretary Yellen. We absolutely are committed to denying
the Burmese military sources of funding that they are using to
suppress the restoration of democracy.
Mr. Huizenga. So, why would you leave them off that
particular list?
Secretary Yellen. We did announce sanctions relative to
MOGE, and we issued a directive that prohibits U.S. persons
from providing financial services to MOGE for its benefit.
Mr. Huizenga. I understand. But again, you left them off a
list that would have toughened those up. And frankly, in
response to that, last week, along with my colleagues from this
committee, Mrs. Wagner and Mr. Sherman, we introduced the
bipartisan BRAVE Burma Act, which requires the President to
determine on an annual basis whether to impose stronger block
sanctions on MOGE, on the Myanma Economic Bank, and on foreign
persons operating in the jet fuel sector of the Burmese
economy. That is where those bombings are coming from, and jet
fuel is a critical piece to the junta continuing the genocide
that is there.
So, Mr. Chairman, clearly, I believe more work needs to be
done, and I look forward to having this bill actually be a part
of a markup.
But, Madam Secretary, I need you to take a closer look at
that because we, frankly, need your support.
Secretary Yellen. I promise that I will do that. And we
certainly are concerned with the situation in Burma, and are
contemplating additional sanction actions, and we will work
with you on that.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. I am not going to get into this right
now, but we have seen some of those sanctions slip in other
areas like Iran and Russia, and I am concerned about that. And
we can continue that conversation.
I am not expecting you to know details about this. This was
from a letter we sent yesterday.
And, Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit that for the
record as well.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Huizenga. The letter is concerning significant problems
with the enforcement of U.S. sanctions against the Taliban
officials. In May, the Special Inspector General for
Afghanistan Reconstruction, also known as SIGAR, highlighted
that since the failed withdrawal from Afghanistan in August of
2021, $10.9 million in U.S. taxpayer money has been paid to the
Taliban in the form of taxes, fees, duties, and utilities.
First of all, is there any reason to doubt the Inspector
General and his report?
Secretary Yellen. I have not had a chance to review it. And
without looking at it----
Mr. Huizenga. The report was from May. Our letter was from
yesterday, and I would appreciate a quick response to our
inquiry on this. I think this is a significant problem. And I
know, in D.C., we talk about trillions and billions, but $10.9
million of U.S. taxpayer dollars being used to pay the Taliban
government taxes, fees, duties, et cetera, seems outside the
bounds.
Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up, but I do appreciate the
opportunity to continue this conversation with you, Madam
Secretary.
I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we will go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Gonzalez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being with us this
morning.
I am pleased that the Treasury Department noticed the
proposed rulemaking concerning the outbound investments
screening program. There is no doubt that U.S. money should be
kept out of the hands of Chinese and Russian firms.
I also want to add another angle concerning foreign
investment that is a concern to us in south Texas, and I think
along the border. Many of our constituents are seeing Chinese
money flooding into Mexico where manufacturing facilities are,
and are being developed south of the border so goods can be
shipped to the United States as a Mexican product instead of a
Chinese product.
And I worry that, if we consider only the direct U.S.
investments into Chinese or Russian factories that can produce
technology of concern, those investments may be directed
instead to factories overseas and Chinese-owned companies in
third nations.
Will the Treasury Department consider or have you already
considered those sorts of nonlinear investments that aim to
evade the goals of the President's outbound investment
screening program? If not this mechanism, in what capacity
could we work together in order to prevent U.S. investments
from funding, for example, the semiconductor factory in Mexico
that is owned by Chinese entities?
Secretary Yellen. I think you raise an important issue, and
it is one that we are aware of at Treasury.
I made a visit to Mexico last year, and this is a matter
that I have discussed with senior Mexican officials. We are
having discussions with them about developing their own
investment screening mechanism similar to our CFIUS. They are
open to discussing and working with us on that, and I think
that is a first step in looking at these issues. We realize the
North American market is highly integrated and that we have a
common interest in this----
Mr. Gonzalez. That is what my next question was going to
be. Have they been forthcoming in wanting to work with us?
Secretary Yellen. They have been. And I discussed this when
I was in Mexico at a press conference that I gave there.
Mr. Gonzalez. It is a huge concern not only to our direct
investments but a lot of things that are happening with the
Chinese moving into that region.
Secretary Yellen. You are right, and it is an important
issue.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you.
Also, in 2023, Mexico received a record $63 billion in
remittances, a 7.6-percent increase from 2022, 95 percent of
which came from the United States. With the recent surge in
remittances, I am concerned that this has inadvertently made it
easier for some of the Mexican cartels to launder drug money,
and for cartels to use civilians as conduits for remittances,
who then hand the money back to the cartels, a practice known
as, ``smurfing.''
What is being done to limit the use of remittances as an
avenue to finance illicit activities? How can we identify and
monitor laundering schemes run through legitimate financial
transactions? And I feel there is an increase--there was a
recent report by a Reuters journalist who was down there and
actually followed one of the ladies in Sinaloa who went to one
of these places to collect the money, and then kept a very
small slice of it and gave the majority of it back to the
cartels. It is a huge concern as remittances grow, and I think
certainly, they are harder to monitor and police.
What are we doing and what cooperation do we have from
Mexico? I think that should be a clear area of concern. I just
see it as very unregulated.
Secretary Yellen. We have certainly been focused on Mexican
drug cartels and have been cracking down on them with Mexico's
cooperation. With respect to remittances, many of them occur
through money services businesses. And those businesses are
subject to the Bank Secrecy Act's Anti-Money Laundering/
Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) compliance
regime.
Mr. Gonzalez. There has been a spike in the resources
coming into Mexico, and it is just a concern being on the
border. Seeing all of the activity and the growth of Mexican
cartels on the other side of the border is really worrisome,
and I think we should pay closer attention to this.
There is a Mexican think tank that just said that $4.4
billion of the money that we remitted to Mexico last year was
sent directly to cartels, so I hope that we can continue to
work on this issue.
Secretary Yellen. It is an important issue. Of course, we
want to work on it.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay. Thank you so much.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
Just a reminder, the Secretary does have a hard stop at
1:00 today, so we are going to try and squeeze in as many
Members as we can here.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, I want to drill down into the Treasury
Department's ineffective sanctions strategy when it comes to
Russia. A June 26th Wall Street Journal article highlighted a
collision of foreign energy policies within the Biden
Administration and frustration among Treasury staffers over the
lack of action against oil trading networks that ferry Russian
and Iranian oil. While on the one hand, Treasury sanctions are
attempts to, ``throw sand in the gears of Russia and Iran's oil
export machines,'' the article identifies attempts by the
National Economic Council (NEC), led by Lael Brainard, to keep
global oil output up to ward off pressures on inflation and,
``keep gas prices stable ahead of the election by encouraging
oil to flow into global markets.''
Secretary Yellen, who is running the show in the
Administration? Those who want to be tough on our adversaries
like Russia and Iran or those who want to ensure that global
oil flows keep gas prices stable ahead of the election?
Secretary Yellen. It is a very good question. I think the
article is, frankly, very misleading because the NEC and
Treasury are really on the same page. We have been working
together closely, and we really have identical goals.
Mr. Barr. So, you're on the same page in terms of trying to
defend this failed oil price cap scheme?
Secretary Yellen. I'm sorry. I don't think it is a failed--
--
Mr. Barr. Let me reclaim my time. Bloomberg reported last
week that Russia's government revenues from oil sales rose
almost 50 percent compared to last year. If this is not an
indictment of Treasury's licensing policy and the failure of
the oil price cap scheme, I don't know what is.
Secretary Yellen. It worked very well in the first year----
Mr. Barr. Not anymore, Madam Secretary.
Secretary Yellen. ----when they should--okay.
Mr. Barr. Let me reclaim my time. I offered an amendment to
the Financial Services Appropriations bill. I got 30 Democrats
to vote to sanction Russian oil exports--30 Democrats, mostly
climate-oriented Democrats. This Administration, which has this
massive climate focus, wants to punish American energy
production. That is the whole strategy, through ESG and climate
disclosure and no permitting, no licenses, no Keystone
Pipeline. But, when it comes to Putin's oil machine, license
it, allow exports of Russian energy. What on Earth are you all
doing?
Secretary Yellen. We have said explicitly from the very
outset that we had two goals with the price cap program: number
one, to apply pressure of revenue; and number two, to make sure
the global oil market is well-supplied----
Mr. Barr. You failed at them both, Madam Secretary, because
you are waging a war against American energy, but you are
green-lighting Russian energy. You are weak on Russia. I want
this Administration to revisit the failed oil price cap scheme
and sanction the crap out of Vladimir Putin's energy, which is
financing the war effort.
Secretary Yellen. We are----
Mr. Barr. And the oil price cap is not working.
Let me shift to China. Treasury has prohibited U.S.
dealings with the publicly-traded securities of certain
companies connected to the Chinese Military-Industrial Complex
(CMIC). But, since being put on the CMIC list, Hikvision
revenues have risen 30 percent, China Mobile stock prices shot
up 90 percent, and Huawei, SMIC went on to develop an advanced
5G chip, and Huawei isn't public to begin with.
Clearly, regulating the trading of publicly-traded
securities has proven irrelevant. Why doesn't Treasury impose
blocking sanctions on these CMIC companies?
Secretary Yellen. I can't discuss particular cases,
certainly not in this venue. We are always looking at entities
that are engaging in activity that could merit sanctions.
Mr. Barr. Well, Madam Secretary, would Treasury welcome the
opportunity by legislation, my bill, on China outbound? You all
have issued an Executive Order. I think it is Congress'
responsibility to create an outbound investment framework.
Would Treasury welcome an opportunity through legislation to
explain on an annual basis why it has refrained from imposing
full blocking sanctions on Chinese entities on the CMIC list?
And it could perhaps be addressed in a Sensitive Compartmented
Information Facility (SCIF).
Secretary Yellen. We can discuss it with you. I will have
my staff be in touch with yours to understand what----
Mr. Barr. We have a list of Chinese Military-Industrial
Complex companies, but Treasury hasn't sanctioned any of them.
That is a really good question for Treasury to answer for the
American people through their elected Representatives in
Congress.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will now go to the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Foster,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you.
Secretary, was there anything you wanted to add about the
oil cap policy that you didn't have a chance to during the
previous round of questioning?
Secretary Yellen. Thank you. What I wanted to say is that
an objective is to keep the oil market well supplied so neither
Americans nor residents of many countries around the globe,
including the poorest, are faced with spiking energy prices.
And we are considering additional sanctions on Soviet chips now
that Russia has taken this approach, but we want to evaluate
what the potential impact could be on global oil markets, and
we are discussing that in an interagency basis.
Mr. Foster. And I would also like to congratulate the
Administration on having made a significant amount of money
with the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR), whereby you are
sort of monetizing your ability to store oil and to be able to
sell at a high price and refill at a low price and make the
taxpayer a whole pile of money. So, to the extent you were at
the table there, good work.
I would also like to second my congratulations on your
successful pilot program for the IRS Free File System and
believe it should be an option available to taxpayers at all
income levels. I have been introducing legislation in this area
for more than a decade, so it is really nice to see it come to
pass.
And, as a next step, in February, I reintroduced the
Autofill Act, which would allow individuals who choose to
download tax forms that are automatically populated with
information that the IRS already collects from employers, from
the Social Security information, and from financial
institutions. Our Tax Code is complicated enough, and we
shouldn't force people to keep shoeboxes full of all of these
stubs they get, and then have to use them for their tax forms.
This would be a common-sense solution in most countries, to
just have the government fill out part of the forms with
information they already have, so please consider that as a
next step in strengthening this very successful pilot program.
On April 24th, President Biden signed the REPO Act, which
gives the Administration the authority to seize Russian assets
and use them for the benefit of Ukraine's war effort and their
eventual reconstruction. Last month, the G7 agreed in principle
to use the interest earned on frozen Russian assets to back a
$50-billion loan for Ukraine.
And following that meeting, you said that the logistics was
a little more complicated and that you could not provide a
timeline for getting that money to Ukraine. Since you made
those comments a few weeks ago, has progress been made to get
the money to Ukraine? And what challenges are you running into
from our G7 allies? Is there anything that Congress can do to
speed this process along?
Secretary Yellen. Thank you for that. The leaders in the G7
asked that we be ready by the end of the year to transfer
money, so we are working very closely now that the leaders have
endorsed this general concept to work out the details. There
are steps that the European Union needs to take to make sure
that the windfall revenues will remain available to service
these debts. We are discussing the allocation of the loan among
G7 members. These are very intense discussions taking place
right now.
Mr. Foster. Okay. If there is anything we can do to provide
additional leverage in those negotiations, we are, on a
bipartisan basis, willing to do so.
Secretary Yellen. Honestly, this is a collaboration. The G7
is working together constructively. There are some complex
issues here, but we are working constructively to get this
done.
Mr. Foster. And I would also mention that the $50 billion
loan could be the first of several, that this is the first
tranche and, if necessary, there could be more behind it?
Secretary Yellen. Yes.
Mr. Foster. How far can this strategy go and on what
timeframe to support Ukraine? What fraction of the amount of
money you get by simply seizing and liquidating the Russia
assets?
Secretary Yellen. We think all options should remain on the
table, and the REPO Act is a----
Mr. Foster. But if you have to stick to this business with
the loans and using the interest income, what are the limits to
that?
Secretary Yellen. We believe that a global approach
strategy where the G7 and the European Union act jointly
together is effective and appropriate. So, we are looking for
strategies that other countries can also endorse and the issue
of simply seizing assets, whereas we have been very clear that
we believe there is a sound legal basis to do so in the United
States and elsewhere. This has been something of a bone of
contention, so the approach that the G7 leaders have endorsed
is an alternative which doesn't raise all of the same issues as
seizing the assets would, and it lets us act together as a
coalition.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, and keep at it.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams, who is also the
Chair of the House Small Business Committee, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Secretary, it's good to see you again.
The last time you were here, I asked you what actions
Treasury was taking to educate small businesses on their
obligations regarding compliance with FinCEN's beneficial
ownership information. And you acknowledged the burdens that
small businesses will face with compliance surrounding this
rule and committed to working with businesses to better educate
them on compliance. However, from what I have been hearing from
small business owners as I travel around, and being on the
ground, is that they are still unaware of FinCEN's beneficial
ownership requirements.
FinCEN Director Gacki recently said that only 2 million
small businesses out of over 32 million had filed beneficial
ownership information. This shows that something needs to be
done, because you cannot hold these small businesses
responsible for something they have never heard of or are even
aware of the rules of the road.
My question would be, could you expand on how Treasury will
work with small business to educate them on beneficial
ownership? And is there any possibility for Treasury to provide
more time for small businesses to come into compliance? That is
important.
Secretary Yellen. At this point, we are engaged--FinCEN is
in a very broad outreach effort. It has received 2.7 million
filings already. The filing requirements are easy to do, and
FinCEN believes that the timeframe is adequate. The companies
in existence before this year have until January 1st to file.
But that is their current view. If things don't go according to
plan, it will be considered.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Well, small businesses are burdened
right now, so please take a look at that.
And the Biden Administration's climate agenda is forcing
the IMF and the World Bank to take their eyes off the ball and
channel resources and funding for climate-related projects and
not projects that would enhance the overall well-being of a
country or region.
The World Bank is working to devote 45 percent of their
financing to climate, and you are voting in opposition to any
fossil fuel projects. Developing countries need access to
electricity and other vital resources, not some unelected
bureaucrats telling them that they can't finance an energy
project in their country because it would support fossil fuels.
Because of this, many developing countries will be forced to
turn to Chinese financing. How is Treasury going to combat
growing Chinese influence around the globe if your policies are
enabling them to grow their influence?
Secretary Yellen. What we see in countries in Africa and
elsewhere is, for example, in Africa, you have 600 million
people who don't have electricity at all, and actually want to
use renewables to expand access and to address climate and to
have systems that over time will be more secure and less
dependent on fluctuations in global markets. And this is the
strategy that they prefer.
Our policy in terms of lending is that if it is not
possible to use renewable energy--we want that to be looked at
first--or if it is unduly expensive, we will vote in favor of
projects that use natural gas, and, in fact, in those that have
been presented, the great majority we have been supportive of.
But climate is a very serious concern. In so many countries
around the world, it is impeding the goals of sustainable
development and poverty reduction. And it is a priority of
borrowing countries as well as the World Bank and other MDBs.
Mr. Williams of Texas. In business, you don't want to sell
off an empty shelf, and you want to have products that people
want to buy. So, I think we need to have all options available.
There have also been developments at the IMF under the
Biden Administration that I find extremely concerning,
specifically the IMF proposed that billions of dollars in
Special Drawing Rights assets be generally allocated as global
membership. Now, this is alarming as hostile actors like China,
Iran, and Russia can receive the funding to use as they please,
all of which can be done without congressional approval.
So, quickly, Secretary, you should be using your influence
in the IMF to protect U.S. influence, ensure transparency, and
prevent malign actors from exploiting resources. How could
increasing IMF resources and allocating SDRs to China, Russia,
and Iran affect U.S. national security? And what steps are you
taking at Treasury to protect our U.S. interests?
Secretary Yellen. We oppose allowing malign countries to
use SDRs that they receive as allocation. We will not exchange
them for dollars, which must be done in order for them to be
used, and we work with other countries that have that capacity
to make sure that it doesn't occur, and it hasn't occurred.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we will go to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Meeks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
Secretary Yellen, let me just say I greatly appreciate the
work that you have done with the State Department, with the
National Security Council, and with the whole Biden
Administration in isolating Russia in the wake of its illegal,
unjustified, and immoral invasion of Ukraine. Just yesterday,
the Russians bombed the Children's Hospital in the center of
Kiev with absolutely zero evidence of any military targets
within the vicinity of that site.
And then, I heard some Members of Congress rudely
addressing you, talking about Russia when, in my opinion, what
they should be talking about is the candidate of their choice,
who has a bromance with Vladimir Putin, who gave away top
secrets to Russia in the White House, who said that the Iran
intelligence is better than the U.S. intelligence, who has said
that he wants to be an ally and wants to emulate what Russia
does with its parades and everything else, that he likes a
strongman.
So, they shouldn't be talking to you--a word about you and
your policy. They better be talking to their candidate of
choice as the rest of the world is worried about him being the
President----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Meeks, we just had this conversation a
while ago.
Mr. Meeks. Well, if you are going to do it, I have to come
back----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. We had this conversation a while ago, and
the conversation is that you stay away from the personalities
and individual activities of the candidates, whether it be Mr.
Trump or President Biden. Therefore, direct your comments to
the Secretary----
Mr. Meeks. I am.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. ----with the issues of the day. You are
going into the personalities, sir.
Mr. Meeks. Well, I am talking facts.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. We have already gone down this road. We
have already gone down this road today. It is going to stop. Go
back to questions with regards to other issues that you think
are----
Ms. Waters. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes.
Ms. Waters. The gentleman from New York was speaking about
facts. He was not----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. He was getting into personalities.
Ms. Waters. He was not making up anything. He was talking
about facts.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. I have ruled on how this is going to go,
okay.
Mr. Meeks, you are recognized for the balance of your time
to address issues that are important to this committee with
regards to the Secretary's responsibilities for today.
Mr. Meeks. I am talking about facts here, Madam Secretary,
and the record will reflect that.
Now, I have two bills, Madam Secretary--and I think this is
the way that we should look at that--that I believe would
further strengthen sanctions on Russia, both of which have been
sent to your team and have garnered broad bipartisan support,
because I try to work in a bipartisan way, except when I hear
the other side not doing that. Then, we have to make sure that
we step up.
One bill would sanction leaders of the Russian nuclear
company, Rosatom, and the other bill would preemptively ensure
that no People's Republic of China (PRC) or other foreign
company could work to build a tunnel from the Russian mainland
to Crimea. I am hopeful that we can do some work together to
get those bills into law, and I hope that we can do it this
year.
But I know that you have put in a lot of work in this area,
so could you just please discuss the work that you and the
Administration have done to hold Russia accountable as well as
its enabler, China?
Secretary Yellen. We have been focused, even before
Russia's brutal invasion of Ukraine, when we realized that it
was likely to happen, on creating the toughest possible
sanctions regime that we could to deny Russia the military
equipment it would need to carry out this war.
And, as time has passed, we have strengthened our
sanctions. We have sanctioned individuals, entities, and
banking organizations, virtually the entire military-industrial
complex of Russia, and have been seeking to reduce Russia's
access to these goods that it gets from China and other
countries that are suppliers. Iran is a supplier of drones,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). And we have an extensive
sanctions regime which we are constantly tightening.
Most recently, with respect to China, not only have we
cracked down and placed sanctions on Chinese entities and firms
that are involved in applying military-related goods, we have
now gone after, with the President's new Executive Order,
financial institutions that are processing payments involved in
this trade trying to--basically threatening to cut off banks'
access to the dollar-based trading system if they facilitate
these transactions. And we have recently broadened it so that
any foreign bank, Chinese or in other countries, that engages
in transactions with any sanctioned entity in Russia, and that
includes all of the largest Russian banks, Sberbank, VTB, and
others, all of those financial institutions are subject to our
sanctions. And we have put a price cap on Russian oil to try to
reduce their revenues----
Mr. Meeks. You did a lot of work, and you are continuing to
do so.
I wanted to ask you a question about outbound investments,
et cetera, but I don't have the time. Thank you for the facts.
Thank you for the work that you are doing to hold Russia
accountable----
Secretary Yellen. Thank you.
Mr. Meeks. ----and China.
I yield back.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we will call a stop to the hearing here with
regards to the Secretary's wish to be able to stop at 1
o'clock. We are going to get you out, Madam Secretary, I
believe, in time. I would like to thank you for being here
today and for your testimony.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place her responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
I ask you, Secretary Yellen, to please respond to those
questions no later than August 30, 2024.
With that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:59 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 9, 2024

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
