- IMPORTING GLOBAL GOVERNANCE:

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

IMPORTING GLOBAL GOVERNANCE:

EXAMINING THE DANGERS OF

CEDING AUTHORITY OVER

AMERICAN FINANCIAL REGULATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2024

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-85

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-436           WASHINGTON : 2024

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 21, 2024...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 21, 2024...............................................    47

WITNESSES
Thursday, March 21, 2024

Billingsley, Ryan, Deputy Director, Capital Markets & Accounting
Policy, Division of Risk Management Supervision, Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)...........................     6
Gardineer, Grovetta N., Senior Deputy Comptroller for Bank
Supervision Policy, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
(OCC)..........................................................     8
Gibson, Michael S., Director, Supervision and Regulation, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Fed)...............     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Billingsley, Ryan............................................    48
Gardineer, Grovetta N........................................    56
Gibson, Michael S............................................    64

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Billingsley, Ryan:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................    69
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Meuser......................................    82
Gardineer, Grovetta N.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................    85
Gibson, Michael S.:
Written responses to questions for the record from Chairman
McHenry....................................................    96
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Barr........................................    99
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Huizenga....................................   113
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Kim.........................................   116
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Meuser......................................   118
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Steil.......................................   120

IMPORTING GLOBAL GOVERNANCE:

EXAMINING THE DANGERS OF

CEDING AUTHORITY OVER

AMERICAN FINANCIAL REGULATION

----------

Thursday, March 21, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Patrick McHenry
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives McHenry, Lucas, Sessions,
Posey, Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Wagner, Barr, Williams of Texas,
Hill, Loudermilk, Mooney, Davidson, Rose, Steil, Norman,
Meuser, Fitzgerald, Garbarino, Kim, Donalds, Flood, Lawler,
Nunn, De La Cruz, Ogles; Waters, Sherman, Scott, Lynch, Green,
Cleaver, Himes, Foster, Beatty, Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez,
Casten, Horsford, Tlaib, Torres, Garcia, Nickel, and Pettersen.
Chairman McHenry. The Financial Services Committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Importing Global Governance:
Examining the Dangers of Ceding Authority Over American
Financial Regulation.''
I will now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an
opening statement.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here. Today, we
will examine the dangers of ceding authority of American
financial regulation to global governance bodies. This hearing
is a good governance exercise. Currently, there is little
visibility into the dealings between our financial regulators
and a complex network of international bureaucrats. This
includes the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), and the Network
for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), just to name a few.
That lack of transparency and accountability raises
concerns about the extent to which other countries are
influencing financial regulation here in the United States. In
fact, as recently as 2017, Russian and Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) banking officials have been scrubbing U.S. laws,
regulations, and supervisory practices for compliance with
Basel rules, sometimes physically on site here at U.S.
agencies. That is absurd. To be clear, international
cooperation can be positive and help set clear rules of the
road for financial markets. However, when the scale repeatedly
tips in favor of our competitors, we have a problem.
The most glaring example of Federal banking agencies taking
their cues from global governance bodies is the Basel III
Endgame proposal. We have heard concerns from Members on both
sides of the aisle about the impact of increased capital
requirements on families, communities, and small businesses,
but the proposal would also strengthen the competitiveness of
foreign financial institutions at the expense of our own. Why
would American banking regulators work to weaken our standing
on the global stage?
This is just the first of many questions we have for
today's witnesses from the Federal Reserve (Fed), the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). While you are not the ones
setting policy for your respective agencies, you have insight
into your organization's deliberations, negotiations, and
discussions with these international forums. That is what we
are seeking.
I would also remind you that you have a responsibility to
be transparent with Congress and the American people we
represent as we work to fulfill our obligation of checks and
balances in our system and as we work to fill in the blanks,
the many blanks that are currently obvious to us on the Hill.
Unfortunately, the lack of transparency by President
Biden's banking regulators feels more like a feature than a
bug. When Congress has zero visibility into the agency
officials and staff participating in various workstreams in the
global governance bodies, traditionally-independent regulators
become a breeding ground for politics and partisanship.
That is why today, we will consider a bill to create clear
reporting requirements for American financial regulators
dealing with global governance groups and provide insight into
global deal-making. This bill brings financial regulators in
line with other American officials, like those of the State
Department and the U.S. Trade Representative that adhere to
clear reporting structures regarding their involvement
overseas.
I will finish with this. President Biden's banking regulars
are attempting to force progressive pet projects, all pushed by
global governance bodies through our financial system. And for
those who like those policies in the other party here on the
committee, I would tell you, when the coin flips, I don't think
you will like the results of an opaque process in international
regulation. I don't think you will like this. So overall, I
think this should be a good governance operation for us to get
insight into how these regulators are making decisions. That is
where I want to end.
I will now recognize the ranking member of the committee,
the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, for 4 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning. Last week, we marked the 1-year anniversary of the
failures of Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank, with First
Republic failing soon thereafter. These features represented
the second, third, and fourth largest bank failures in United
States history and threatened to snowball into a full-blown
banking crisis. Thankfully, the actions of President Biden,
Secretary Yellen, and the banking regulators testifying today
stabilized the situation, averting a banking crisis, and
protected our nation's depositors. Because of their swift
action, our banking system remains strong. Unfortunately, it
seems as if Republicans and big banks are pretending like none
of this ever happened. As our banking regulators move to write
rules that would address weaknesses in our banking system,
including on bank capital and related to the climate crisis,
Republicans are convening this hearing to attack any effort to
collaborate with other countries that face the same problems.
Right now, the global climate crisis is getting even worse,
as evidenced by the record-breaking heat, floods, storms,
droughts, and wildfires that communities across the United
States are experiencing. In the face of this crisis, we are
seeing big banks and major financial institutions give into
extreme MAGA Republicans and walk back many of the climate
commitments they made to strengthen our banking system.
Just last year, Bank of America walked back its commitment
and began financing new coal mines, coal-burning power plants,
and Arctic drilling projects. In addition, JPMorgan, State
Street, PIMCO, and BlackRock all pulled out of an international
coalition aimed at addressing climate issues. Let's be clear:
Climate change is real, and climate-related-financial risk must
not be ignored. It is critical that our financial institutions
take these threats seriously instead of feeding into the
extreme MAGA Republican's anti-ESG campaign.
As if that wasn't bad enough, big banks are spending
millions of dollars to gut the proposed Basel III Endgame rule
to increase capital. Over the last several months, their
executives have proven that they care more about protecting
their million-dollar bonuses and further padding their pockets
than they do about making Americans' banking stronger in the
service of working families.
Today, you will hear Republicans try to undermine our
regulators as the regulators collaborate with their foreign
counterparts to ensure that our global and interconnected
financial system is strong. This adds to the long history
Republicans have of abandoning our international partners and
hurting our global standing in the process. Time and time
again, Republicans shamelessly defend comments made by twice-
impeached, 4-times-indicted, former President Trump, who
attacks our partners in NATO and the U.N. Let's be clear:
Extreme MAGA Republicans' hostility toward our allies is
terrible for America and only weakens us as a nation.
The US. banking system has the potential to be the
strongest in the world, but we can't get there if our nation's
most powerful banks and financial institutions block the
government from devising policy that protects our nation's
consumers. Rest assured, Committee Democrats are fighting back
and working around the clock to strengthen the safety and
soundness of the banking system, protect depositors, and
prevent future financial crises. I don't know what more I can
say. With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The ranking member yields back. I will
now recognize the Chair of our Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Monetary Policy, Mr. Barr, for 1 minute.
Mr. Barr. Well, that was something. Today, we will discuss
the interplay among financial regulators and a growing and
tangled web of global governance bodies, such as the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, the Bank of International
Settlements, and the Network for the Greening of the Financial
System. The American people and their elected representatives
know next to nothing about how U.S. regulatory agencies
negotiate deals within these bodies. Those deals, we are told,
are nonbinding, yet they become binding when U.S. regulators
abide by them and respond to pressure from the global
governance web to comply.
Recently, we have seen global governance in action with
reference to some framework agreements in the Basel III Endgame
that no elected official negotiated or signed. This begs the
question, who is in charge? We will seek answers, since it
appears that unelected bureaucrats and global governance bodies
have the abilities to bypass Congress, U.S. law, and even
governing boards of Federal financial regulators to achieve
their goals.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the ranking member of our Subcommittee on
Financial Institutions and Monetary Policy, Mr. Foster, for 1
minute.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses. As the global economy changes, financial firms and
their regulators must remain well-apprised of new and emerging
risks. Geopolitical tensions, climate change, and emerging
technologies like AI pose new challenges that will affect not
only the economy of the United States, but economies from
around the world. The BIS estimates there are nearly $38
trillion of cross-border claims among banks today, and there
are regulatory lessons to be learned from the only global
systemically important bank (G-SIB) failure since the Dodd-
Frank Act, which was not in the U.S., but was Credit Suisse.
Forums like the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) allow us to
advance our national interests and leverage the influence of
the United States in the development of international
standards. The argument that our regulators, by participating
in these international organizations, are somehow ceding their
authority to the international community is misguided. U.S.
regulators have no obligation to adopt the standards developed
by these organizations, and any regulatory proposal informed by
their participation must adhere to the same legal and
procedural requirements as any other proposal by U.S.
regulators.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. Today, we welcome the testimony of Dr.
Michael Gibson, Director of Supervision and Regulation at the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; Mr. Ryan
Billingsley, Deputy Director of Capital Markets and Accounting
Policy at the Division of Risk Management Supervision at the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and Ms. Grovetta
Gardineer, Senior Deputy Comptroller for Bank Supervision
Policy at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. We
thank each of you for being here. We will recognize you each
for 5 minutes for an oral presentation of your testimony. And
without objection, each of your written statements will be made
a part of the record.
And we will begin with you, Mr. Gibson.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL S. GIBSON, DIRECTOR, SUPERVISION AND
REGULATION, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
(FED)

Mr. Gibson. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the Federal Reserve Board's engagement with
international organizations on supervisory and regulatory
matters.
The Board participates in various international forums in
support of its statutory responsibilities of supervising and
regulating financial institutions and fostering financial
stability. In a globally-interconnected financial system,
financial shocks can quickly propagate across national borders,
and the Board seeks to promote the stability of the U.S.
financial system by supporting strong and consistent minimum
regulatory standards and sound supervisory practices for
financial institutions globally.
Engagement with international organizations also has been
an effective and efficient means for understanding and sharing
information on global financial risks, as well as an
opportunity for the Board to help shape international standards
and recommendations to the nature and needs of the U.S.
financial system. It is also important to note that the
standards and recommendations are not binding on any
jurisdiction or member, including the United States and the
Federal Reserve. Any changes to the regulations that apply to
U.S. firms would be proposed by the Federal Reserve and go
through our usual public notice-and-comment process.
In support of its goal to enhance the strength, stability,
and resilience of the financial system, the Board actively
participates in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the
Financial Stability Board, and the International Association of
Insurance Supervisors (IAIS). The Board is also a member of the
Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS). Although the
NGFS is not a standard-setting body, Board staff participate in
its working groups to understand how other central banks are
approaching climate-related financial risks.
Each international group that we participate in has a
unique organizational structure and purpose and holds regular
meetings. The nature of the Board's participation varies
accordingly by group. The Board promotes U.S. interests by
participating in the main groups and subgroups and has
leadership roles on major issues. As part of this work, we
coordinate with other U.S. participants, such as the FDIC, the
OCC, the SEC, Treasury, the Federal Insurance Office (FIO), and
State Insurance Commissioners. These international groups are
consensus-driven organizations. Participants seek to reach a
common understanding around material issues and consider what
policy choices could help to address those issues.
Although it can be challenging to work through complex
issues, this approach serves as a check on potentially
undesirable policy recommendations. As with any other process,
alternative viewpoints emerge and dissenting opinions are
voiced. Before standards or recommendations are finalized, they
are often subject to public consultation and the comments
inform any final decisions.
Staff from the Board engaged in these groups consult
regularly with Board principles to ensure any final
recommendations or standards align with the Board's policy
goals. Once standards or recommendations are finalized, it is
then up to individual members to implement any changes as
appropriate in their respective jurisdictions. While the Board
participates in these organizations, it is under no obligation
to adopt any standards or recommendations that are developed.
When the Board makes decisions about policy, it does so on the
basis of its own domestic statutory mandates and
responsibilities and in accordance with U.S. administrative
law, importantly, including an opportunity for public comment
on the proposal. The Board does not implement standards or
recommendations that are beyond the scope of our mandate or are
otherwise not appropriate for our banks and our financial
system.
The Board is committed to transparency in its own work and
supports transparency by the international organizations in
which it participates. These international organizations
publish information to keep the public informed of their work.
The Board supports efforts by international organizations to
regularly publish information, including annual work plans and
meeting summaries, and to subject work products, such as
proposed international standards and supervisory principles, to
public comment. Congressional oversight is an important feature
of the U.S. regulatory framework. Congress has an oversight
role for the Board's activities, including its participation in
international organizations, and we welcome that oversight.
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Director Gibson can be found on
page 64 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you. Mr. Billingsley, you are now
recognized.

STATEMENT OF RYAN BILLINGSLEY, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, CAPITAL MARKETS
& ACCOUNTING POLICY, DIVISION OF RISK MANAGEMENT SUPERVISION,
FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC)

Mr. Billingsley. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters,
and members of the committee, I am pleased to appear at today's
hearing to discuss the FDIC's engagement with international
organizations. The FDIC's core mission is to maintain stability
and public competence in the U.S. financial system. The FDIC
carries out this mission through its responsibilities for
deposit insurance, banking supervision, and the orderly
resolution of failed banks. The FDIC's international engagement
is guided by the same mission.
My testimony today will discuss the FDIC's engagement with
international organizations, including the Financial Stability
Board (FSB), the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS),
the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS), and the
International Association of Deposit Insurers (IADI).
The Financial Stability Board, or FSB, was established to
improve international coordination and promote effective
regulatory, supervisory, and other financial sector policies.
While the FDIC is not a member of the FSB plenary, the FDIC is
a member of the Resolution Steering Group (ReSG). As a member
of the ReSG, the FDIC has helped to develop international
standards and guidance on the resolution of global systemically
important financial institutions (G-SIFIs). Our contributions
in this area have enabled the U.S. resolution regime to serve
as a model for effective resolution regimes in other
jurisdictions.
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, or BCBS, is an
international standard setter for the prudential regulation of
banks and provides a forum for regular cooperation on banking
supervisory matters. The FDIC engages the BCBS in support of
its mission, and the BCBS aims to improve consistency of
standards internationally. Through their work at the BCBS, the
FDIC and the other Federal banking agencies have sought to
strengthen the stability and resiliency of the banking sector,
both domestically and abroad.
The Network for Greening the Financial System, or NGFS, is
a forum for collaboration and information-sharing among central
banks and banking supervisors. Importantly, the NGFS is not a
standard-setting body. The FDIC engages with members of NGFS to
foster collaboration and share best practices in addressing
climate-related financial risks.
The International Association of Deposit Insurers, or IADI,
is a forum for deposit insurers from around the world to gather
and share knowledge and expertise. Its mission is to contribute
to the enhancement of deposit insurance effectiveness by
promoting guidance and international cooperation. As a member
of IADI, the FDIC has supported the development of standards
and best practices for depositor insurers around the world. The
FDIC's work at IADI contributes to the stability of the global
financial system by promoting international cooperation in the
field of deposit insurance.
To reiterate, the FDIC engages in international
organizations in support of maintaining effective deposit
insurance, bank supervision, and resolution systems. It is
important to note that standards developed by these
organizations do not have legal force. The implementation of
any standard in the United States remains subject to the U.S.
notice-and-comment rulemaking process, and the FDIC may elect
to consider different standards that more appropriately reflect
the specific characteristics of U.S. markets.
I would like to close by saying that it is a privilege to
work alongside so many talented people at the FDIC. They
dedicate their careers to serving the public and the FDIC's
mission, and I want to acknowledge and thank them all for all
that they do. Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Director Billingsley can
be found on page 48 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Ms. Gardineer, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF GROVETTA N. GARDINEER, SENIOR DEPUTY COMPTROLLER
FOR BANK SUPERVISION POLICY, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE
CURRENCY (OCC)

Ms. Gardineer. Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Waters, and
members of the committee, I am pleased to testify before the
committee to discuss the OCC's engagements with the
international forums to advance the agency's mission to ensure
that national banks and Federal savings associations operate in
a safe and sound manner, provide fair access to financial
services, treat customers fairly, and comply with applicable
laws and regulations. I oversee several of the agency's policy
units, including those that participate in issues related to
international banking.
My written statement discusses the OCC's participation in
international forums and the benefits this provides to the U.S.
banking system. The OCC supervises several banks and U.S.
affiliates of foreign banks that conduct business on a global
scale. It is critical in our role as a prudential supervisor to
understand the full scope that these global operations present
so that we can assess the effectiveness of the bank's risk
management policies and programs.
Engaging with foreign counterparts is critical to achieving
that understanding. International forums present an opportunity
for regulators and supervisors to share knowledge and discuss
common approaches, practices, and policies while fulfilling
their individual supervisory mandates, and ultimately
supporting the integrity of global financial markets.
The OCC is a member of several international forums or
their subgroups, including the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision, the Financial Stability Board, the Financial
Action Task Force (FATF), and the Network for Greening the
Financial System. The OCC's engagement in international forums
is beneficial to the agency and the U.S. banking system.
For example, our participation provides an opportunity to
exercise U.S. leadership and promote U.S. policy interests by
helping shape standards that may be adopted by jurisdictions
around the world. Our participation helps establish a level
playing field for global banking activities. This minimizes the
possibility that another country's lax regulatory regime could
give its banks a competitive cost advantage over U.S. banks or
promote a race to the bottom by jurisdictions.
Our membership also advances U.S. national security and
foreign policy interests. For example, the OCC's participation
in the FATF allows the agency to exert significant influence on
the development, revision, and implementation of the FATF's
Anti-Money Laundering/Combating the Financing of Terrorism
(AML/CFT) framework to strengthen regimes worldwide. This
reduces the exposure of U.S. banks to money laundering and
terrorist financing risks, thus preserving the integrity of the
U.S. financial system and supporting the achievement of
national security goals.
In addition, OCC's engagement in international forums
supports the development of more-consistent global frameworks,
which makes it easier for internationally-active U.S. banks to
understand what to expect in other operating environments. It
also provides a venue for sharing supervisory and regulatory
principles, practices, and perspectives. This can be especially
helpful in educating members about developing issues and
innovative topics, such as crypto assets, tokenization,
generative artificial intelligence, and other developing
technologies, particularly since these products and
technologies do not recognize international borders.
As a U.S. Federal regulator, the OCC maintains its
independence. While international consistency is valuable, the
OCC's priority is the safety, soundness, and fairness of the
U.S. financial system. Any standards developed by the
international forums in which the OCC participates inform OCC
rulemakings, but are not otherwise applicable to federally-
supervised banks without further action.
In conclusion, the OCC participates in international forums
to further U.S. interests, gain a better understanding of
global developments in the financial industry to move the
international regulatory framework toward more consistently
high and appropriate standards, and strengthen our
relationships with foreign counterparts. Thank you, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Senior Deputy Comptroller
Gardineer can be found on page 56 of the appendix.]
Chairman McHenry. Thank you all for your testimony. I will
now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
I will begin with you, Mr. Gibson, on behalf of the Federal
Reserve. The Basel Committee's charter requires a public
consultation process for all Basel standards. Yet, in May 2022,
the Basel Committee, without public consultation, altered the
G-SIB surcharge for the largest banks, but specifically for
European Union banks. The net result was for European G-SIBs,
European large banks, there was a 50-basis-point reduction in
their capital surcharge. Are you aware of this?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. At the time, there were several
critics of the secretive change to the G-SIB framework,
including the progressive group, Better Markets, who described
the Basel Committee as shamefully lowering capital requirements
for European banks without public input. Does the Federal
Reserve believe that there is public input in that process?
Mr. Gibson. You are asking if the Basel Committee put that
change out for public comment? I don't know. I don't remember.
Chairman McHenry. You don't remember? Okay.
Mr. Gibson. On that particular change, I can check and get
back to you.
Chairman McHenry. So, there is a most significant change in
capital surcharges until the next set of negotiations at the
Basel Committee, which resulted in much higher capital
surcharges for U.S. banks, which is now going through the
Federal Reserve process and all of the regulators for this
additional Michael Barr approach to new capital standards. How
does the Federal Reserve reconcile relaxing European large bank
capital surcharges, and yet, in the next negotiation,
increasing U.S. capital surcharges on our U.S. domestic banks?
Mr. Gibson. With respect to the G-SIB surcharge, it was one
of the post-2008 financial crisis----
Chairman McHenry. No, no, this was 2022, a decade after the
financial crisis. Let's not misstate this. That is what I am
asking you about, 2022, and then, last year.
Mr. Gibson. In the U.S., we, the Federal Reserve, have
proposed some modifications to the G-SIB surcharge.
Chairman McHenry. I am aware of that. I am asking you about
the Basel Committee and the name of this committee hearing on
the international coordination. The justification from the Vice
Chair of the Fed was that we have to implement the Basel
standards. That is the justification, so that is why I am
asking about this international coordination.
Mr. Gibson. We do coordinate at the Basel Committee on
common approaches to things like the G-SIB surcharge, but we
implement them domestically according to our rulemaking
process.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. I understand that, but you then
negotiate those standards internationally and have agreement
internationally. That is what the Basel Committee does. Is that
correct?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Chairman McHenry. This is what I am trying to highlight for
Members here. Who attends these Basel Committee meetings on
behalf of the Federal Reserve? Do you have a designated staff?
Mr. Gibson. I attend the Basel Committee meetings, and
Chair Powell and Vice Chair Barr attend the oversight body of
governors and heads of supervision.
Chairman McHenry. Was there a vote on this question of the
European Union G-SIB surcharge, the reduction in capital
standards? Was there a vote at the Basel Committee on that?
Mr. Gibson. The decisions aren't voted on; they are by
consensus.
Chairman McHenry. By consensus. So, you put out reports,
but we don't know relative opinions, the Federal Reserve's
view, the FDIC's view, the OCC's view; what we get is just the
result in these disclosures? I am asking what U.S. nationals
are doing on behalf of implementing financial policy and the
opinions going in and the results coming out, which we don't
have disclosures on.
Mr. Gibson. In the example that you are citing of the
discussions in the Basel Committee around the changes to the G-
SIB surcharge, the way we would handle that is that I would
brief Vice Chair Barr about what the discussions are at the
Basel Committee. And nothing that is done in the Basel
Committee is binding on us, but we do want to give good input
and we would give our input into those discussions.
Chairman McHenry. Okay. This is the basic question for all
regulators. We send the U.S. Trade Representative out
internationally. We know who is negotiating for us. There are
disclosures back to Congress on implementing trade laws. We
have financial regulators that are implementing stuff that is
even more impactful than trade negotiations, that have a direct
bearing on domestic lending to small businesses and families
and mortgages, and yet, we have no disclosures on it, we have
no equivalent disclosures on it. That is the driving question
here, and that is the reason why we are having this hearing.
This is what I want to highlight. This one example with the Fed
lowering European bank capital standards, and in the same
breath, in the same committee internationally, raising U.S.
capital standards in the next set of meetings. And yet, we have
no justification for this, nor the relative opinion of the
Federal Reserve.
With that, I will now recognize the ranking member, Ms.
Waters, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Gibson, the Fed
participates as a member of the Basel Committee, and that
organization came to an agreement in 2017 with respect to the
Basel III Endgame proposal to strengthen bank capital
requirements. And while Republicans like to bash international
agreements, even former Secretary Steven Mnuchin applauded the
2017 agreement, saying, ``The reforms would standardize the
approach to capital regulation, improve the quality and
consistency of bank capital requirements, and level the playing
field for U.S. banks.''
Recently, Treasury Secretary Yellen highlighted the
importance of getting these rules implemented when she
testified on FSOC's annual report. Unfortunately, it took our
regulators more than 6 years to issue a proposal to implement
the 2017 Endgame reforms, which the Fed and other banking
regulators finally did last year. That is because Trump's other
appointees decided to prioritize deregulating regional banks,
including allowing large banks like SVB to opt out of capital
requirements related to their securities portfolio that had
large unrealized losses.
Dr. Gibson, can you confirm that in the Fed's report on the
failure of Silicon Valley Bank, you found that the bank
appeared better capitalized by nearly 2 percent because of this
opt-out for Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI)?
Mr. Gibson. We only apply that AOCI passthrough to the
largest banks, and it was not applied to Silicon Valley Bank.
That is correct.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Would you confirm that the Basel III
Endgame rule will fix this loophole and ensure that other large
banks are being capitalized?
Mr. Gibson. That was what the agencies proposed last year.
It is out for comment, and we received comments on that
provision, so we are reviewing the comments.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I know your agencies are getting a
lot of pushback from the banks and are looking at making
changes, but this rule is absolutely critical to preventing a
future failure and protecting consumers across the country, so
I urge your agencies to finalize the rule this year.
Ms. Gardineer, I appreciate you sharing OCC's work on
international bodies where you can collaborate and learn from
what other countries are doing. However, it seems like the
United States is behind the curve in addressing climate-related
risks compared to other countries. For example, regulators in
the United Kingdom included climate change in their insurance
and stress testing 4 years ago, and the Bank of England
designed their 2021 stress test to aid their economy's
transition to net zero and to analyze climate-related risk on
capital requirements. What is your agency learning from foreign
regulators that you seek to update requirements to ensure our
banks are absolutely and adequately considering and addressing
climate-related financial risks?
Ms. Gardineer. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Waters. In our engagement with the NGFS as well as the Basel
Committee, we are learning and sharing knowledge about what
their experience has been in implementing their rules and their
engagement. What we have done here at the OCC is, starting in
2022, the OCC began reviewing information on our largest
institutions by doing a range of practice reviews based on some
of the things that we have learned from our international
engagement. While we are doing that, we also acknowledge that
many of the largest banks--and that has been the focus of our
engagement and our work--have started to do climate-related
financial risk activities of their own initiative. So
understanding what the experience has been on an international
basis helps us to frame our approach going forward.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. What is your agency learning from
foreign regulators as you seek to update requirements to ensure
our banks are adequately considering and addressing climate-
related financial risk?
Ms. Gardineer. We are looking at and learning about how
they are doing their risk management, what they are doing with
regard to transition risks, what they are doing with regard to
physical risks. Those issues actually are very important to our
risk management approach as we consider how we will implement
that here at the OCC.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from Arkansas, the Vice
Chair of the committee, Mr. Hill, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to our panel
for being with us today. Thanks for your contributions to this
discussion, because it is so important that when we think about
American leadership, we think about that across-the-board,
including in harmonizing regulations around the world. But this
is a tough time, I think, in the U.S., because we have a group
of people in our country who think that Europe has all the
solutions to so many issues, whether we are talking about
privacy on GDPR, investment research or investment standards,
artificial intelligence, and, of course, a topic today, the
Basel III standards on setting global capital standards.
During my time at the Treasury and as a White House
official, it was the real mission of our regulatory agencies
and our policy leaders to be sure that our government would
defend our ability to have the regulatory system that we want,
that we think is proper for our companies in a Federal republic
for competitiveness purposes.
Sure, we are going to go to these meetings, and we are
going to listen to all of this stuff, and we are big picture
for harmonization, but we are really big picture for America's
competitive position. And we wouldn't agree to anything, even
if it was harmonious, that we thought would put us in an
anticompetitive position for our capital markets, for our
financial conditions here. But I don't see that consistently as
a policy position in the Biden Administration at all, and U.S.
financial regulation seems to be, as I say, being subsumed by
European ideas, which I don't think are in the right direction.
Last week, the SEC published their climate disclosure rule
for public companies, and that is the most recent example of a
bad idea inboarded from across the Atlantic. In today's
hearing, you are going to hear us talk about pervasive ways
that this is shaping regulations here at home, including this
incorporation of climate activism into our Federal prudential
supervisory framework.
Following up on Chairman McHenry's line of questioning,
let's talk about theBasel Endgame. The U.S. clearly has a
higher surcharge for G-SIB banks than those in Europe. Our
stress capital buffer is based on supervisory stress tests,
among other things, which are all more strict than in Europe.
Would you agree with that, Dr. Gibson?
Mr. Gibson. On both of those matters? Yes, I would agree.
Mr. Hill. It seems to me when I look at the 800-plus-page
proposal from Basel III, and that is why I think there were so
many negative comments that we already have a strict Basel III
level or above-capital standard, and it exceeds that in Europe.
And I think a lot of people feel like some of this is
redundant. The ranking member talked about Steve Mnuchin, our
former Treasury Secretary, talking about his hope--his
statement was a hope that the reform would standardize the
approach, and improve the quality and consistency of bank
capital, and that that would help level the playing field for
U.S. banks. I find it to be just the opposite. How many people
wrote to you in support of Basel III in the rulemaking, Dr.
Gibson? What percentage of the comments were positive?
Mr. Gibson. Most of the comments were negative, not
positive.
Mr. Hill. And were some of those comments about level
playing field U.S. banks for the big banks?
Mr. Gibson. We got comments about that.
Mr. Hill. Yes, and I bet a lot of them felt like, God, this
is making it worse, not better. Would that be generally true
based on what you read from the comments?
Mr. Gibson. We got comments in both directions, but most of
the comments were negative.
Mr. Hill. Yes. I think it doubled down on gold-plating and
puts the U.S. absolutely at a disadvantage with international
banks at the top, and it is inconsistent, including with what
is going on in the U.K., Japan, and Canada. Let me ask you
this: Did you participate in writing the memorandum that we
received last May about the look back at the Silicon Valley
Bank supervisory process?
Mr. Gibson. We had staff who----
Mr. Hill. But you reviewed it, did you not?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Hill. Because that is an important document, and Vice
Chair Barr was great at being so responsive to the committee.
In your view, what was the top issue, the two mistakes that
Silicon Valley Bank made?
Mr. Gibson. They didn't manage their interest rate risk or
liquidity risk well.
Mr. Hill. Right, and neither one of those is dependent on
capital. I think the issue here is that supervisors failed,
their management failed, and customers were not attentive, and
to try to connect Silicon Valley Bank to whether we should or
should not adopt Basel III Endgame is a false canard. I yield
back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. It seems odd that those who oppose this
improvement in our regulations are listing xenophobia, when in
fact, what you folks are doing goes far beyond the European
standards, as the gentleman from Arkansas pointed out. I don't
know whether the standards you are adopting are too high, but I
do know that if they are, we shouldn't be blaming the
Europeans, because their standards are not too high. We are
told that we should ignore climate, but I don't see anybody on
this committee investing in the sovereign debt of the
Maldives--it is predicted that the Maldives will be an entirely
submerged nation by the end of this century. I won't even ask
the question of our bank regulators here, but I would think
that if all of a bank's assets were divested in the Maldives,
you would notice that subaquatic countries usually can't pay
their debt.
What concerns me here is that we are going to make some
mistakes in how we adopt these regulations, and I don't think
we should blame the Europeans for that. The first of these is,
it is my understanding that these proposed regulations give no
weight to private mortgage insurance (PMI). Is that true, and
are you going to fix it? I will ask our first witness.
Mr. Gibson. We have gotten comments on the issue of
mortgages, generally, and private mortgage insurance, in
particular. The proposal doesn't change the treatment of
private mortgage insurance. It is recognized in a particular
way in the current capital rules, and that is not proposed to
change in the proposed rules. We have gotten a lot of comments
on that.
Mr. Sherman. You are not changing risk weights on loan-to-
value ratios that ignore the effect of private mortgage
insurance?
Mr. Gibson. The proposal would change the risk weights to
make them risk-sensitive.
Mr. Sherman. And changing those risk weights, you would
have the same rate for mortgages or the same loan-to-value
ratio whether there was mortgage insurance or there wasn't
mortgage insurance. Is that correct?
Mr. Gibson. Not necessarily.
Mr. Sherman. That is what everybody in the industry is
saying. Do any of our witnesses want to assure me that private
mortgage insurance is going to be reflected in the risk the
bank has taken?
Mr. Billingsley. Certainly, we can't make that assurance,
but like Mike said, I think that is an area where we get a lot
of comment from the industry for sure.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Now, under the proposed rules you are
doing, you are appropriately treating tax credits owned by
banks for low-income housing, but you are treating much worse
tax credits for clean energy. Is that something that I can
count on you to clean up? I will ask the witness at the far
end.
Ms. Gardineer. Congressman Sherman, I think we have gotten
a lot of comments about that, and we are thoroughly reviewing
those comments and the process is moving forward. And we will
address those in any final product that we issue.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Now, in a capitalist society, the
allocation of capital is critical, and it is often a fight
between Wall Street and my local pizzeria, my local Main Street
business. And throughout this process, you have tilted things
toward Wall Street and against Main Street.
First, you have a rule of only 65 percent waiting for a
company that happens to be publicly traded, whereas a company
of equivalent risk is 100 percent.
Second, you do not mark to market long-term bonds held if
the bank just says that they are going to hold them to
maturity.
Finally, on that 65-percent rule, not only do you hit small
and medium-sized businesses, but also mutual funds and pension
plans.
Can I be assured that when these rules actually come out,
that small businesses, mutual funds, and pension plans will not
be discriminated against as compared to publicly-traded
corporations? Mr. Billingsley?
Mr. Billingsley. Again, I can't provide you the assurance
you are asking for, but the issue you raised about the
corporate risk weight is a really important one.
Mr. Sherman. I want to get in one more thing. You guys are
obviously getting a lot of input, including in this room. Can I
be assured that you are getting more input from Americans than
Europeans in writing these rules? I will ask each witness. More
from Europeans or more from Americans in terms of total input?
Mr. Gibson. More of the comments are from Americans.
Mr. Sherman. And more of the committee hearings----
Mr. Gibson. Likewise.
Mr. Sherman. ----and meetings. Is that correct? And I will
ask our third regulator.
Ms. Gardineer. Yes.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. So if you guys screw it up, don't blame
the Europeans, and if you oppose these rules, don't enlist as
xenophobia. I yield back.
Chairman McHenry. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, is now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision is the primary global standard-setter for
prudential regulation of banks, and of course, the Fed, the
FDIC, and the OCC are all members. And as we have heard today,
there is significant concern about the lack of transparency in
the Basel Committee's internal proceedings, which your agencies
are party to.
Director Gibson, are you aware if the Basel Committee
deliberations regarding capital standards are public in any way
or if any of the proceedings are even public-facing?
Mr. Gibson. Yes. The Basel Committee puts out those
standards for public comment and takes account of the comments
when they finalize the standards.
Mr. Lucas. But are the deliberations public, like the
minutes from other Federal agencies?
Mr. Gibson. They publish summaries of the meetings and they
publish their documents.
Mr. Lucas. Do we know that decisions by the Basel Committee
on Banking Supervision are taken by consensus among the
members?
Director Gibson, why not just have each jurisdiction vote
and have majority rule? Could you articulate about why
consensus building is important?
Mr. Gibson. The Basel Committee operates by consensus
because nothing it does is binding on any country. So if
countries are going to agree to something in the Basel
Committee, they still have to implement it through their
domestic process and with their domestic statutory
responsibilities. The consensus at the Basel Committee helps
make sure that things that countries are discussing in Basel
are going to be consistent with our domestic statutory
mandates.
Mr. Lucas. So, consensus is key. Is using this model the
only way to promote a lasting and resilient capital framework?
Mr. Gibson. In the Basel Committee, there are no binding
agreements possible, so there are no votes, and there is really
no other way the Basel Committee can have those discussions
other than operating by consensus. It is different from
legally-founded organizations.
Mr. Lucas. Maybe the Fed should use the same kind of
system. That said, thinking about my colleague, Mr. Hill's,
observations, you are all aware of the significant concern that
the Basel Endgame proposal from your agencies will disadvantage
U.S. banks on multiple fronts. There has been much discussion
about that here. The proposal goes far beyond the capital
requirements that banks and other jurisdictions are subject to,
like the EU.
Director Gibson, when revisiting capital standards, to what
extent does the Fed consider the implication of Basel standards
by our international counterparts, the nature of the playing
field?
Mr. Gibson. We definitely look at the competitive
landscape. Yes, we look at that.
Mr. Lucas. Okay. The charter for the Basel Committee
requires that each member commit to implementing the
committee's decisions. From my understanding, the Basel
Committee assesses the timeliness and the completeness of
domestic regulations. However, of course, in the United States,
we have a process that, in theory, should inform the making of
rules.
Director Gibson, focusing on Basel III Endgame proposal, I
am concerned that there could be an unwillingness by the Fed to
deviate too far from the Basel capital standards, given the Fed
is already committed to implementation. So, how much weight
does the Fed give to these past commitments as a member of the
Basel Committee during the Fed's rulemaking process?
Mr. Gibson. The Fed's rulemaking process is going to be
focused on what is the best rule to implement our domestic
statutory mandate.
Mr. Lucas. As long as it is not contrary to the commitments
we have given to the other entities. Okay. I will note that in
Europe, implementation of the Basel Committee standards is done
through the legislative process, through their parliament. In
the United States, the Basel standards are solely left up to
banking regulators. That makes the revision period after
comment intake even more important, and it is the sole
opportunity for the public to be heard.
One last thought: The Basel Committee comprises 45 members
consisting of central bank regulators from 20 jurisdictions,
including your agencies, and the central banks of Japan,
Indonesia, Mexico, and around the world.
Director Gibson, in the internal Basel meetings, does equal
weight apply to each member? Whether you are a big economy or a
small economy, does equal weight apply to each member's
consensus-building process?
Mr. Gibson. It is a consensus-driven organization, but
certainly the U.S. has a big role, because we are the world's
largest economy.
Mr. Lucas. Ironically, Mr. Chairman, only a handful of
countries have significant banks. With that, I yield back.
Mr. Hill. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Hill. Director Gibson, here
is the situation as I understand it. Under Basel, different
jurisdictions are given national discretion to increase or
decrease certain components of the regulatory framework based
upon their own needs. Is that correct?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Scott. The significant increase in U.S. capital
requirements related to banks' trading activities has so far
differed from the approach taken elsewhere around the world, is
that correct? Let me get to the example here. The United
Kingdom and Europe reforms are expected to result in roughly 3-
percent and 10-percent increases in aggregate capital levels
across their banking sectors. Is that correct?
Mr. Gibson. That sounds about right.
Mr. Scott. Okay. This is compared, however, to a nearly 30-
percent increase in capital levels for the largest U.S. banks
when including both the Basel Endgame proposal and the
surcharge changes. Is that correct?
Mr. Gibson. The first numbers you quoted were for all
banks.
Mr. Scott. Yes.
Mr. Gibson. And now, you are quoting a different number.
Mr. Scott. Yes, because my question is this: Why is there
such a discrepancy between the European regulators and us here
in the United States, our regulators, when the entire goal was
to harmonize requirements?
Mr. Gibson. Those comparisons are definitely one of the
areas where we have gottens comments on our rulemaking, so we
are going to look at that through the comment process,
certainly.
Mr. Scott. And what is the path forward for this proposal
in relation to capital rules, and also, what changes are you
considering in response to the number of comments submitted by
businesses and consumers who have raised concerns?
Mr. Gibson. We have gotten over 300 comments and we are
reviewing all of them, and we will take all of those into
account when we move forward with the final rule.
Mr. Scott. Are you pretty much satisfied with what is going
on here? Do you agree with the status of the situation as it
is? Do you see any dangers? Because this is a pretty large
differentiation between the results and activities and
directions that the European Union is going in and what we are
going in. But we are all connected, and there is great
interplay between both our situation here in the United States
and Europe, but there is this huge differentiation.
Mr. Gibson. The Board will be making decisions going
forward about capital based on what is good for achieving our
domestic statutory mandates for a strong banking system and a
strong economy.
Mr. Scott. Now, let me ask you this about your path
forward. For the proposal in relationship to capital rules,
what changes are you considering in response to the number of
comments submitted by businesses who have raised these
concerns?
Mr. Gibson. We are considering all of the comments that
were received. We are looking at all of them and analyzing
them.
Mr. Scott. Okay. That is fine. Thank you very much.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman from Georgia yields back. The
gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
witnesses for being here this morning. It is kind of an
interesting discussion. Let me start by saying that the various
global governance bodies, like the Basel Committee and the
Network for Greening the Financial System, frequently engage in
what they call stocktakes. This is where a global governance
body looks at what is recommended and scans the world to see
who is doing what the global governance body wants and who is
not. Part of the stocktaking involves surveying and monitoring,
sometimes physically on site at the FDIC or the Fed by global
peers.
As recently as 2017, Chinese and Russian supervisory and
regulatory officials participated in reviewing U.S. laws,
rules, and regulatory framework, sometimes here in the United
States, to determine whether we were adhering to the so-called
recommendations. This cannot happen. We have the strongest and
most-liquid capital markets in the world. We have the strongest
and most-dynamic banking system, which is the envy of the
world. Why in the world do we want to open up our regulatory
framework to be manipulated by nonbinding recommendations from
hostile foreign governments?
Deputy Director Billingsley, has the BCBS or NGFS, or both,
sent any questionnaires or monitors over to the FDIC over the
past 5 years asking and probing the FDIC for adherence of the
U.S. regulatory framework to the recommendations of the global
governance body?
Mr. Billingsley. Yes. The peer reviews you are asking
about, we have definitely engaged in over the years, but I
would note that the results of those things have no effect, no
force.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Why in the world are you letting them in?
That is the question. What good could come out of that?
Mr. Billingsley. The answer to that question is that I
think we learn a lot from engaging and understanding how
jurisdictions' rules differ.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. We are learning something from the
Communist Chinese Party of China or the Russian banks? Are you
kidding me?
Mr. Billingsley. No, our involvement in the process more
generally, is not specific to, I suppose, the question you are
asking.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Those two banks are the ones that came
over. I just told you that. Are you learning anything from
them?
Mr. Billingsley. Not during the process you are talking
about, no, but from our involvement more broadly and being able
to look at other jurisdictions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Why are they even allowed to come in?
Mr. Billingsley. At that time, they were both members of
the Basel Committee.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Gibson, same question. Why in the
world did you let the Russians and the Chinese come in our
country and look at our stuff and expect them to be able to be
good guys about this?
Mr. Gibson. These reviews look at our laws and they look at
our regulations, which are all public information. We share
public bank data. And if we were to share any confidential
data, we would anonymize it, so it wouldn't be identified to
any bank.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Why even take the risk of allowing them in
here if you say it is public information that they are looking
at?
Mr. Gibson. We meet with the team that wants to look at our
regulations.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. What are you learning from them? Anything?
Mr. Gibson. All Basel Committee members, we share
information about----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You know exactly what I am talking about.
I am talking about the Russians and the Chinese. What are you
learning from them, because you are allowing them in?
Mr. Gibson. If they are reviewing our rules, then we are
not learning. We are explaining how we have implemented things
domestically.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Have you performed a similar
oversight like that on any other countries in the world?
Mr. Gibson. The Basel Committee does reviews of----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. No, I am just asking, the United States
Federal Reserve, the OCC, are you conducting those same kind of
reviews anywhere else in the world, like the Chinese and
Russians were doing to us?
Mr. Gibson. We have sent staff to join some of these review
teams in the past, yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do you ever bring our rules and
regulations to the Basel Committees? Instead of bringing their
stuff here, do you ever take our stuff there?
Mr. Gibson. We do share what we do----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Do they ever implement our stuff?
Mr. Gibson. Sometimes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Give me an example.
Mr. Gibson. We recently proposed a change to our G-SIB
surcharge formula to average the data over the year instead of
having it be only measured at the end of the year. That is a
proposal that was out for comment, and the Basel Committee is
now proposing the same thing subsequently.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ms. Gardineer, you made a comment a while
ago about things that you have learned from these folks. What
has the OCC learned from Russia or China?
Ms. Gardineer. Congressman Luetkemeyer, the OCC takes the
national security of the United States very serious, and we----
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Oh, that is enough. I am done. I don't
need platitudes.
Here is another question for you: With regards to
implementing these rules and regulations, I have had three
foreign banks from Europe in my office in the last 2 weeks, and
they laughed at me when I asked the question about Basel,
because I said, what are you doing? Are you implementing these
things? They said, no, we are not doing it because it makes us
noncompetitive.
Mr. Hill. The witness can answer that question in writing.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Hill. The gentleman's time has expired. I thank the
gentleman from Missouri. The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Gardineer, just
following up on that last line of questioning, through the FATF
recommendations, we have the ability to project our anti-money
laundering and terrorist financing standards on other
countries. Is that right?
Ms. Gardineer. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. So if they don't comply with anti-money
laundering regimes that we have established, and anti-terrorist
financing standards that we have projected on other countries,
they can't operate through our financial institutions. Is that
correct?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes. We have opportunities to stop that type
of transaction.
Mr. Lynch. Yes. I think there are 190 countries that are
involved or are a signatory to FATF, so we make sure that those
other countries, in order to do banking business with us,
cannot have lower standards that would allow money laundering
or allow terrorist financing? Is that correct?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes. Our engagement with the FATF allows us
to have higher and more appropriate standards to guard against
the race to the bottom or to introduce that type of risk to the
United States.
Mr. Lynch. Right. And in most countries, through their
banking system, they want to have a stamp of legitimacy, right?
In order to attract capital, they want to show people that they
are operating under standards that have integrity and that
those depositors and businesses can rely upon. Is that correct?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes. It does allow the other countries to
understand and have a sense of confidence in a strong regime
from other jurisdictions.
Mr. Lynch. And there are penalties. I know that FATF on
occasion will look, will instruct certain countries to get into
line to raise their standards if they feel that the money
laundering risk or the tendency of terrorist financing to occur
in that country is out of compliance with international
standards. Is that correct?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes. They actually publish and make it quite
public if there is a weakened standard in a jurisdiction.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. Thank you. I want to jump over to
something else. The Financial Stability Board has recently
reported that for shadow banking--these are financial companies
that operate in quasi-banking businesses, but they are not
regulated like banks--the financial assets held by those shadow
banking institutions now stands at about $460 trillion, which
is almost about half of all financial assets that are in
existence around the globe. I know that the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision is examining the vulnerabilities in that
shadow banking world, and this is a question for all three of
you. Could you offer your thoughts on what we have learned from
our collaboration with international financial regulatory
organizations to ensure that this shadow banking system is not
creating a regulatory blind spot and a latent risk to our
traditional banking system?
Ms. Gardineer. I am happy to start. The nonbank financial
institutions, I think, do pose similar risks to the United
States and other countries around the globe. It is important
for us to share our experiences in order to manage that risk
and make sure that the risks do not trickle into the United
States' financial system. So I think sharing those experiences,
looking at that acceleration of growth allows us to have some
harmonization around how we treat these entities.
Mr. Lynch. Right. Mr. Gibson, would you like to add to
that?
Mr. Gibson. Just to say that the Financial Stability Board
has been focusing on that topic, and by producing the report
that you cited, they have increased the transparency around the
nonbank financial intermediation significantly.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. Mr. Billingsley?
Mr. Billingsley. I would just add that through the
international coordination, we can learn more about how banks
are connected to the nonbank finance system you mentioned and
understand how we could get feedback from the banking system.
Mr. Lynch. Okay. My time has just about expired, Mr.
Chairman, so I will yield back.
Mr. Barr. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity. I am going to jump right into this, since I have a
few topics that I would like to cover. Given the recent
finalized rule by the SEC over the climate-related disclosures,
I thought perhaps we could explore how decision-making
internally has influenced decisions being made by American
regulators.
On November 29, 2023, the Basel Committee issued a paper on
what they call a Pillar 3 disclosure framework for climate-
related financial risks as part of its, ``holistic approach to
address climate-related financial risks to the global banking
system.'' The Basel Committee said its work was to, ``further
its mandate to strengthen the regulation, supervision, and
practices of banks worldwide with the purpose of enhancing
financial stability and the potential design of such a climate
framework.'' It sounds like awesome work, but in that paper,
the Basel Committee said it was exploring disclosure
requirements that included bank deposits and risks posed to
banks if depositors and others, ``are impacted by climate-
related financial risks and may require drawdown of their
deposits.''
So, Deputy Director Billingsley, does the FDIC agree with
the Basel Committee that it is important to consider imaginary
climate-related bank runs as a possible source of financial
instability? And if so, what is the reason and evidence for why
we will see bank runs being caused by climate change?
Mr. Billingsley. At the FDIC, we are really focused on the
financial risks associated with climate change, so we are
really focused on how climate-related financial risk could feed
into the traditional banking risk.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. So That is my question. What is the
reason and the evidence of why we would see bank runs being
caused by climate change?
Mr. Billingsley. The disclosure requirements you just
cited, I don't think necessarily get into the details of that,
but I think it is important to note that the disclosures you
are talking about, we got a lot of comments back on those. I
think the comment period for the Basel Committee ended last
week or the week before last, so I am expecting to have some
good----
Mr. Huizenga. So, you need to review the comments before
you are able to answer that?
Mr. Billingsley. No. I just think the comments we received,
particularly from U.S.-based entities, will be helpful.
Mr. Huizenga. You must not leave your microphone on, but
why aren't you able to then answer my question?
Mr. Billingsley. I'm sorry. Could you repeat the question?
Mr. Huizenga. For the third time, what reason and evidence
is there that you believe that there will be bank runs related
to climate change? You gave me gobbledygook first. Then you
told me, well, we are getting a bunch of comments and that will
be helpful. I asked whether you could answer my question or
not, and you asked me to repeat the question.
Mr. Billingsley. I am not aware of a bank run----
Mr. Huizenga. Imagined scenario.
Mr. Billingsley. I am not aware of a bank run at this time,
to be honest.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Well, it took three attempts, but thank
you. In a Fed research paper authored by an official who serves
as Co-Chair of the Basel Committee's Task Force on Climate-
related Financial Risks, an idea called, ``double
materiality,'' was analyzed. The idea seems to be that bank
supervisory authorities should consider both the risks that
banks face from climate change themselves and any impacts of
bank actions, such as to whom and where they lend on climate
change. For example, if a perfectly legal and financially-
healthy producer of a product that the Fed might think is a so-
called, ``brown sector,'' got a loan from a bank, maybe the Fed
would want the bank to view the loan as riskier because the Fed
thinks that they are creating products that could potentially
cause more wildfires or harsh storms or things like that in the
future. Is that something with which the FDIC also agrees?
Mr. Billingsley. No. The issue you raise about double
materiality is not within our mandate.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. Director Gibson, under the guise of
safety and soundness, what would prevent the Fed in the future
from using existing authorities to change bank supervision
using concepts such as double materiality to channel credit
away from what future Fed officials and the global governance
crowd believe are brown sectors and toward what they believe to
be green sectors?
Mr. Gibson. Our supervisory focus is only around safety and
soundness. It is not around favoring one sector over another.
Mr. Huizenga. That is not what your researchers are talking
about.
Mr. Gibson. Research papers are not the official position
of the Federal Reserve. Our researchers publish their research,
but that is not an official position.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. The Federal Reserve's Vice Chair for
Supervision led a review of the Federal Reserve's supervision
and regulation of SVB and published the results along with his
personal cover letter that included, in my view, some biased
and unnecessarily-politicized views that are not representative
of the full Board, I would hope. Shockingly, some of those
views showed up word for word, yet without attribution to Vice
Chair Barr's report, in the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision's October 2023 report entitled, ``Report on the
2023 Banking Turmoil.'' According to recent information
provided to this committee from Fed Chair Powell, ``The Federal
Reserve staff contributed to and have opportunities to comment
on various work products.'' So, I will have to be following up
with you on that, but I am very concerned about that
interaction.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Green, is recognized.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank the ranking
member, and the witnesses for appearing.
In my City of Houston, Texas, we had over a trillion
gallons of water as a result of Hurricane Harvey in 2017. Over
a 4-day period, 68 people died. It caused $125 billion in
damages. Now, through a process known as security realization,
banks bundle their loans and then indirectly issue them as
securities. As climate change begins to impact these assets,
these securities, such as mortgages, that are in these
packages--doesn't that cause some concern for banks when the
insurance companies decide that they are moving out, they are
not going to insure? We find that if you can't get the
insurance, you can't get the home, because the home has to have
some level of insurance. Does that cause some concern for banks
or should it?
Ms. Gardineer. Congressman Green, of course, it does. We
have a flood insurance rule, for example, that we have been
dealing with for many years, and when we see changes like that,
it does have an impact or the potential to have an impact on
the financial institution that holds a mortgage.
Mr. Green. Anyone else?
Mr. Billingsley. No, I would agree. I think the issue you
raise is how climate change can affect credit risk, and that is
something we have been----
Mr. Green. This is just one, but there are many others, and
I think that is what we have to concern ourselves with, how
this climate change impacts these mortgages, these underlying
securities, and to the extent that they can impact the bank
itself, and that is where you come in. Do you have any other
examples?
Mr. Gibson. We do see banks looking at how climate-related
financial risks affect their own loan portfolios or their
business models, so banks are looking at those risks, yes.
Mr. Billingsley. No, I would agree with Mike. It could also
impact things like operational risk as well.
Mr. Green. Say again?
Mr. Billingsley. It could impact things like operational
risk as well.
Mr. Green. Operational risk? Okay.
Ms. Gardineer. Congressman, I do think that when we issued,
jointly, Principles for Climate-Related Financial Risk, it is
precisely because we wanted to focus on risk management because
of the increased frequency of weather-related and extreme
weather on operational risks, supervisory issues, and the true
impact it has on communities and individuals across the
country.
Mr. Green. Okay. Understanding that we have these risks,
what is it that you can do to assure us to some extent--you
can't guarantee--that banks will be in a position to deal with
these risks that climate change will impose? What do you do?
Mr. Gibson. We make it clear to banks that we expect them
to measure and manage all of their material risks, including
the climate-related financial risks that you are talking about,
and we have the interagency guidance that was mentioned that
has some principles around that.
Mr. Green. Do you also concern yourself with how well they
are capitalized?
Mr. Gibson. There is no direct link from climate-related
financial risks to capital requirements, but certainly, when
banks are evaluating their own risks, they need to know whether
their capital is sufficient for the risks they are taking,
which would include all of their material risks.
Mr. Green. But if the climate change impacts the underlying
assets and the securities, does that not impact the financial
market in some way?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, and we are seeing investors who purchase
those securities, and they will be trying to understand their
risks, which are very targeted to the risks that they are
investing in. So, it is possible that climate-related financial
risks could be important for a particular security, and we see
investors paying attention to that.
Mr. Green. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr. Barr. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize myself
for 5 minutes.
Director Gibson, the Basel Committee sets international
capital and liquidity standards that the Fed uses as the basis
for domestic regulations. Section 11(k) of the Federal Reserve
Act, which you know very, very well, provides that, ``The Board
of Governors may not delegate its functions to a Federal
Reserve Bank for the establishment of policies for supervision
and regulation,'' but the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is a
member of the Basel Committee, as is the Federal Reserve Board
of Governors.
How does the Federal Reserve reconcile delegating to the
New York Fed the ability to be a member of the Basel Committee,
which establishes supervision and regulation policies that
become incorporated into Board regulatory and supervisory
policies, with Section 11(k)of the Act, which says that the
Board may not delegate to a Federal Reserve Bank its functions
for the establishment of supervision and regulation policies?
Mr. Gibson. When the Board and the New York Fed participate
in the Basel Committee, we are coordinating closely. We are not
delegating anything, and we work together, and the Reserve Bank
staff provide a lot of value. They have a lot of technical
expertise.
Mr. Barr. When you and the New York Fed are participating
in the Basel Committee, do you represent the United States, or
are you just participating in an international standard-setting
exercise?
Mr. Gibson. We are representing our agencies, and we are
representing the United States.
Mr. Barr. And U.S. energy companies that are fossil energy,
carbon-emitting companies, do you have their interests in mind
when you are there in Basel? The shareholders of fossil energy,
carbon-emitting American companies, do you have their interests
in mind?
Mr. Gibson. We have our statutory responsibilities around
bank supervision and safety and soundness in mind.
Mr. Barr. Yes, and when European standard-setters ask you
to pressure banks to disinvest in or de-bank fossil energy
companies, what do you say to them?
Mr. Gibson. I would say that we don't direct banks to lend
to any particular customer. That is the bank's decision.
Mr. Barr. And American shareholders who depend on the
profitability of fossil energy companies, what do you say in
defense of them when you are in the Basel Committee?
Mr. Gibson. Again, in the Basel Committee, we are
representing our statutory responsibilities for bank
supervision and safety and soundness.
Mr. Barr. Do you ever raise the issue of energy reliability
and energy affordability in the context of these conversations
at Basel?
Mr. Gibson. That is not a main topic of the Basel
Committee. We talk about----
Mr. Barr. You don't talk about that? You don't talk about
the reliability of the American energy grid? You don't talk
about energy affordability or shareholder returns for American
energy companies when you are there?
Mr. Gibson. That is not the focus of banks' supervision
and----
Mr. Barr. What is the focus?
Mr. Gibson. Banks' safety and soundness, and a strong
economy and a strong banking system.
Mr. Barr. Yes, and are banks more sound when they don't
have good credit with energy companies?
Mr. Gibson. Banks need to manage their credit risk with
respect to all of their borrowers.
Mr. Barr. Yes. Director Gibson, in one of our subcommittee
hearings last year, you said that you did not know about the
funding for the Network for Greening the Financial System
(NGFS). Have you had a chance to look more closely at NGFS
funding, and if so, whether you think that with activist
funding of research, that the NGFS at the Federal Reserve Board
is still comfortable with the Board's participation in these
NGFS meetings?
Mr. Gibson. I have looked more into the NGFS funding. What
I can tell you is that the NGFS is supported by voluntary
contributions of the NGFS members and observers. However,
external funding can also be provided to support projects
commissioned for the benefit of the NGFS. The NGFS charter
states that such contributions do not confer the contributor
any right to define the priorities or influence the NGFS's
work, and, of course, we do not contribute funding to the NGFS
from the Federal Reserve.
Mr. Barr. We are very obviously worried about the influence
from who funds it. Director Gibson, can you describe the
Climate Data Committee, including the Climate Data Hub, and the
joint work with the Financial Stability Oversight Council's
(FSOC's) Office of Financial Research's Climate Data and
Analytics Hub over at Treasury? It seems like there is a lot of
obsession with climate at the Fed.
Mr. Gibson. I can't speak for the FSOC or the Treasury, but
in terms of the Federal Reserve, we do have a staff group that
is looking at climate data and what might be investments----
Mr. Barr. My time has expired, but we need patriotism. From
our participation in international bodies, we need promotion of
American energy dominance. We don't need yielding to European
climate obsession. I yield back.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Vargas, is recognized.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Nice speech,
but I would say what we really need to take a look at is the
soundness of banks. That is what we are talking about here
today, and I think banks are much more sound when they don't
put their head in the sand, and take a look at what is
happening nationally and internationally. There is climate
change. Even the Republican witnesses who come up here, when I
ask, do you believe in climate change, even they raise their
hands. When I first got here, none of them would. Now, they do.
Of course, it is happening. How could you possibly predict a
run on the bank with climate change?
You know what? If you have a local bank in Florida that is
heavily invested in the real estate market there with
mortgages, and you are invested in that bank or you have your
money in that bank, and the first hurricane comes through--it
is not even a Category 4, now it is a 5; they are creating new
numbers now because these hurricanes are so large because of
climate change--Hell yes, you want to get your money out of
that bank. Is that bank going to be sound? No, and of course,
it is going to impact what you do. It is ridiculous. It is a
nice speech when they say, ``patriotism,'' the coal companies
and all this. It is B.S, climate change is happening, and I am
not against energy companies. I think it is important to
support energy companies, but at the same time, we are talking
about banking here and insurance.
I was in insurance for a while, and I have to tell you, one
of the things that they do is they take a look at what are real
risks, and they take a look at Florida, and they take a look at
California and other places. They know that because of climate
change, it is becoming much more expensive to insure there, and
they can't get the price that they need, so either they are
pulling out or they are shrinking. They are not stupid, and of
course that is why you are taking a look at this. As bankers,
you have to. There are real risks; climate-related risks are
real risks.
Somehow, my friends on the other side think that they are
made-up risks. They are imaginary risks. Ask that to the people
in Texas, we talk about the hurricanes, the people in Florida,
or the fires in California. See how imaginary they are. Anyway,
I will shut up now. I had my speech just like the other side. I
just want to make sure I said that because it is so ridiculous.
By the way, it was the same thing with Dodd-Frank. When I
got here, Dodd-Frank was the boogeyman. Dodd-Frank was bad.
Now, it is the gold standard. Why are we going to Basel III? We
have Dodd-Frank. It is so great. I do have some problems with
Basel III, but I do want to say this: When we go and
participate in these international organizations, are they
dictating to us what to do? I think you have already testified
no, right? Dr. Gibson, why don't we go to you first?
Mr. Gibson. No. Nothing that is discussed in the
international groups we participate in is binding on the
Federal Reserve.
Mr. Vargas. Yes, and the things that you talk about there,
are they sneaky, nobody knows about them, and somehow they pop
up, and then we have to enforce them here? Does that happen
like my friends on the other side seem to be intimating?
Mr. Gibson. The groups we participate in, like the Basel
Committee, publish their work plan annually, they publish
summaries of the meetings, so the topics are in the public
domain that they are discussing.
Mr. Vargas. Yes. In fact, we get them in our office. We get
to see these things. I don't know why they don't get them over
there on the other side. It seems pretty ridiculous to me. Now,
I should ask you, because I do ask everybody, so I think it
would only be fair, do you believe in climate change? If you
could raise your hands?
[Hands raised.]
Mr. Vargas. Okay. Thank you. That's pretty consistent now
with what we have had, and, again, I think it is very important
to do that. And the last thing I would say is this: There seems
to be this notion that we shouldn't rely on professionals
anymore, that somehow the politicians will get it right, and we
should listen to what we say so much and not let you do your
job. And maybe that is the anti-elitist fever and fervor that
we hear, but let professionals do their job. If I need an
operation, I am not going to let some kook operate on me; I
want a doctor, someone who knows what they are doing. I want a
professional to do that, and you guys are professionals. I hope
they let you do your job.
Again, I appreciate the work that you have been doing. I
had a whole speech here, asking a whole bunch of other
questions. Sometimes, they get my goat because of this whole
climate-related imaginary thing, which is ridiculous. It is
real, it is happening, it is big, and it is very problematic,
and I am glad you all are taking a look at it. And with that, I
will yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Davidson. [presiding]. I thank the gentleman. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
For a lot of my constituents back home, they will be
sitting here watching this hearing, dozens of them, wondering
what in the world has Basel, Switzerland, got to do with banks
in America? Why do these globalist bankers keep going to Basel,
Switzerland, and why do they make rules from these meetings in
Basel and come to us? Why should we pay so much attention to
Basel?
Could you explain it to us, Dr. Gibson, what goes on in
Basel and why it is important?
Mr. Gibson. In the Basel Committee, we are participating to
support our statutory responsibility domestically for
supervision and regulation and financial stability----
Mr. Davidson. Our FSOC is supposed to submit to whatever
happens in Basel?
Mr. Gibson. Nothing that is agreed upon in Basel or
developed there is binding, and we make decisions based on our
domestic statutory mandates.
Mr. Davidson. Under Dodd-Frank, under all bank regulations,
so it is not really a treaty. It is just kind of this consensus
that we should gather together regularly in Basel, Switzerland,
and talk about the global financial markets and try to create
some sort of stable international financial system.
Mr. Gibson. Having common standards helps the global
financial system because U.S. firms that want to operate abroad
have rules that they are familiar with, because we have a
somewhat harmonized----
Mr. Davidson. There is nobody from Basel making us do this.
We are in a sense doing it to ourselves, right?
Mr. Gibson. We participate voluntarily, yes.
Mr. Davidson. Okay. I just wanted to be clear on that.
Yesterday, our Housing and Insurance Subcommittee held a
hearing on housing affordability in America, where we discussed
the many issues homebuyers are facing in the current market.
One issue we discussed briefly and I wanted to save for today's
hearing is the clear impact the proposal on Basel III capital
requirements is going to have on homeownership in America,
especially for low- to moderate-income borrowers, and
especially for our rural, minority, and first-time homebuyers
across the country. Mortgages issued to these borrowers would
require a risk weighting of 70 percent versus 50 percent, so a
pretty big increase.
What is very clear is that as a result of this 20-percent
increase in the risk-weighted capital requirement for low- to
moderate-income (LMI) mortgages, lenders will be forced to
decrease their lending to these borrowers. Because of Basel III
Endgame, fewer mortgages will go to rural communities. Fewer
mortgages will go to minority borrowers. Fewer mortgages will
go to hardworking Americans who want to buy their first home.
The Basel III Endgame will definitely make homeownership in
America more expensive and the housing affordability worse
unless it is reworked. I will say that the Chairman of the
Federal Reserve gave us some hope. Although he seems very
committed to it, he seems to be open to reworking it.
As we looked through this, I was reviewing several speeches
and interviews that the Chairman of the Basel Committee has
given in the last month, and he asserted that the Basel members
are expected to have the outstanding standards implemented by
the end of the year. Director Gibson, does that sound right to
you, by the end of the year?
Mr. Gibson. I would say the timing is uncertain, because we
are reviewing all of the comments that we received, and we will
have to analyze all of those comments.
Mr. Davidson. This is also encouraging. When I hear folks
in your position, or people like the Chairman of the Federal
Reserve say, we may have to rework some things, that is
essentially like what people back home might do screaming, it
is a total disaster. We are going to have to fix it. So, I take
it as good news because we know we have to fix it.
Director Gibson, do you think that a robust public
engagement, following the Administrative Procedure Act (APA),
will ensure that whatever new capital requirements are fit for
purpose for America's financial institutions?
Mr. Gibson. Yes. That is the process we will do, and that
is the goal we have.
Mr. Davidson. For others on the panel, any other concerns
about the impact of Basel III on homeownership or the ability
for people to get a mortgage in America due to some consensus
in Basel?
Mr. Billingsley. Yes. The issue you raise is probably one
of the most prominent comments we have received, so I view it
as critically important to get it right.
Mr. Davidson. Yes. I will just share from my personal
experience as we look at the impact on small and mid-market
firms as well. Public companies, big companies have access to
the bond market. But for small and mid-market firms, their
ability to access financial capital in America largely goes
through banks. So, who is getting crippled? It is Main Street
businesses over Wall Street companies. These are the businesses
that dominate Southwest Ohio and a lot of America, a lot of
where the jobs are. The ability to grow these businesses is
hamstrung when you have globalist bankers come away from
Switzerland and say, we are going to clamp down on lending. And
it doesn't just hit homeowners, it hits businesses, and it
hurts the growth rate in our whole economy. So, I hope it is
very strongly reworked.
My time has expired, and I now recognize the gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks to all of
our witnesses. I think this has been a genuinely fascinating
hearing. I just think it is mistitled, and I don't mean that to
be sassy. I say that because I think the appropriate title for
this hearing is how is it that the Republican Party, the party
of Reagan, has become so uncomfortable with global leadership,
and I am not just saying that to cast aspersions. The Chicago
Council on Global Affairs, a wonderful organization in Chicago,
just did a survey they released last month that said that for
the first time in nearly 5 decades, a majority of Republicans
said that the United States should stay out, of rather than
play an active role, in world affairs.
We are going to leave Congress this week, for 2 weeks,
without even bringing a bill to the House Floor to provide aid
to our friends in Ukraine to stand up to Vladimir Putin. It
doesn't seem like that long ago that the leader of the
Republican Party was saying, ``Tear down that wall, Mr.
Gorbachev.'' Now, nobody wants to stand up to him. I can't find
a single member of the Republican Party who is willing to
suggest that someone who seems to have a fetish with the leader
of North Korea, and is publicly refusing to support the United
States obligations under Article 5 of NATO, to even say that
might be problematic.
And of course, yesterday, we had the Heritage Foundation in
here, who has played a role in creating Project 2025, a
conservative blueprint for the next Republican President, which
suggests that the Treasury Department should withdraw from the
World Bank, withdraw from the International Monetary Fund
(IMF), and the Commerce Department should pull out of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
and terminate any program that even references the Paris
Climate Accord.
I guess my first question for you all is, do you believe
that the United States should withdraw from international
financial institutions and cede leadership to everybody else in
the world? Does anybody agree with that proposition?
[No response.]
Mr. Casten. Good. Thank you. I am glad your organizations
have done that. FDIC Chair Gruenberg recently said that climate
change should not be viewed solely as a long-term threat, that
weather events are already influencing insurance costs. We know
that. Mr. Vargas has said that. It is affecting financial
markets.
Dr. Gibson, these are simple questions. But isn't it
beneficial for the United States to actually sit at the table
and collaborate with our international climate counterparts to
minimize climate risks, to understand them?
Mr. Gibson. Yes. We work with our international
counterparts to support our statutory mandates.
Mr. Casten. And shouldn't we be collaborating with regional
banks, and other central banks, making sure that we are working
in lockstep with them?
Mr. Gibson. We do collaborate with other central banks,
yes.
Mr. Casten. Given the choice, would you like the United
States to be in a leadership role at those tables or not at the
table at all?
Mr. Gibson. We do play a leadership role in a lot of these
groups, yes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. Ms. Gardineer, do you agree that
climate risks are global and will affect all entities, sectors,
and economies?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes, Congressman, I do.
Mr. Casten. Wouldn't banks with a global footprint actually
benefit from having the United States at that table instead of
leaving U.S. multinational companies to wait and sit there and
have to do the bidding of whatever other international
sovereign nation sets those rules?
Ms. Gardineer. It is really important for us to continue,
and the value that we provide by having that collaboration with
our global partners, I think, helps the United States and our
financial system.
Mr. Casten. I come back to what I said at the start. It is
fascinating that this sounds like such a partisan exchange,
that you all are answering such simple questions with simple
obvious truths, and I have sympathy for all of my colleagues
across the aisle. I don't know what I would do in their shoes.
If my ability to hold this job depended on appealing to that
small minority of Americans who do not believe that the United
States should lead, but make up the majority of the Republican
primary electorate. I get it, leadership is hard, but following
people is the opposite of leadership. I thank you all for your
leadership, I thank you for doing the right thing, and I hope
that people who find leadership hard, find more satisfactory
jobs than being a part of the leadership of the United States.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to
thank all of our witnesses for being here and representing your
respective agencies.
Dr. Gibson, last year, I asked you some questions about the
processes of developing the Federal Reserve's Pilot Climate
Scenario Analysis (CSA), and the sources of its funding. At the
time, you didn't know, but I also understand Representative
Barr asked this question earlier, and from what I understand,
you told him that the NGFS was funded partly by voluntary
contributions from member banks. Is that true?
Mr. Gibson. Voluntary contributions from its members, which
are central banks or supervisors, but they do accept external
funding for certain projects that they run.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Since I wasn't physically in here, I
want to make sure of those. Now, let me do a follow-on question
on that. Do any U.S. bank supervisory agencies voluntarily
contribute to the NGFS?
Mr. Gibson. The Federal Reserve has not.
Mr. Loudermilk. But you are not sure of any others?
Mr. Gibson. I wouldn't want to speak for the others.
Mr. Billingsley. The FDIC does not either.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
Ms. Gardineer. The OCC does not.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you. I just want to make sure
that was clear.
On to another question. Dr. Gibson, as the Director of
Supervision and Enforcement at the Fed, do you think it is
important that you know what assumptions are being made to
support the proposals that come out of your division?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. In the participant instructions for
the Pilot CSA, there were 75 references to the NGFS. In the
instructions, the Fed asked banks to examine trajectories for
climate and economic outcomes under hypothetical trajectories
provided by the NGFS. Now, the Fed claims to have used NGFS
trajectories because, ``these trajectories are considered
plausible and illustrative scenarios and do not have
probabilities attached to them.'' How did you evaluate whether
these trajectories were plausible and what measure of
plausibility was used?
Mr. Gibson. When we were constructing the Pilot Climate
Scenario Analysis, we considered the question of what scenarios
to use and asked the banks to look at it. And we did, in those
cases that you mentioned, decide to use scenarios that were
produced by the NGFS, mainly because the banks were already
familiar with them, so that would be the least-burdensome way
to go about the exercise.
Mr. Loudermilk. But was there a particular measure of
plausibility other than what you have just described?
Mr. Gibson. Our technical experts evaluated them and were
comfortable, yes.
Mr. Loudermilk. When did the Fed believe it was important
that these scenarios do not have probabilities attached to
them?
Mr. Gibson. In our view, the scenarios that we were using
for the Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis--I don't think we know
enough to attach probabilities to them, and the purpose of the
exercise was not to attach probabilities to them. The purpose
of the exercise was to give banks a chance to evaluate those
scenarios and look at how they are evaluating those risks and
their risk management around climate-related financial risk.
Mr. Loudermilk. But without any probabilities?
Mr. Gibson. Without a probability attached.
Mr. Loudermilk. Does the Fed formally endorse these
scenarios as a supervisory standard when evaluating banks'
adherence to the joint climate risk guidance issued last year
by the Fed, the FDIC, and the OCC?
Mr. Gibson. No. I would say these are not the scenarios
that we would use as a standard.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. A recent Basel Committee regulatory
consistency assessment report says that U.S. agencies have
adopted a stricter approach than the minimum standards
prescribed by the Basel Committee. The stricter rules have not
been considered as mitigants for the overall component level
assessment of compliance.
Dr. Gibson, is it correct that when U.S. standards are
stricter than BCBS recommendations, the U.S. does not receive
credit for those standards under the Basel Committee's rating
scheme?
Mr. Gibson. It is true that when the Basel Committee looks
at countries' regulations, they are only looking for
differences in the downside direction. They are not evaluating
the differences in the other direction.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. So if the U.S. doesn't receive credit
for stricter standards, why exceed those standards?
Mr. Gibson. We get a lot of benefit from having standards
that are appropriate for the U.S., whether or not they are
identical to Basel standards.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. I see I am short on time, so I yield
back.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Illinois, Mr. Foster, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, again, to our
witnesses. Many of you have mentioned the fact that the U.S. is
often a leader in these international discussions. Why do you
believe that the U.S. is a leader, or at least first among
equals in these discussions? Is it the size of our GDP or the
primacy of the dollar or our leadership in advanced
technologies or just the expertise we have in certain areas? Is
it explicitly written into the bylaws of these groups that the
U.S. should have a leading role in these, or is it just de
facto, because in a number of ways, we are the big dog in the
international economy?
Mr. Billingsley. I suppose I can start. For me, I think it
starts with the FDIC's mission, so I will give you an example.
The International Association of Deposit Insurers is an
international organization we are involved in, and it is fair
to say that the rest of the world looks to us as the premier
way to do that, so I think that is a particular area where we
are the social leadership.
Mr. Foster. Yes. Are there areas you are aware of where
other countries or other areas may have more expertise in
international trade?
Mr. Gibson. I would say one of the things we bring to the
table is we have a high capacity for research and data analysis
and that supports our engagement in these international groups,
and it is often a way to move the international consensus to
provide good data and arguments. I would say that is a strength
of the U.S. participation.
Ms. Gardineer. I would add to that the expertise that we
have across all of our agencies at the OCC. We do have, I
think, the perspectives of the largest globally-active
institutions down to some of the smallest community banks, and
that purview gives us a lot of leadership capability to take to
these international forums.
Mr. Foster. Now, another area where we might gain from
engagement with other countries is when you see failures that
occur in other countries. There was this famous incident with
the deepfake impersonation on some sort of Zoom that caused a
$25-million erroneous transfer. I believe that happened in Hong
Kong, if I am right, so there are lessons to be learned there.
The biggest G-SIB that has failed, the only one since Dodd-
Frank, was Credit Suisse, so there may be lessons there from
which we can benefit. We are only 5 percent of the population
of the world, and there are lots of ways that financial
institutions can mess up that might be discovered earlier in
other countries. Are there examples you can think of where we
really gained a valuable lesson from experiences offshore?
Mr. Gibson. Just to give one example, the Basel Committee
was founded 50 years ago because of the failure of a German
bank that caused losses to U.S. banks through the foreign
exchange market. And that was really the impetus for more
international cooperation about what are cross-border banks
doing and do we understand and supervise their risks
adequately. That spurred more international cooperation because
of the failure of a German bank.
Mr. Foster. And have there been disasters averted that you
can point to because of the understanding and this
standardization, at least to some extent, of our approaches to
different financial threats?
Mr. Gibson. I would say that the fact that we have had
strong regulatory standards in the U.S. has been a source of
strength for our banking system and our economy. I can't point
to particular banks where, because we did this, a bank didn't
fail, but overall, I think we have a strong system.
Mr. Foster. Yes. I came onto this committee in March of
2008 when the roof was about to cave in, and began educating
myself about things. I was pointed to the Canadian banking
system, which was stodgy and overcapitalized at the time. But
then when the crisis hit, being over capitalized went from
being something that would be a source of derision to something
that made the Canadian banking system the envy of a lot of
countries, including some in the United States. And I believe
that there is a lot to be learned from looking at the other 95
percent of humanity.
Historians say there are two basic ways for countries to
fail, one of which is to seal themselves off from the rest of
the world, and pretend like they know all the answers. The
other one is to just have an extractive elite that sort of
benefits the incumbents and preserves their economic and
political power. There are a lot of both of those strands in
this hearing, and I think to maintain our strength, we have to
keep ourselves open to the world and particularly open to the
world's ideas, and I thank you for your work in that regard. My
time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Norman, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As a follow-up, I will
take Mr. Luetkemeyer's questions about the involvement with
Chinese and Russian banks as far as Basel. Mr. Gibson, did I
hear you right that the climate risk didn't affect any of its
safeguards that Basel tries to implement--market risk, capital
risk, operational risk?
Mr. Gibson. When we think about climate-related financial
risks, we ask banks to think about the ways that they could
manifest through all of those traditional channels, so that is
the way we would look at it.
Mr. Norman. Okay. I think he asked this. Could you give me
one climate risk that the banks are facing now of which they
need to be aware? Give me an example. Is it forest fires? Is it
hurricanes? Give me one example.
Mr. Gibson. We did run this Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis
last year that asked six large banks to look at, among other
things, the scenario of a large hurricane hitting the East
Coast and how that would affect their loan book. So, that is
one example that banks have looked at.
Mr. Norman. Mr. Billingsley?
Mr. Billingsley. Yes. One good example is just the cost or
availability of insurance, so that could impact the credit risk
of an institution.
Mr. Norman. Give me one climate risk that man can control,
that would affect the banks and the Basel as far as the
regulations and recommendations, and, as our friend from
Georgia mentioned, there is no probability that is put with it.
Mr. Billingsley. Right. I will agree with Mike that it is
difficult to assign probabilities, but I think it is our job to
assess all material risks, including ones where we can't assign
probabilities.
Mr. Norman. All three of you raised your hands about
climate risk. What if a bank just gave you one sentence: ``We
are not going to make allowances unless you define further with
a probability of a climate risk.'' What would be the
consequences?
Ms. Gardineer. What we have done, Congressman, is look at
climate-related financial risks, and looking at that and the
impact it could have on all of the risk, like credit risk,
operational risk, market risk, et cetera. Risk management is at
the core and our safety and soundness is the focus of what we
are looking at when we look at climate-related financial risk.
Mr. Norman. But what would be the consequences of a bank
that did that?
Ms. Gardineer. I think if they were unable to manage their
risk appropriately, our examiners would take normal courses of
action to help them manage the risk to prevent any adverse
consequences that could befall the bank or the communities.
Mr. Norman. But Basel can't come up with a firm example of
a climate risk. If it is a hurricane, if it is a forest fire,
put a probability on that and how that directly affects the
banks.
Ms. Gardineer. I don't----
Mr. Norman. But you all raised your hands that this is a
real crisis, and I guess I am just trying to further drill down
to see exactly what, and for the money and time that you are
requiring by the banks because they are going to suffer the
consequences. I think the foreign banks are going to laugh at
it. Mr. Luetkemeyer mentioned the involvement of China and
Russia from a national security standpoint. I don't think they
are our friends, having all the information from our financial
records that you all have provided them, but I guess I am just
trying to ask again about the climate risk, what are the
foreign countries saying about your regulations and the
consequences?
Mr. Gibson. When we engage with our international
counterparts in talking about climate risk, many of them have a
lot more active policies than we do.
Mr. Norman. Which country?
Mr. Gibson. All of the other countries, pretty much.
Mr. Norman. China?
Mr. Gibson. I would say Europe stands out as being very
active on climate risk, in my experience.
Mr. Norman. What about China and Russia?
Mr. Gibson. Not in my experience, no.
Mr. Norman. Zero. They laugh at it.
Mr. Gibson. Russia doesn't participate in the Basel
Committee anymore.
Mr. Norman. What about China?
Mr. Gibson. They participate. But I would say on the topic
of climate risk, we are really in the early stages of learning
what are the links from climate change to the risks that banks
have on their balance sheet. That is why we are trying to build
the capacity to understand that better, and banks are building
that capacity as well.
Mr. Norman. I yield back.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you very
much to the witnesses. A little earlier, we had a colleague
making a very sanctimonious speech, which really doesn't make
it in the real world and shouldn't here. I am not sure if my
colleague understands that the United States--or knows his
history--has done far better than the economies that we are
trying now to collaborate with, as he put it, or to fall in
lockstep. Leadership is not defined as falling in line with
other weaker economies and bad ideas, and embracing Basel III
is somehow described as leadership? No. No. Making Basel III
better and forging a better path is leadership, and that is
what we are trying to do.
Not only that, every bank, every business that you speak
to, large and small, has a problem with Basel III, the biggest
banks in the country as well as very small community banks that
come and see me. So, embracing Basel III Endgame is somehow
leadership, and not falling in line is sanctimonious at best,
and I find it very, very politically motivated because it
doesn't make any sense coming from a fellow Member.
Anyway, we have a concern about the preservation of U.S.
business sovereignty, and in the development and adoption of
international standards. We want to have our say, and it
doesn't seem like we do when it comes to Basel III and many
other rules that are being made.
Mr. Gibson, how do your regulatory organizations prioritize
U.S. business sovereignty and standards amidst the growing
influence of international regulatory bodies on our financial
regulations, such as the Corporate Sustainability Directive
(CS3D) and other global paths, that the U.S. seems required to
follow by your regulators?
Mr. Gibson. When the Federal Reserve participates in
international groups, we are supporting our statutory
responsibilities around supervision and regulation and
financial stability, and we are working to shape those
standards and recommendations to the needs of the U.S.
financial system. But the standards in those groups aren't
binding, so we take decisions on our domestic mandates
according to our domestic goals.
Mr. Meuser. I don't know how many letters you got, and you
couldn't even name one that was positive. I would love to see
the positive letter, by the way, if that is at all possible. If
that letter was from an actual stakeholder, I would love to see
it, if you can produce that for this committee.
How is CS3D in the interest of American small business,
because EUR 150 million, you have to comply, not just in
Europe, but in the United States of America. Have we ever heard
such a thing before? I would like to ask you, Mr. Billingsley.
Mr. Billingsley. Yes. Sure. Something like a CS3D is really
sort of outside of the remit of the FDIC, so it is not
something we are interested in. It is not something you will
see come out of us. It is really a European thing.
Mr. Meuser. Good, but according to Treasury Secretary
Yellen, not necessarily. So that is a concern, and it seems to
be a pattern to these global--how did he put it--
collaborations.
Let me ask Comptroller Gardineer, please, how does the OCC
balance international standards, from your perspective, of the
U.S. banking system, ensuring U.S. businesses remain
competitive?
Ms. Gardineer. It gives us, Congressman, an opportunity, as
we said earlier, to talk about raising standards, higher
standards, and trying to ensure that there is a level playing
field so that the U.S. financial system is not at a competitive
disadvantage or losing market share to a more-lax jurisdiction
that has lower standards or is leading a race to the bottom.
Mr. Meuser. And maybe just for all of you, do we integrate
in a sincere, important way industry feedback in these
international discussions?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Ms. Gardineer. Yes, we do.
Mr. Billingsley. Absolutely.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. Thank you. I appreciate that, and, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Fitzgerald, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Obviously, we have discussed quite a bit
about how the Basel proposal adopts legally-binding capital
requirements originating from an organization that exhibits
what in my estimation is no real legal authority. I have been
particularly concerned with the proposals disincentivizing
banks from offering conventional loans to first-time homebuyers
and low- to moderate-income borrowers. This is an issue that I
think if you are a Member of Congress, you are going to hear
about continually when you are back in the district, and I
think the lack of options will make buying a home even more
unattainable than it already is today, certainly for
Wisconsinites right now.
Another major issue is the proposal's operational risk
component requiring banks to hold capital against fee and
commission income as a proxy for operational risk. Under the
proposal, a Wisconsin manufacturer trying to ship products
internationally would need to pay more to get a bank letter of
credit in order to facilitate those shipments, ultimately
leading to higher costs or reduced availability for its
products. In kind of a similar fashion, foreign direct
investment in Wisconsin could be negatively impacted due to the
increased capital, and the burden associated with that capital
on foreign banks helping facilitate investment in Wisconsin.
These issues, I think, kind of highlight the lack of analysis
on how the proposal could affect users.
Mr. Gibson, Vice Chair Barr has promised more analysis on
the final rule, but why not do this analysis up front to
increase the likelihood of kind of a better final product, I
guess you could say?
Mr. Gibson. The notice of proposed rulemaking last year had
an analysis of the impact, and we are doing more work during
the comment period, and we got comments about the impact. We
also did a special data collection during the comment period to
be able to assess the impact, so we are going to take all that
into account going forward.
Mr. Fitzgerald. So, you are comfortable with the amount of
information that is available to make those series of
decisions, I guess, at this point?
Mr. Gibson. We are doing more work during the comment
period with the information from the comments as well as from
the special data collection, so we will be providing more
information in the future, yes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Okay. Members of the military are routinely
subjected to deployments and kind of permanent changes of
station and, therefore, more likely to have kind of longer
periods of time when they don't use open credit lines, I guess
is the best way to describe it. In fact, active duty and
reserve military members are 30 percent more likely than the
general public, within a 2-year period, to make a purchase
using a credit card that hasn't had any activity in the last 12
months.
Under the Basel III Endgame proposal, off-balance-sheet
items like unused credit card lines will be subject to an
increased credit conversion factor applied to undrawn funds,
reflecting the expected amount that could become an on-balance-
sheet exposure, I guess, at some point. Due to the proposed
conversion factor, banks could be incentivized to reduce or
close unused or dormant credit lines to reduce their capital
requirements. Let me just ask you, along those lines, have the
agencies adequately contemplated the unique effect that the
proposed conversion factor would have, specifically on
servicemembers and the military community and their overall
credit score?
Mr. Gibson, I don't know if you have a comment on that?
Mr. Gibson. Just to say that we have received those
comments through the public comment process, so we are going to
be carefully evaluating those and looking at them, yes.
Mr. Fitzgerald. And before I run out of time, the capital
proposal from the Fed and other financial regulators would
impose huge costs on regional and mid-sized banks with little
to no trading books to adopt the governance and data processes
related to the new market risk rule. This proposal, on top of
the other recent regulatory proposals, is bound to lead to, I
am sure, some type of consolidation to overcome the compliance
burden on the rulemaking. Do you believe allowing more banks to
grow through acquisitions so that they are able to compete with
the existing large banks would benefit the current ecosystem?
And are you all worried about kind of damaging the breadth of
the banking system, which obviously is kind of a national
asset, by promoting more concentration and fewer regional banks
who serve communities directly?
Mr. Gibson. I would say we benefit from having a banking
system with a diversity of institutions, including large,
regional, and community banks.
Mr. Fitzgerald. Very good. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Davidson. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from New
York, Mr. Torres, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Torres. Thank you. In January 2022, Fed Chair Jerome
Powell said, ``Capital and liquidity levels at our largest,
most systemically important banks are at multi-decade highs.''
In June of 2023, Fed Chair Powell described the banking system
as, ``very strongly capitalized.''
In June of 2023, Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen said,
``Our banking system is well-capitalized. There is adequate
capital and liquidity in America's banking system.''
Dr. Gibson, do you agree with those statements from the Fed
Chair and the Treasury Secretary?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Torres. The Fed Chair's repeated reassurances about a
well-capitalized banking system seems to flatly contradict
Basel III's assumption of an undercapitalized banking system.
What do you make of that contradiction?
Mr. Gibson. The main objective of the Basel III Endgame
proposal was to make capital requirements more risk-sensitive
and more consistent and adequately reflect risk. That is the
goal.
Mr. Torres. Do you think the banking system is
undercapitalized or sufficiently capitalized??
Mr. Gibson. That is one of the things we are looking at
through the comment period. We have gotten a lot of comments
about that and we are going to evaluate it.
Mr. Torres. Because Fed Chair Powell described it as very
strongly capitalized, and the rhetoric from the Fed
historically did seem to suggest that it is sufficiently
capitalized, I ask myself, given the well-capitalized state of
the banking system, are we fixing what ain't broken? What is
the actual need for Basel III? A common refrain that I have
heard about Basel III is that the United States must conform to
European standards of banking, and I am wondering, where did we
get this notion that the United States, as the financial
superpower of the world, must conform to European standards of
banking?
As a U.S. policymaker, the most important question for me
is not whether the U.S. banking system is acting in conformity
with Europe's banking system. The most important question is
whether the U.S. banking system is achieving the best possible
balance between economic growth and financial stability. That
should be the question that matters to all of you. And do you
believe, as I do, that the end goal should not be the
Europeanization of the U.S. financial system; the end goal
should be the optimization of economic growth and financial
stability?
Mr. Gibson. Our goal is a strong U.S. banking system to
support a strong U.S. economy.
Mr. Torres. Do you agree that the goal should be the
optimization of economic growth and financial stability?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Torres. Okay. And have you conducted a study aimed at
determining the level of capital requirements that would
produce the optimal amount of economic growth and financial
stability?
Mr. Gibson. The notice of proposed rulemaking last year
included that information, and we have received a lot of
comments about that and we are evaluating those.
Mr. Torres. Have you conducted a study?
Mr. Gibson. There were studies cited in the notice of
proposed rulemaking----
Mr. Torres. But has the Federal Reserve itself conducted a
study to determine what level of capital requirements would
produce the optimal amount of economic growth and financial
stability? It is a simple yes-or-no question.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, and it was cited in the proposal last
year.
Mr. Torres. Okay. You did conduct a study?
Mr. Gibson. It is in the proposal.
Mr. Torres. Okay. There are those who insist that Basel III
capital requirements would have no impact on access to credit.
The laws of economics tell us that there is no such thing as a
free lunch, right? Nothing is free. Everything has a cost. Do
you believe that Basel III is an exception to the laws of
economics, that Basel III is somehow a free lunch that would
have no impact on the availability of credit?
Mr. Gibson. There are definitely costs and benefits.
Mr. Torres. It would have an impact on the availability of
credit. There are housing finance agencies that have expressed
concerns about the impact of Basel III on the Low-Income
Housing Tax Credit equity investments, 85 percent of which come
from the banking system. There are housing organizations that
have expressed concerns about the impact of Basel III on
minority borrowers and LMI borrowers who disproportionately
access mortgages with lower down payments and higher loan-to-
value ratios. Do you acknowledge that those are genuine
tradeoffs?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, and we have gotten a lot of comments on
exactly those issues, and we are definitely going to carefully
consider those as we work on the final rule.
Mr. Torres. And you agree that an Act of Congress
supersedes a Basel III recommendation. Is that fair to say?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Torres. So if there were a conflict between a
congressional statute and a Basel III recommendation, the
congressional statute should prevail, because there have been
concerns that there is a conflict between Basel III's
requirement for standardization and Congress' requirement for
regulatory tailoring?
Mr. Gibson. Any proposal we make would be evaluated by our
lawyers to make sure it is consistent with the statutory----
Mr. Torres. I see my time has expired.
Mrs. Kim. [presiding]. I now recognize the gentleman from
Nevada, Mr. Horsford, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you to the Chair and to the ranking
member, and thank you to our financial regulators for appearing
before the committee.
The U.S. banking system is not only the powerhouse of our
economy, creating jobs and opportunities across the country,
but it is also the envy of the world, drawing capital from
across the globe. It is our interconnected and global economy,
our prosperity, which is inherently tied to the stability of
the world markets. American authority on the world stage and
close coordination with our allies makes us all safer from
foreign adversaries but also from catastrophic economic shocks.
And yet, there are those in the hearing today who have
continued to demand that we abandon our international partners
regardless of the risk. Our nation is certainly not stronger
because of their continued criticism of the United Nations,
their constant threats to pull out of NATO entirely, or their
attempts to undermine efforts that protect the global financial
markets.
While we have outpaced our peer nations in our recovery,
there are still looming risks that we must be able to work
cooperatively with other countries to mitigate. One of these
looming risks to our global economy is the ever-present dangers
presented by climate change. It is a common refrain that
America cannot stop the catastrophic effects of man-made
climate change on its own, and yet, here we are, as some of my
colleagues advocate to further weaken our ability to garner
international buy-in and to create a coalition large enough to
tackle this very real problem.
Our regulators and the Financial Stability Oversight
Council established a committee specifically to advise on
climate-related financial risk, but as this is a global issue,
there is still more that we need to do to improve global
monitoring and mitigation efforts. Banks and other companies
are already hard at work dealing with the well-documented
reality of climate-related financial risks because they already
know that these risks are all too real.
Dr. Gibson, what are the potential impacts on banks to
carry out vital services like lending to small businesses,
supporting minority communities, or to sector-wide stability,
if climate change-induced risks are ignored?
Mr. Gibson. We are looking to make sure that banks are
evaluating all of their material risks, including climate-
related financial risks, and firms are looking at how climate
change could impact their business models and their balance
sheets. And as bank supervisors, we need to understand their
operations and their risks.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you very much for that answer, and I
hope that we will all remember that the consequences of climate
change will not be borne equally across the socioeconomic
ladder. The safety and soundness of the global financial sector
is crucial, but an equally important aspect of our continued
coordination with international financial regulators is to
reduce global regulatory arbitrage.
Regulatory arbitrage arises when banks are able to escape
jurisdictions with more-stringent regulations in favor of less-
stringent ones, and our efforts to minimize the possibilities
for these actions are critical to ensuring that more work
capital remains within our borders. Our participation in
international agreements and leadership in global
organizations, both of which are attacked by the legislation
posted for today's hearing, allow us to encourage other
countries to have strong safeguards similar to those found here
in the United States.
Mr. Billingsley, would you please discuss the effects on
American competitiveness if we were to lose our global
leadership in the financial sector and create an opportunity
for increased instances of regulatory arbitrage?
Mr. Billingsley. Certainly. I think the issue you raise is
very important. The extent to which we can influence global
minimum standards in a way that is in the best interest of the
FDIC, that is in the best interest of the U.S. banking system,
that makes the global financial system safer, I think that
makes our banking system safer.
Mr. Horsford. Just to close, I would like to reiterate to
all of you that when we are participating in any of these
international agreements, specifically around capital
requirements, we must be conscious of the unintended impacts to
segments of our population who have been traditionally excluded
from the financial sector.
Dr. Gibson, what processes does the Fed have in place to
better understand and mitigate the effects of these regulations
on communities of color or other marginalized communities?
Mr. Gibson. We evaluate those impacts when we look at
proposed regulations, and we have certainly received comments
about that and we we evaluate them as part of our rulemaking
process.
Mr. Horsford. And I hope you will do the same as it
pertains to Basel III, in line with the questions from my
colleague, Mr. Torres. With that, I yield back.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes
of questioning, and I want to thank all of the witnesses for
being here today.
I am all for U.S. participation in international bodies,
and I see the importance and value in doing so. However, I also
believe that involvement in global governance bodies does not
mean financial regulators have a blank check to agree to
international standards without properly consulting Congress.
We need more transparency when U.S. financial regulators engage
other countries on regulations that could reduce access to
credit and capital for millions of American families and small
businesses. Furthermore, our financial regulators should not
constrain our global competitiveness by gold-plating
regulations through proposals like the Basel III Endgame.
I want to ask you, Director Gibson, would you agree that
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's core goal is to
harmonize regulatory standards across international
jurisdictions?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, as well as supervisory cooperation.
Mrs. Kim. Yes. Sure. Since you agree, do you believe that
the current Basel III Endgame proposal goes against the Basel
Committee's goal, since our international peers are watering
down their own standards while we are gold-plating?
Mr. Gibson. The Basel Committee recognizes that each
country has to take back the standards to their domestic
context and make sure that what we do domestically is
appropriate to our banking system and our economy. So, we do
that process, and we don't just automatically copy it over.
Mrs. Kim. Yes. To me, it seems that we are fragmenting
international standards rather than harmonizing, which could
lead to greater risk for our financial stability. I want to
point to the recent BCBS Regulatory Consistency Assessment
Programme report, which states, ``In the following areas, the
U.S. agencies have adopted a stricter approach than the minimum
standards proscribed by the Basel Committee. The stricter rules
have not been considered as mitigants for the overall or
component-level assessment of compliance.''
So, I want to ask all three of you, our witnesses, is it
your understanding that when the BCBS looks at the U.S. capital
standards and their compliance with BCBS recommendations,
stricter U.S. standards in some areas do not receive credit
under the Basel Committee's rating scheme?
Mr. Billingsley. I think that is generally true. The way
the assessments typically work is they are identifying areas
where a jurisdiction standard might be below the global minimum
rather than above.
Mrs. Kim. I want to hear it from you two, as well.
Ms. Gardineer. I think that is an accurate statement.
Mrs. Kim. Mr. Gibson?
Mr. Gibson. Yes. The consistency assessments focus on
deviations in the downward direction, not deviations in the
upward direction.
Mrs. Kim. Okay. I want to ask you, Senior Deputy
Comptroller Gardiner, does Acting Comptroller Hsu monitor what
OCC staff and officials are doing in their work with various
global governance bodies such as the Basel Committee and NGFS,
and are there regular reports on what staff and officials are
doing and why they are doing it?
Ms. Gardineer. Yes. The staff that participate in any of
the global forums that we are members of, regularly report back
to the Acting Comptroller to get his position for the agency as
we continue. That is an ongoing communication.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I have the same question about Chair
Gruenberg's knowledge in monitoring what goes on with FDIC
staff and officials at the global governance bodies. Deputy
Director Billingsley, can you answer that?
Mr. Billingsley. Absolutely. It is very similar to what
Grovetta just stated. Anything we do at the staff level at any
international engagement is done so with the direction of the
Chairman.
Mrs. Kim. And, Director Gibson, I have the same question
about Chair Powell's or Vice Chair for Supervision Barr's
knowledge in monitoring.
Mr. Gibson. Both Chair Powell and Vice Chair for
Supervision Barr sit on the Basel Committee's governance body,
and the staff will be briefing Vice Chair for Supervision Barr
on what is going on in the meetings and also to Chair Powell
when it rises to that level.
Mrs. Kim. Thank you. I know my time is up. The gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, has joined us, so I will
recognize him for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much to our witnesses for being here.
I would like to talk about the dominance of the U.S. dollar
across the globe. The dollar is the world's dominant reserve
currency, which has significant advantages for the United
States. Because other countries hold and use dollars for
international trade, reserves and investments, the dollar is
always in high demand, and the U.S. is able to pay less to
borrow money because of it. American businesses and consumers
can enjoy lower interest rates and easier access to foreign
markets. Unfortunately, given China's growth, there are already
challenges to the dollar's influence. The dollar's share of
official reserves fell to a 20-year low of 58 percent in the
fourth quarter of 2022. We cannot afford to risk losing the
economic and political benefits of the dollar's dominance.
Loans will be more expensive for the government, businesses,
and for the working families I represent in North Carolina's
13th district.
The dollar's unique status also enables us to influence
global economic policies and maintain a significant role in
international financial institutions. U.S. regulators are
engaged in critical international conversations about cross-
border payments. The G20 released a roadmap for enhancing
cross-border payments to make them faster, cheaper, and more
transparent while maintaining safety and security. I believe
that the U.S. must be at the table for these talks to advocate
for our interests, such as maintaining the dollar's role as the
global reserve currency.
The Financial Stability Board, or FSB, is the international
body that coordinates the implementation of the roadmap, but
partisan legislation put forward today would likely undermine
U.S. regulators' ability to actually work with the FSB. If
Republican legislation prevents our regulators from engaging in
these conversations, we risk being left out of the global
economy.
Dr. Gibson, my first question is for you. Chair Powell said
here in the Financial Services Committee that, ``The status of
the dollar as the world's reserve currency is a very important
thing to us.'' Do you agree with him?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Nickel. And do you agree that U.S. regulators, like the
Fed, should be involved in international conversations with the
FSB and G20?
Mr. Gibson. Yes. We benefit from those international
discussions.
Mr. Nickel. And how do we benefit?
Mr. Gibson. We are able to influence the discussion in the
international groups in a way that supports our objectives of a
strong U.S. economy.
Mr. Nickel. And if the Congressional Banking Regulation
Priorities and Accountability Act that was noticed for this
hearing were enacted, what implications would that have for the
Fed?
Mr. Gibson. I haven't looked at the details of the
legislation. We would be happy to look at it and get back to
you.
Mr. Nickel. Next to you, again, Dr. Gibson, how does the
Federal Reserve plan to collaborate with other U.S. regulatory
bodies and international counterparts to maintain the dollar's
influence in these discussions?
Mr. Gibson. When we participate in the international groups
you mentioned, like the G20 or the FSB, that are talking about
issues like cross-border payments, we work with the other U.S.
participants. In the FSB, it is the Federal Reserve, Treasury,
and the SEC, and we would all work together to support the goal
of a strong dollar.
Mr. Nickel. And what benefits would the U.S. lose if the
dollar were no longer a global reserve currency?
Mr. Gibson. You mentioned some of the benefits already,
which is that it strengthens our economy. It allows our debt
markets to be very liquid, which has benefits across our entire
economy.
Mr. Nickel. Chair Powell was recently here. He talked a lot
about interest rates and where we are as an economy. If you
would like, you are welcome to say, ``soft landing,'' a few
times. If you want to take that opportunity, please, by all
means go ahead.
Mr. Gibson. I can't comment on any monetary policy.
Mr. Nickel. I think the gist of my conversation with him
afterwards is he was never going to say those words either just
because it is a jinx, but I am pleased at where we are heading
and yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Nunn. [presiding]. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here in front of
this committee today. You are all entrusted to be independent
in protecting the strength of the American economy in your
respective agencies. However, in my short 14 months here as a
freshman Member of Congress, I have witnessed continuous
politically-charged decisions and, I would offer, backroom
discussions that have left many folks out, including members on
this committee on both sides of the aisle, as well as folks
back in my hometown. I believe that we should all agree at the
forefront that folks in Altoona, Iowa, should have a much
larger say in our future economic success than modeling a
regulatory structure that is being decided in Brussels,
Belgium.
With that, in January, I led a bipartisan letter to your
agencies, along with a Senator from Kansas, Jerry Moran, who
emphasized the impact of increasing bank capital requirements
on the economy and the impact on our constituents, particularly
those in the agricultural community. It was signed not only by
bipartisan Members of this committee in the House, but also in
the Senate. I was happy that the Fed at least acknowledged that
we sent the letter over. And while you didn't provide any
detail in here other than an acknowledgement that you received
the letter, I am still waiting to hear from the other two
agencies, who have just turned a blind eye to responding to
this committee. That is disappointing, so let me be clear: The
actions of your agencies are hurting families back in small
towns in Iowa as well as in large communities across the
country.
Director Gibson, your boss at the Fed stated that the Fed
will make substantial changes to the final Basel III proposal.
Is it correct that the next draft includes concerns that my
farmers voiced months ago?
Mr. Gibson. We have heard those comments, and they will be
reviewed as we work on the final rule, yes.
Mr. Nunn. The follow-up then is, could these end-user
concerns or other concerns have been mitigated if you had
listened to them on the front end of this?
Mr. Gibson. We go through a public comment process
precisely to make sure that everyone has the opportunity to
comment, so we are getting those comments now, and we are
carefully reviewing them.
Mr. Nunn. For all of the panelists, I just want to be clear
here. Would you agree that U.S. stakeholder input on the front
end of these decisions is important for you to be able to
execute on the backend when you make these decisions? Can I get
a verbal yes or no?
Mr. Billingsley. Yes, I think it is important. That is the
purpose of the rulemaking.
Ms. Gardineer. Yes, it does support the rulemaking process.
Mr. Nunn. I agree.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, that is part of our rulemaking process.
Mr. Nunn. Good. I hope that we continue to have that before
rather than after, and now I want to talk about
competitiveness. Right now, we are holding American companies
to international regulatory standards when, despite this action
by the current Administration, our economy remains the envy of
the world. In fact, the U.S. has 4.4 percent of the world's
overall population. As we all know, we have over 50 percent of
the equities and debt raised in the world.
So for each of you, if the world comes to us for capital
market solutions, then why do we continue to look to Europe as
the leader when it comes to its financial markets? This is not
a rhetorical question. It is one that we are currently engaged
in. And why are your bodies imposing more-stringent standards
on an American company when our international peers implement
the minimum recommendations for global standards, as we have
seen time and time again?
Mr. Gibson. We are proposing rules like the capital
proposal based on our domestic statutory mandates, and that is
what we consider. And we have received the comments and we are
evaluating those.
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Billingsley?
Mr. Billingsley. I think, to Mike's point, we are trying to
implement rules in the United States that are fit for purpose
here, but the comment process is critically important.
Ms. Gardineer. As we engage in the rulemaking process,
Congressman, I think we take into account the particularities
of the U.S. financial system in proposing and then receiving
comments that we take into account before we move forward to
finalize any rule.
Mr. Nunn. Just as a quick reminder for all of us here, the
U.S. economy continues to lead because of the great success of
the American enterprise, and including that of the rest of the
world continues to follow our lead. Perhaps, we should
emphasize the fact that we are leading in this area and not
continue to restrict in this area, in my feelings, very
arbitrarily. I remain concerned that if we continue on this
path, every agency will be a climate regulator in 5 years,
across-the-board here.
Director Gibson, is it consistent with the Federal Reserve
to say it is not a climate policymaker while simultaneously
being committed, throughout the Fed's work, that furthering the
NGFS goals amounts to a climate policymaking regime?
Mr. Gibson. The Federal Reserve is not a climate
policymaker. We have responsibility for bank supervision and
bank safety and soundness, and we only take climate-related
financial risks into account to the extent they interact with
our existing mandate.
Mr. Nunn. My time has expired. At this point, I would like
to thank Dr. Gibson, Mr. Billingsley, and Ms. Gardineer for
your testimony today. I know this has been a long process, and
I appreciate you all being here.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.

The hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:37 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

A P P E N D I X

March 21, 2024
