- OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC'S DIVISION OF CORPORATION FINANCE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC'S DIVISION OF
CORPORATION FINANCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CAPITAL MARKETS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 18, 2023

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 118-42

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-870 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL POSEY, Florida                  NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas, Vice          EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
Chairman                         JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
JOHN ROSE, Tennessee                 VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina      AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan
SCOTT FITZGERALD, Wisconsin          RITCHIE TORRES, New York
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York           SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
YOUNG KIM, California                NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
BYRON DONALDS, Florida               WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
MIKE FLOOD, Nebraska                 BRITTANY PETTERSEN, Colorado
MIKE LAWLER, New York
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
MONICA DE LA CRUZ, Texas
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana
ANDY OGLES, Tennessee

Matt Hoffmann, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Capital Markets

ANN WAGNER, Missouri, Chairwoman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California, Ranking
PETE SESSIONS, Texas                     Member
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JUAN VARGAS, California
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin               VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania             SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
ANDREW GARBARINO, New York, Vice     WILEY NICKEL, North Carolina
Chairman                         STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
MIKE LAWLER, New York                EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
ZACH NUNN, Iowa
ERIN HOUCHIN, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 18, 2023................................................     1
Appendix:
July 18, 2023................................................    29

WITNESSES
Tuesday, July 18, 2023

Gerding, Erik F., Director, Division of Corporation Finance, U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).......................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Gerding, Erik F..............................................    30

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Casten, Hon. Sean:
An Open Letter from Out Leadership on the Business Case for
ESG Reporting & Investment, dated June 20, 2023............    35
Written statement of Principles for Responsible Investing....    41
Hill, Hon. French:
EY Center for Board Matters, ``Four key takeaways from the
2022 proxy season,'' dated July 2022.......................    48
Huizenga, Hon. Bill:
Letter to Vanessa A. Countryman, Secretary, SEC, re: The
Enhancement and Standardization of Climate-Related
Disclosures for Investors (File No. S7-10-22), dated June
17, 2022...................................................    59
Meuser, Hon. Dan:
Chart, ``Rule Proposals Issued During the First 27 Months of
SEC Chairs' Tenures''......................................    67
Vargas, Hon. Juan:
Letter from Family Farm Defenders and other groups...........    68
Gerding, Erik F.:
Written responses to questions for the record from
Representative Nunn........................................    74

OVERSIGHT OF THE SEC'S DIVISION
OF CORPORATION FINANCE

----------

Tuesday, July 18, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Capital Markets,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ann Wagner
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Wagner, Lucas, Sessions,
Huizenga, Mooney, Steil, Meuser, Garbarino, Lawler, Nunn;
Sherman, Scott, Vargas, Gottheimer, Casten, Nickel, Lynch, and
Cleaver.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Subcommittee on Capital Markets will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Oversight of the SEC's
Division of Corporation Finance.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Thank you, Mr. Gerding, for joining us today. This hearing
will examine the actions taken by the SEC's Division of
Corporation Finance under your leadership, Director Erik
Gerding. These actions have far-reaching implications for
millions of retail investors and the overall health of public
markets. I think Director Gerding's controversial rulemakings
and decisions threaten to undermine the attractiveness of
public markets and stall economic growth at a time when global
competition is on the rise.
The SEC's primary role is to maintain fair, orderly, and
efficient markets, while facilitating capital formation and
protecting investors. However, the recent actions of the
Division of Corporation Finance have deviated from this core
mission, pushing an unconventional and partisan agenda that
hampers the free market system. The burden of excessive
regulations and politically-motivated disclosure requirements
falls heavily on small and medium-sized companies, impeding
their growth. It is crucial that the SEC change its course and
foster a market system that is competitive and dynamic.
One specific area of concern is the rollback of the July
2020 proxy advisor rule, which was intended to ensure
transparency in proxy voting decisions. This rollback
undermines necessary reforms to the proxy advisors duopoly and
fails to protect the interests of retail investors seeking to
maximize the return on their investment. Moreover, costly
disclosure regulations on environmental and social policies
will harm companies by obstructing their business expansion and
hindering them from hiring additional employees.
For example, in 2022, investors backed by shareholder
activist group, As You Sow, filed a proposal that Comcast
reported on its retirement plan options in relation to climate
action goals. This attempt to use retiree funds for fringe
political purposes could have resulted in lower returns or
higher risk for investors had it been successful. Similarly,
other proposals, such as emissions targets from Costco, have no
material impact on the company's financial performance.
By limiting their ability to generate returns, retail
investors who rely on these returns for their retirement
savings will be directly affected. It is our duty to protect
these interests and ensure their success within our capital
markets. To restore the SEC's integrity and realign its actions
with its mission of investor protection and capital formation,
we must prioritize the interests of retail investors. It is
essential that we create an environment that maximizes
opportunities for their success.
We have heard in previous hearings how important
maintaining a variety of attractive pathways for raising
capital is for businesses. Excessive regulatory and compliance
costs act as barriers to entering the public markets, leading
many companies, especially smaller ones, to turn to private
markets. Unfortunately, my friends across the aisle view
private market growth as problematic and have pushed for more
disclosure requirements and regulatory burdens. For example, it
has been suggested that the SEC will require heightened
disclosure obligations for large private companies on Form D.
Committee Republicans strongly oppose this approach as it
would, in effect, force private companies to go public before
they are ready.
The recent actions of the SEC's Division of Corporation
Finance, along with the proposed cybersecurity disclosure
rules, private market regulations, and conflicts of interest in
securitizations, pose a threat to our market and our free
market systems. Our parents and grandparents worked their
entire lives to save for retirement. It is the duty of the SEC
to ensure that American retirement accounts are not used as a
tool for partisan political and social agendas.
The SEC needs to follow its congressionally-mandated
directives to facilitate capital formation and protect
investors, and under Director Erik Gerding's leadership, this
is not happening. I want to thank you, and I eagerly look
forward to this morning's discussion on these crucial matters.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, for--
--
Mr. Sherman. Four minutes.
Chairwoman Wagner. ----4 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. And I am seeking unanimous consent that the
ranking member of the full Financial Services Committee be
allowed to present either before or after the witness.
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
You are now recognized for 4 minutes for an opening
statement.
Mr. Sherman. This hearing marks the 412th hearing of this
committee and our subcommittees on the issue of environmental,
social, and governance (ESG) criteria. Shareholders are
literally the capitalists. They should be able to decide and
they should be given the information so that they can decide
where to invest their money. The Republicans are waging war
against the capitalist market that says investors get to
decide. They are waging that war on behalf of entrenched
managements who don't want the real owners of the company to
tell them what to do.
We are told that we should have a variety of avenues for
raising capital. One important avenue is for climate investors.
These are not fringe investors. They are a huge portion and a
growing portion of those who are investing their capital. And
it seems like the purpose of these hearings is to tell climate
investors to go to hell, or to go to Europe where they can get
the information should they choose to invest in European
companies. Even investors who do not give a whit about whether
they leave this planet in better shape for their children and
grandchildren are going to want some information before they
invest in the Maldives Coconut Plantation Corporation, because
the Maldives is only about 4 feet above the water, and maybe
that is an investment risk.
I have read these documents that go through your Division,
and they list dozens of investment risks. This is clearly one
that needs to be examined. I do want to point out, as the only
CPA on our side, that Scope 3 makes it very difficult to create
anything that is anywhere close to reliable. It took the CPA
profession 200 years to develop the systems we now use to
define and tabulate audit report information. And to try to do
Scope 3 is something that I haven't heard professors of
accounting theory or persons who have headed technical review
departments in major CPA firms think that we are quite ready to
do.
It is not just ESG. We also need, ``W''; investors want to
know about the, ``workforce.'' It is the most valuable asset. A
hundred years ago, 90 percent of the value of a company could
be seen on the balance sheet listing hard assets. Now, 90
percent of that value is not in the hard assets; it is in
things like the training or competency of the workforce.
And we also need disclosures about China, because it is a
risk to many companies that we may see a cut off or a
diminution in our trade relationship with China, and because
some investors don't want to see us become dependent upon
China.
Shifting to another issue, your Division is coming up with
conflict-of-interest rules. We have heard Republicans say that
they are very upset that the SEC is doing so much work, so
quickly, and I can understand that. We mandated that you draft
these regulations only 13 years ago, and in the blink of an
eye, here they are. You are moving too fast. Thirteen years is
not long enough. But it is important, as much as I have wanted
these regulations to move forward, that they move forward with
care. I am concerned that ordinary hedging of interest rate
risk might be regarded as somehow violative of the conflict-of-
interest rules, and I would hope that interest rate risk and
some other things can be carved out and not be considered
something that could lead to a charge of a conflict of
interest. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the ranking
member of the full Financial Services Committee, Ms. Waters,
for 1 minute.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Director Gerding, for your
attendance here today. This is the second week where
Republicans are pushing their cultural wars. What has become
clear is that Republicans don't like that the SEC wants
investors to have information about companies they seek to own
or to have the ability to strengthen governance of the
companies they own.
The Division of Corporation Finance plays a critical role
in reviewing the disclosures public companies make about
themselves so that investors can understand the financial risk
of where they place their hard-earned savings. I commend the
Division for its good work in protecting investors and
improving transparency in our capital markets. You, Director
Gerding, are strengthening capitalism in America. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. Today, we welcome the testimony of Erik
Gerding, the Director of the Division of Corporation Finance at
the SEC. We thank you for taking the time to be here. And
without objection, your written statement will be made a part
of the record.
Director Gerding, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your oral remarks.

STATEMENT OF ERIK F. GERDING, DIRECTOR, DIVISION OF CORPORATION
FINANCE, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)

Mr. Gerding. Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member Sherman, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today about the activities and responsibilities of the
Securities and Exchange Commission's Division of Corporation
Finance. It is my honor and pleasure to appear before you today
to discuss the Division's work.
Please note that I am testifying in my official capacity as
Director of the Division of Corporation Finance, but my
testimony does not necessarily reflect the views of the
Commission, the Commissioners, or other members of the staff.
The mission of the SEC is to protect investors; maintain
fair, orderly, and efficient markets; and facilitate capital
formation. In support of this mission, the Division of
Corporation Finance seeks to ensure that investors are provided
with the material information needed to make informed
investment decisions.
A large portion of the Division's work is done by our
Disclosure Review Program, which reviews the disclosures and
financial statements of reporting companies to monitor and
enhance compliance with disclosure and accounting requirements
under the Federal securities laws and SEC rules. We concentrate
our review resources on disclosures that appear to be
inconsistent with those laws, rules, or accounting standards,
or that appear to be materially deficient or lack clarity.
Division staff members conducting filing reviews are assigned
to offices that have specialized industry, accounting, and
disclosure expertise.
We continue to feel the impact of the surge in initial
public filings from 2021 and 2022. We have seen an
approximately 18-percent increase in the number of active
public companies since 2021, and we continue to review
thousands of annual reports each year. In addition to the
filing review process, the Division recommends to the
Commission new rules or changes to existing rules as needed to
improve investor protection and to facilitate capital
formation. These rulemakings benefit from public comments, and
we will continue to encourage comments from the public on any
new proposals or proposed recommendations that the Commission
makes.
We also help companies and their advisors to comply with
Commission rules by communicating the staff views in a variety
of forms, such as staff legal and accounting bulletins, through
issuer letters, staff disclosure guidance topics, updates to
the Division's financial reporting manual, no-action and
interpretive letters, and compliance and disclosure
interpretations.
In addition to providing public guidance, the Division
serves as a resource for investors, businesses, and their
advisors. Our Office of Chief Counsel responds to legal and
interpretive questions from the public about the Securities
Act, the Exchange Act, and the Trust Indenture Act.
Our Office of Small Business Policy provides guidance to
small businesses seeking to raise capital or to comply with
existing reporting requirements. Each year, this Office
responds to approximately 1,000 requests for assistance from
the small business community.
Our Office of Mergers and Acquisitions fields questions
regarding business combinations, including domestic and cross-
border tender offers, contested change-of-control transactions,
and beneficial ownership (BO) reporting.
For foreign issuers or domestic issuers undertaking
offshore offerings, our Office of International Corporate
Finance serves as our subject matter experts regarding specific
registration, reporting, deregistration, and exemptive matters.
Thank you again for inviting me to discuss the Division's
activities and responsibilities. I would also like to emphasize
that the overview that I have shared with you today does not
fully capture the tremendous commitment of the staff of the
Division to our mission of promoting investor protection,
capital formation, and fair and orderly markets. I am happy to
answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Director Gerding can be found on
page 30 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you, Director Gerding. We will now
turn to Member questions, and I recognize myself for 5 minutes
for questions.
Director Gerding, in July 2022, the SEC proposed amendments
to rules that would narrow certain grounds under which
companies may exclude shareholder proposals from their proxy
statements. Specifically, the proposed amendments would make it
harder for public companies to exclude shareholder proposals
that are duplicative, or a resubmission of a proposal that
failed previously, or a proposal that a company has already
substantially implemented. As you know, these SEC-proposed
amendments have not been finalized and require Commission
approval for them to be adopted. Yet, SEC staff is already
using the proposed approach to decide shareholder proposal no-
action requests. Can you explain, sir, why SEC staff is
operating as if these amendments were already finalized?
Mr. Gerding. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner. As you know, the
Division did recommend changes to Rule 14a-8 in 2022 on
resubmission, substantial duplication, and other grounds for
exclusion under 14a-8. We are carefully considering comments
received in response to that proposed rule, but until a rule is
finalized by the Commission, we follow existing rules in our
informal shareholder proposal process.
Chairwoman Wagner. As you said, you are still dealing with
the comment period. They haven't been finalized. They haven't
been adopted. Yet, you are using the proposed approach. I will
give you just an example of one right here dealing with Altria
Group. And I take high exception to this, as do, I believe, the
companies and this committee. Without objection, I will submit
this to the record, and I will also make sure you get a copy of
it, sir.
Director Gerding, what do you think the weather will be
next week?
Mr. Gerding. I'm sorry, Chairwoman Wagner?
Chairwoman Wagner. What do you think the weather is going
to be next week?
Mr. Gerding. I don't know. I would have to look it up.
Chairwoman Wagner. Interesting. Next week, I think it is
going to be cold and rainy. Director, what will be the effect
of artificial intelligence on oil refinery production in 2034?
Mr. Gerding. Chairwoman Wagner, I would leave that to
companies to disclose.
Chairwoman Wagner. Interesting. I thought it would cost all
companies $13 trillion annually. Director Gerding, while these
questions may seem strange, that is exactly what you are asking
public companies to do under the climate change proposals put
forth by the Commission. And given that companies are being
forced to guess about the state of the weather or technological
innovations decades in the future, how can they possibly
provide, in the words of Chair Gensler, the comparability and
standardized disclosures that the rules purport to require?
Mr. Gerding. Chairwoman Wagner, the climate risk disclosure
proposal that the Commission voted on last year is about
disclosing risk to investors, and risk is about future losses
that companies may face. This is the kind of disclosure, the
kind of things that investors need to make investments and
voting decisions.
Chairwoman Wagner. Future risk. They are guessing. Director
Gerding, the SEC reversed Chairman Clayton's 2020 reforms that
would have effectively held proxy advisory firms accountable
for omitting or misstating material information regarding proxy
voting advice or conflicts of interests.
Sir, do you agree with Chairman Gensler that proxy advisory
firms should be able to omit material information or to provide
misinformation regarding their voting advice, methodologies,
sources of information, or conflicts of interest without being
held accountable?
Mr. Gerding. Chair Wagner, the 2020 proxy voting advisory
business provisions remain in effect with respect to requiring
proxy voting advisory businesses to disclose conflicts of
interest. They remain in effect with respect to subjecting
proxy voting advice to the Federal proxy rules, and they remain
in effect with respect to ensuring the proxy voting advice is
subject to anti-fraud rules, including Rule 14a-9.
Chairwoman Wagner. None of that is answering my question,
which has to do with the omitting of material and whether that
is okay. My time has expired, so I will submit a couple of my
other questions for the record.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Sherman, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Sherman. It is true no company can accurately predict
the future. Our whole reporting system is designed to calculate
the past, and then it is up to the investor to determine what
is likely to happen in the future. If you buy Apple stock based
on their earnings today, what you are really thinking is that
those earnings will allow for dividends to be paid whenever
they want to pay dividends, which could be a decade from now.
So, what you care about is the dividends. All you can get is a
report on the past. Likewise, we can't ask companies to tell us
what the temperature of the planet is going to be in 2034, but
they can tell us how much greenhouse gases they emitted in a
prior year.
Sir, it is my understanding that under your Scope 1 and
Scope 2 proposal, companies would simply be disclosing what
their greenhouse gas emissions were last year, and they would
include in that, under Scope 2, the greenhouse gases of the
utilities that they use. Would they be required to predict
temperatures in the next decade?
Mr. Gerding. No, they would not, Ranking Member Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. But they would have to disclose their own
company's emissions during the prior fiscal year?
Mr. Gerding. The climate risk disclosure proposal does
include certain transition risk metric requirements for certain
public companies, including greenhouse gas emission.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, the company may be entirely green. They
may generate all of their electricity and everything with solar
panels. They may get an award from the Sierra Club, but if they
are growing coconuts in the Maldives, they may have a
substantial climate risk. It is only 4 feet above sea level
and, in some places, 4 inches above sea level.
I want to shift to the conflict-of-interest rules. I
mentioned these in my opening statement. You are required to
issue them, and they make sense as to the first and second
prong that you have. The issue here is, does the promoter
design a security and then that security will tank--if I was
going to buy a car from a company which had bet that that car
would blow up, I would say that is very bad. If, however,
General Motors bets that interest rates will go down, or that
gas prices will go up, or that Detroit will be in the World
Series, I don't care. They are not betting that my car will
blow up, nor are they betting about something that they control
or that they designed.
So, it makes sense to have your first two prongs, that they
can't sell short or have a derivative that, in effect, sells
short the very security that they design. Do we need to make
clear, and do you think you do make clear in your proposed
regulations that the promoter of an asset-based security could
hedge their interest rate risk or otherwise bet on the interest
rate markets?
Mr. Gerding. Yes, Ranking Member Sherman, the proposed rule
that you are referring to implements Section 621 of the Dodd-
Frank Act. And consistent with that statute, in the proposal
there are exemptions for hedging, bona fide market making, and
liquidity commitments.
Mr. Sherman. Even if it is not hedging, you hedge an
interest rate risk if you bet interest rates are going to go
up, because you have a big position in that. You may just want
to bet that interest rates go up because you think interest
rates are going to go up. It is an overall part of the economy.
Do you make it clear that, on the one hand, you can sell an
asset-based security, and on the other hand, you can buy a
debenture which will be profitable if interest rates go up?
Mr. Gerding. Yes, Ranking Member Sherman, the proposed rule
would address conflicts of interest by certain securitization
market participants. And the proposed rule includes a
definition of what those conflicts of interest would look like,
including betting against the asset-backed securities or
synthetic asset-backed securities that are----
Mr. Sherman. I would hope to work with you further to make
sure that you give a conflict if you are betting against the
design that you created, but simply betting that interest rates
are going to go up or some other parts of the economy that you
have no control over should not be considered a conflict of
interest. I look forward to working with you on that, and I
yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Mr. Gerding, I
would like to focus on the Commission's proposed climate rule,
which I believe would have a dramatic effect on public
companies. There are estimates that would adjust the initial
compliance costs at more than $100 million for some companies.
In your rulemaking process, how have you assessed the effects
of these costs? What effect will these costs have on public
companies, particularly the smaller and medium-sized companies?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the rule proposal that you are
referring to contains a rigorous economic analysis that looks
at the benefits and cost to public companies and public
companies of all sizes. That being said, as part of every
economic analysis and every rule proposal, we solicit comments
on the economic analysis. We gather comments, and we have
received a lot of comments on the benefits and costs in the
economic analysis. And we are carefully considering those and
any recommendations----
Mr. Lucas. Do you calculate how many dollars, because that
affects the viability of a company?
Mr. Gerding. The economic analysis would factor in all
costs of the rule on public company reporting, including
compliance costs with the disclosure regime.
Mr. Lucas. Have you worked with any other agencies that
undertake climate-related rulemaking such as the EPA, NOAA, the
Department of Energy, the FTC, or, for that matter, just any
other agencies?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we consult and talk to a number
of Federal agencies in our rulemakings. But all of our
rulemaking recommendations are based on our statutory
authorities and our notice-and-comment rulemakings, including
the comments that we receive in response to the rulemakings.
Mr. Lucas. So in a case like this with climate-related
rules, in essence, you go it on your own. Okay. The proposed
rule would also impact private businesses that are in the value
chain of a public company. Public companies that are required
to report emissions data will turn to their downstream
suppliers, such as farmers and ranchers, to calculate and
report their emissions data to those companies. We have seen
public companies shift their inputs to larger operations that
have the resources to track climate and emissions data. Do you
know the number of public companies with Scope 3 targets?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I don't have that particular
statistic with me now. I will note that we have received a
number of comments on the impacts of the climate rule proposal
on the suppliers that you mentioned, and we are taking those
comments very, very seriously.
Mr. Lucas. I would like to know, if it is possible, the
number of companies that your people believe would be impacted,
and has there been an analysis conducted on the volume of
private businesses that would potentially be forced out of the
supply chain as a result of this because their bigger partners
simply have to turn to someone else?
Mr. Gerding. I want to note, Congressman, that the climate
risk disclosure proposal would apply only to public companies.
There are provisions in there that would require certain
disclosures by public companies that may impact other
companies, and we are carefully considering all of the comments
we have received on those----
Mr. Lucas. And I appreciate that, Mr. Gerding, because you
are a part of the Federal bureaucracy and you know
organizations tend to shift their responsibilities and their
costs to someone else. I am just concerned that in public
business, the least able to compete, the folks who are having
the greatest challenges being a part of the economy, are the
ones who will get shoved out of this.
If climate-related information is material to a public
company's operations, is that company already required by the
SEC to disclose that information, completely absent of the
rule? If something is material, they are supposed to say so
already, correct?
Mr. Gerding. This is a common misconception, Congressman.
The SEC rules do not require public companies to disclose
everything material that happens to them.
Mr. Lucas. Has the materiality standard served our capital
markets investors well so far?
Mr. Gerding. The materiality standard that we continue to
follow is that articulated by the Supreme Court, and we
continue to follow the statutory mission that we have always
followed, which is providing----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Lucas. This is fascinating, Madam Chairwoman. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you. The gentleman from Georgia,
Mr. Scott, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Director Gerding, I want to discuss the SEC's
proposed rule. As you know, the SEC's proposed rule requires
publicly-traded firms to disclose to investors the climate-
related risks they face and the greenhouse gas emissions their
company is responsible for, including emissions from up and
down the company's value chain, which is now known as Scope 3
emissions. And these metrics will be critical in understanding
carbon-intensive companies' risk exposure and helping investors
allocate capital efficiently and prioritize their engagement.
However, I believe that they could have a significant,
costly, and adverse effect on thousands of small farmers and
ranchers. And I understand the rule only applies to publicly-
traded companies and does not create any disclosure obligations
for small private companies, so I am very concerned about this
and the potential of indirect impact that this rule could have
on small farmers and ranchers.
My first question to you is, do you see a single scenario
where a large publicly-traded company that falls under Scope 3
still chooses to seek data from small agriculture suppliers in
order to meet Scope 3 reporting requirements?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the proposed climate risk
disclosure rule includes a number of provisions that would
allow companies that would be required to disclose Scope 3
emissions to use assumptions, methodologies, and tools other
other than getting disclosures from suppliers and customers.
That being said, we have received a large number of comments
expressing the very concerns that you are expressing today, and
we are carefully considering those concerns and those comments
as we formulate any recommendation to the Commission.
Mr. Scott. What about large publicly-traded banks and other
financial institutions which provide loans to small family
farmers and ranchers? Could Scope 3 requirements have an
unintended consequence on the amount of loans or investment
activity being made by these banks?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the requirement that you are
mentioning in the proposed rule includes a number of
provisions, including a materiality qualifier that would
potentially limit the number and the scope of disclosure
requirements that companies would have to make here. We are
aware that banks have already developed methodologies for
making these kinds of disclosure requirements and assumptions
about disclosure requirements.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask you this. The SEC received a record
15,000 public comments on the rule--15,000--surpassing the most
comments garnered by any single proposal in the history of the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Chairman Gensler has
recently hinted at potential adjustments to Scope 3. Can you
provide some daylight to us as to what these adjustments could
be?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I can't make any commitment to
what a future Commission action would look like. I will note,
again, that we have received comments expressing a lot of the
concerns that you have mentioned today, and we are very
carefully considering those comments and taking them very, very
seriously.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Sessions, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sessions. Madam Chairwoman, thank you very much. And I
want to thank you for having this important, what is really a
follow-up to the follow-up to the follow-up discussions in
which we engaged the SEC on this outlandish proposal that they
put out, the Scope 3 requirements.
Mr. Gerding, I am very concerned, and I think you will hear
and are hearing from members of this subcommittee that the SEC
continues abusing the discretion delegated to it by Congress to
undermine the attractiveness of public markets and to hinder
economic growth. Your recent focus on non-material
environmental, social, and political issues is more than
worrisome--15,000 public comments should have demonstrated that
we believe that, primarily because your 500-page mandatory
climate disclosure rule would be in violation of not just what
I think is common sense, but could be considered anti-
capitalist and against the ability to grow our economy.
I would like to ask you, do you consider inflation to be a
primary cause or how worrisome that would be to all these
public companies, where they would want to write about
inflation as a material of hindering their growth, and their
stock price, and their ability to hire people and their ability
to stay afloat?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, a number of macroeconomic
factors, including inflation, could impact companies and their
financial performance.
Mr. Sessions. Sir, I think that this Administration, in
particular, has downward-driven pressure on companies
intentionally because of a desire of politics and what I
believe is a view of anti-capitalism expressed by this
Administration, specifically at Treasury and the SEC, and we
think this is a problem. It is diminishing people who would
propagate new business deals. We have engaged the Chair of the
committee and told him what we think about how they look at
their discretion and the things that it has caused in the
marketplace.
I want you to know that we believe that this SEC are
activists and are trying to take a perspective of destroying
market gains that might be made, employment by companies, and
the opportunity to stay afloat and to be competitive with the
world. And we think that what has been downward-driven by this
Administration is far more destructive to the growth of
companies and their ability to be competitive because of the
pressures that have been placed on them. An example of this is
the 15,000 public comments that have been received on the
proposed rule.
We need capitalism. We are in competition with the world.
We have pressures that come from other countries, and we want
to be competitive, but because we have an activist government
that the President of the United States openly touts as the
most-liberal, as the most-progressive, what we are becoming is
one of the boys. And you are arbitrarily harming what has
always been in the United States during these last 200 years:
an opportunity for freedom; and an opportunity for
individualism.
But perhaps more importantly, entrepreneurship has been a
rule that has guided the United States of America. And it would
be my hope that you at the SEC and, in particular, in the
capital markets subdivision would recognize that corporate
profits and ability are at risk with the active social agenda
that I see. And I hope you listen to us, because we are
speaking directly to people who make those decisions, and that
is what we think. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I thank the
ranking member as well. And thank you, Mr. Gerding, for your
willingness to come before the committee and help us with our
work.
I just want to go over this a little bit. This information
that you are requesting would aid investors and actually the
shareholders, the owners of these corporations, to make better
decisions with respect to the operation of these companies,
isn't that correct?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, that is our overall mission,
consistent with our statutory authority of investor protection
and promoting capital formation. Our rules are about providing
investors with information that they need to make investment
and voting decisions, including decisions to value the
securities that they own or the securities that they may wish
to purchase.
Mr. Lynch. So in many ways, this is about managing risk
specifically to the climate change disclosure rule?
Mr. Gerding. That is correct. And, Congressman, the
disclosures of risk and required disclosures of risks are
something that the Commission has required for decades. This is
nothing new. Going back decades into the 1960s, the Commission
has required disclosures from companies of risks that they face
and that could affect the value of the securities that
investors own or may wish to purchase.
Mr. Lynch. Exactly. I come from the construction industry.
I was an iron worker for over 20 years before I came to
Congress. Also, my degree is in construction management, and I
have seen tremendous change in the construction industry. My
district includes the South Boston waterfront in my district,
and we are building high-rises all along that waterfront. And I
have noticed that companies, in constructing their high-rise
office towers and residential towers, are using a whole set of
measures and materials that will mitigate the risk that they
have from climate change and sea-level rise.
I have several buildings that have been built in the last
10 years that actually have self-contained water supplies that
allow them to release wastewater into the sewage system, such
that they lower their tax rate, their sewer tax rate. I have a
company that just built a large residential tower right on the
water, right on the coast, and their first floor has
retractable wave barriers which come up out of the ground and
block the ocean from coming in. And if that is not enough, they
have designed the entire first floor of their office tower so
that they can just drop the water barriers, remove the
furniture, and let the water just rush through the building
with no damage. And when the storm is over and the water
recedes, they go back to business. So, they have done all of
these measures, and obviously, they have solar energy capacity
there. They put in all of these measures to induce people to
invest in those companies and in those buildings.
Doesn't the information that you are requiring help people
make those decisions so they can choose companies that are
taking a proactive approach to protecting from that level of
risk?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the proposed climate risk
disclosure rule would give investors information about physical
and transition risks in order for them to make investment and
voting decisions. I would note that many companies, as we know
in the release, are already making climate risk disclosures.
The key to the proposal, though, is that those disclosures
should be consistent, comparable, and decision-useful. If
companies believe that they are not subject to physical or
transition risks, they can disclose that, and investors can
make investment and voting decisions accordingly.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. It keeps people honest. Madam
Chairwoman, I yield back. Thank you for your courtesy.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Huizenga, who is
also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Director
Gerding, in my role as Chair of our Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee, I have requested information
relating to the SEC's pending Climate Rule Act. I assume you
are aware of this. Over the last month, we have had several of
your colleagues before our committee, including the Chief
Economist and the General Counsel of the SEC. Frankly, neither
of them could or, maybe more accurately, would answer the
simple question of why the Chair is stonewalling Congress in
our efforts to understand this massive rule. I am going to get
to a couple of questions, and I am going to request that you
please don't stall your answer by thanking me for my insightful
question, which is what they did the entire time.
I assume that your Division is in direct contact with the
General Counsel's Office on this request. So quickly, one, does
your Division have the responsive materials, such as thorough
economic analysis on the climate disclosure rule, that you will
share with this committee? And I am not asking for the public
documents; those have been already sent to us. We have those.
And two, will you commit to cooperate with us to understand, to
answer our questions relating to our investigation when they
fall within your Division?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, everything that the Commission
relies on in voting to propose or adopt a rule is within the
proposing and adopting releases. I will note that the Office of
the General Counsel and other offices are primarily responsible
for providing and responding to requests of this committee and
other committees.
Mr. Huizenga. You are shoving it off to them? In other
words, basically, we just have to work with them to get the
answers that we need? You have nothing to give us?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, my institutional role is to lead
the Division of Corporation Finance, and we do have----
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. I am going to move on. Last week,
representatives from the two largest proxy advisory firms,
Glass Lewis and ISS, appeared before our Oversight and
Investigations Subcommittee. ISS testified that they rely on
the SEC's legal analysis to determine what shareholder
proposals are legally permissible.
Mr. Gerding, are you aware that proxy firms do not
undertake any independent legal analysis of shareholder
proposals and instead refer that judgment to your staff as to
whether a proposal violates Federal rules or Federal laws or
State laws?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, my Division does not take
positions on underlying shareholder proposals.
Mr. Huizenga. That is not my question. Are you aware that
the proxy advisors do not do independent analysis and that they
rely on your analysis, assuming, as they said, that if you, the
SEC, allows a vote to go forward, a proposal to go forward,
then it must meet legal criteria? Are you aware of that?
Mr. Gerding. I am not familiar with the testimony that you
are mentioning.
Mr. Huizenga. We will print it off. It is public
information, but we will print it off and send it to you,
because you need to understand this. Earlier, you told my
friend from Massachusetts that you look at material information
for investors, and isn't knowing whether a proposal would
violate State or Federal law material to an investor?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I think you are referring to our
shareholder proposal review process.
Mr. Huizenga. No, no, I am referring to the analysis, the
fact that the SEC does no analysis as to whether a proposal
violates State law if it was adopted or violates Federal law if
it was adopted. Are you aware of that? Yes or no?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, as we review shareholder
proposals, we review the----
Mr. Huizenga. How much clearer can I be? Yes or no, you do
not understand that or this is all new information for you?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we apply Rule 14a-8, and the
grounds for exclusion in shareholder----
Mr. Huizenga. Does the SEC analyze whether a proposal would
violate State or Federal law? Yes or no?
Mr. Gerding. I can refer you to the 14a-8 grounds for
exclusion as we do our----
Mr. Huizenga. That is not my question. Since the proxy
firms clearly rely so heavily on your analysis, what other
analysis does the SEC conduct with respect to a shareholder
proposal? How about that? What do you do, or do you just assume
that the proposal is up, Katie, bar the door, it gets on, it
needs a vote?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, part of what the career staff do
every year in the shareholder proposal review process is offer
informal views on whether any grounds----
Mr. Huizenga. What other areas do you analyze? You don't
analyze climate. You don't analyze whether it violates State
law. You don't analyze whether it violates Federal law. What do
you analyze?
My time has expired, Madam Chairwoman, but I do have a
letter that I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record, a
letter expressing concerns about the climate disclosure rule
written by two former SEC Chief Economists.
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I would like
unanimous consent before I start to include a letter into the
record from Out Leadership in support of the continuation and
expansion of ESG reporting and metrics.
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Casten. Director Gerding, I want to start by just
giving you a chance to respond to some of what has been
discussed here. I feel like we need to just sort of bring this
all down to a really simple reading level because I don't think
these issues are that complicated, but I want to make sure
everybody in the room understands. Can you remind us of the
definition of, ``materiality,'' that guides the Commission?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the definition of,
``materiality,'' that the Commission follows is the one that
the Supreme Court has articulated in cases like TSC Industries
v. Northway, and Basic, Inc. v. Levinson. All of our rules are
following Supreme Court precedent.
Mr. Casten. To basically summarize Levinson, I think the
Court has said, ``the substantial likelihood that the fact
would be viewed by a reasonable investor as having
significantly altered the total mix of information made
available.'' Is that a----
Mr. Gerding. That sounds accurate, Congressman.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And can you just remind us why the
Commission believes that the proposed climate risk disclosure
rule fits this definition of materiality?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the climate risk disclosure
proposal is aimed at providing investors with disclosure for
them to make investment and voting decisions, including for
them to analyze risks in order to value the securities that
they hold or may purchase. So, the whole focus of the proposed
rule is on providing investors with disclosures that would be
relevant for their investment and voting decisions. And that is
the overall concept of materiality.
Mr. Casten. Okay. And this rule has been up for public
comment for a long time. Can you estimate roughly what
percentage of the comments you have received have been
favorable with respect to the rule?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I don't have in front of me exact
statistics on comments that would be supportive of or opposed
to the rule. I would note that we have received a large number
of comments that support the proposed rule, and we have
received comments that have expressed concerns with the rule,
and we are taking all of the comments extremely seriously.
Mr. Casten. Okay. We can follow up with you afterwards. We
had some analysis--I mentioned in the hearing last week that
over 90 percent of investors responding were supportive of the
rule, which certainly sounds like a lot of reasonable investors
to me. In 2010, the SEC issued interpretive guidance regarding
disclosure related to climate change. Have you seen adequate
compliance from companies with this guidance? In other words,
are SEC registrants already sufficiently disclosing material
climate-related risks in their filings?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I think you are referring to the
2010 guidance that the staff put out on climate-related
disclosures. We have seen companies make disclosures on those
matters, but it has been our observation that those disclosures
are not always consistent, comparable, or decision-useful. And
that is, as we explained in the climate risk proposed rule,
part of the reason for the overall rule.
Mr. Casten. Relating to that, and I think you said this to
Mr. Lynch, but just to clarify, in the absence of this rule,
what I think you are saying--I don't want to put words in your
mouth--is that the passage of this rule would provide investors
with a better understanding of the risks that they face in
their portfolio so they can allocate their capital accordingly
and risk would be better priced. Is that a pithy enough summary
of the SEC's position?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, that is something that is part of
this rule and part of what we have done for decades, again,
providing investors with information about the risks of the
companies in which they invest. And part of that is what
investors use to make investment decisions and to construct
investment portfolios.
Mr. Casten. I said at the start that I feel like I need to
dumb this down. This is so simple, right? People want
information. They are demanding information. We are trying to
give them information, and if you give people information, they
will allocate their portfolio and better price risk. And my
colleagues seem to be bringing a lot of witnesses in here who
are saying, well, if we pass this rule, we will see divestments
from certain sectors. No, we won't. We will see divestment from
lousy managers who are incapable of responding to investor
pressure, because if investors move their capital and the price
goes up, and you don't respond to that, welcome to capitalism.
Capitalism is scary. It is frightening if you can't compete,
and I hope that someday the Republican Party embraces
capitalism and investor rights once again. Thank you. I yield
back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Meuser, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. And
thank you, Director Gerding, for being here with us today.
So many actions of the SEC trouble me, including the pace
of rulemaking, limited comment periods, aggressive
implementation timelines, and the lack of responsiveness to
congressional concerns. This breakneck pace is exhausting the
SEC staff, as you probably know, and overwhelms the industry,
which I know, with broad new rulemaking without enough time to
comment, and congressional inquiries are sometimes at
painstakingly headshaking lengths of time. The examples of some
of these extensive timeframes are the climate disclosure rule,
as well as the proxy advisory rule, which you allowed 30 days
for comment, and that was over Thanksgiving and Christmas, so
you were not really looking for substantial input.
Madam Chairwoman, to demonstrate the breakneck pace of the
SEC's rulemaking agenda compared to previous Chairs, I ask
unanimous consent to submit this chart entitled, ``Rule
Proposals Issued During the First 27 Months of SEC Chairs'
Tenures.'' For the record, this chart shows that after 27
months, Chair Gensler has issued 58 rules, compared to 33 rules
issued under Chair Clayton, and 30 rules issued under Chair
White, so the rules have doubled and the comment periods have
decreased by 20 to 25 percent, respectfully.
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Meuser. Mr. Gerding, let me ask you this: Can you
identify which of these 11 rulemakings would actually advance
the SEC's mandate to facilitate capital formation?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, all of the rules that my Division
recommends proposing or adopting are squarely within our
statutory mandate of investor protection, capital formation,
and promoting fair and orderly markets.
Mr. Meuser. Do you think the industry agrees with that? Do
you ever ask?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we receive a wide range of
comments on all of our rulemakings, and we take all of those
comments very, very seriously.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. So when proposing these very significant
rules that impact millions of Americans and have broad
implications, stakeholder input and sufficient comment periods,
one would very rationally think roundtables, concept releases,
and other outreach mechanisms should be an important part of it
because that is the industry that you are trying to help and
advance and promote, correct? Why is it then that we have data
which shows a conflict with what you are saying?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we take the notice-and-comment
process extremely seriously. I believe that all of the comment
periods are not only adequate under the Administrative
Procedure Act, but have generated robust comments on our rules.
We carefully consider those comments. And again, that is not
just our obligation under the Administrative Procedure Act; it
makes for better policies and better recommendations from the
Division.
Mr. Meuser. I don't think your clientele--and maybe you
don't look at it that way, but I tend to--would agree with a
216 percent increase in new rules, but 20 percent less time to
comment on this plethora, this blizzard of new rules. But you
think that everything is going fine and there is no reason to
change course?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, again, we take the notice-and-
comment rulemaking and our obligations under the Administrative
Procedure Act very, very seriously. And the public is my
clientele, and we take our statutory authorities, our statutory
mandate extremely seriously.
Mr. Meuser. Okay. But you agree that your timeframe is
about 45 days, where before it was a good 20 to 25 percent
longer?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, again, I believe all of the
comment periods for all of the rule proposals that we have
recommended are adequate under the Administrative Procedure Act
and have yielded comments which we are carefully considering.
Mr. Meuser. If you did hear, as I do, that the timeframes
are not sufficient and the number of rules coming across is
very difficult to deal with, would you then consider and commit
to this committee to review your timeframes and the level of
rules being issued to better accommodate American investors and
the industry?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we receive a number of comments
on our comment period that we carefully----
Mr. Meuser. Unfortunately, it sounds like a, no. Madam
Chairwoman, my time has expired, so I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from California, Mr. Vargas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman, and I
thank the ranking member for this hearing, and to the witness,
thank you very much for being here.
Madam Chairwoman, before I begin my questions, I would like
to submit into the hearing record a letter signed by Family
Farm Defenders, Food & Water Watch, the Institute for
Agriculture and Trade Policy, and the Union of Concerned
Scientists.
Chairwoman Wagner. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Vargas. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman.
The ESG disclosures are a market-driven initiative to
increase investor education and corporate transparency.
Information from ESG disclosures will help investors gain
greater insight into what companies are doing to reduce carbon
footprints and to address important issues like climate change,
diversity, and labor rights. Investors understand that ESG
issues are material and need to be accounted for when assessing
market opportunities. Investors are smart people, and I think
that is why 77 percent of the large Fortune 500 companies now
have ESG disclosures, because investors want to know this
information.
And I think what you are attempting to do here is very
appropriate. It has been a long process because there have been
a lot of comments, and there should be to try to figure out how
you measure this. It is very complicated issue, there is no
doubt about that, but this is very important. But again, it is
investors, and why investors read the headlines. Do you read
the headlines, Mr. Gerding?
Mr. Gerding. Yes, I do, Congressman. I read The Wall Street
Journal every day.
Mr. Vargas. Yes. The headlines recently have been screaming
about climate disasters, and I just talked to someone from
Phoenix, who said that it is 118 degrees, not that it hasn't
been that hot before, but it has never been that consistently
hot. It has been hot like that now for a long time. Take a look
at what happened up in Vermont. Take a look at what is
happening around the world right now. These climate disasters
cost money. Take a look at what insurance companies are doing
in Florida, and in California, because, again, climate change.
Investors look at this. Investors believe this is material,
and, of course, it is material. It costs billions and billions
of dollars, so of course, it is material. Do you think it is
material?
Mr. Gerding. I'm sorry, Congressman?
Mr. Vargas. Do you think that the issue of climate is
material? Do you think investors are correct about that?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, as part of proposing the climate
risk disclosure proposal, my Division, as part of our
recommendation to the Commission, was aware of and cited a
large number of investors who expressed a desire for the types
of information that are in that climate risk proposal. And that
information, as you know, is about helping those investors make
choices, not the Commission, but those investors make decisions
with required disclosure about their investment and voting
choices.
Mr. Vargas. Yes. Sometimes when I am up here listening, it
sounds like there are some accusations that you are doing this
for yourself, somehow for the Commission. No, it is for the
investors. Investors want to know, and especially savvy
investors, because they do see what is coming up. And
unfortunately, the scientists who most commonly speak about
this, say there is going to be more of this. So, of course,
savvy investors want to know this information to make sure that
they are not going to invest in a company that is very short-
sighted. They want a company that is going to be around for a
long time, because they manage these risks. They understand the
risks of climate change and climate disaster.
And again, I think you are on the right track. There is the
question of, do you take a look at the comments that people
make? There are so many of them. I believe you do. Isn't that
correct? By the way, the number of them is interesting because
now, digitally, you can do anything. When they move $42 billion
out of a bank in one day, you know that the world has changed.
The reality is because of digitalization, things move quickly,
but do you take a look at these comments and do you take them
seriously?
Mr. Gerding. Absolutely, Congressman. We carefully read
each comment. We take the comment process extremely seriously,
whether they are comments supporting, or opposing, or
expressing concerns with a particular proposal, and that is
part of our duties under the Administrative Procedure Act. It
is also what makes for better policy and better rules.
Mr. Vargas. Again, I thank you for being here. And I thank
the chairwoman and the ranking member for holding this hearing,
and I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Steil, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Steil. Thank you very much, Chairwoman Wagner. I am
really concerned about the direction the Securities and
Exchange Commission has taken under Chairman Gensler. I want to
go back to a few things you said here today, in particular as
it relates to shareholder proposals that are looking for no-
action requests. Did you tell us that the Securities and
Exchange Commission does not review whether or not the actual
shareholder proposal is legal or not legal in order to issue
your recommendation?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, when the staff conducts their
informal process under 14a-8, we look at all grounds for
exclusion under 14a-8----
Mr. Steil. Understood.
Mr. Gerding. ----and offer informal views on whether any of
those grounds for exclusion apply.
Mr. Steil. Correct. I understand that. Are you willing to
say on the record that you do or do not look at whether or not
an action is legal federally or in any of the 50 States?
Mr. Gerding. Again, Congressman, we look at all grounds for
exclusion----
Mr. Steil. Do all grounds include legality?
Mr. Gerding. One of the grounds would require the
Commission to look at a number of factors, including that one.
Mr. Steil. So yes, you do look at legality?
Mr. Gerding. Again, Congressman, we apply all----
Mr. Steil. Without being difficult here, this should be a
really simple question. Either, yes, you look at legality, or,
no, you don't look at legality. Do you look at legality?
Mr. Gerding. We look at all grounds----
Mr. Steil. I get, ``all grounds.'' Does that include
legality?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I am happy to refer you to 14a-8.
Mr. Steil. No, no, don't refer me to anything. Do you look
at legality? I have you here in front of me today. Do you look
at legality?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we don't offer opinions on the
legality.
Mr. Steil. So, no, you don't. Here is the problem. If,
``no,'' is your answer, here is the problem. We had before the
committee last week, ISS and Glass Lewis, the duopoly that
dominates proxy advisory advice, and I asked ISS and Glass
Lewis, do you look at legality, and they said no--on the
record, no. Why? Because they said the SEC does. And now, what
we are hearing from you is, after trying to delay answering the
question, no, you don't look at legality.
So, here is the problem. We have the SEC coming forward and
allowing a whole host of ESG-related reforms. We look at
companies like Travelers, who pointed out to the SEC that if
they had their shareholder proposal moved forward, it would be
illegal. Why? Because it would have required Travelers to
adjust pricing based on race. They pointed out to you, the SEC,
that it would have been illegal for them to do that. You didn't
care--not you, personally; the SEC didn't care. The SEC allowed
it to go forward. The proxy advisors reckoned in favor and the
proxy advisors pointed to the SEC, saying that they don't do
the review of whether or not it is legal; that is the job of
the SEC. You are now telling us that you don't review whether
or not an action is legal, and so what we have is a complete
lack of accountability.
And then, Chairman Gensler guts Chairman Clayton's proxy
advisor rules so that the proxy advisors aren't on the hook
either. No one is on the hook, and then, Americans are
wondering why their retirement savings are being weaponized to
advance a woke liberal agenda. Well, here it is. Anyone can
submit a proposal. That proposal can be illegal. The SEC
doesn't care. The proxy advisors don't care. And you have
instances like the Travelers case--but there are plenty of them
out there--where 46 percent of shareholders voted to have
Travelers engage in illegal behavior.
And then, you have boardrooms pulling their hair out,
saying, we should be focusing on growing our businesses,
growing jobs, but we can't because the SEC is asleep at the
switch. Chairman Gensler gutted the proxy advisor rule so the
proxy advisors aren't on the hook. The proxy advisors are
advising in favor of this. People should be darn frustrated
with what is going on. And the lack of accountability at the
SEC under Chairman Gensler, for example, gutting the Clayton
proxy advisor rules, should frustrate the American people who
are watching their 401(k)s, who are watching their pension
funds that they are relying on for retirement being weaponized
against them to advance a liberal agenda.
And you just finally admitted on the record that you don't
review whether or not an action is legal, and the proxy
advisors said they rely on you to do that part of the job. I
think we have identified a massive problem at the SEC. I think
we are highlighting what happened when the SEC gutted the
Chairman Clayton proxy advisor rule, and I think it is all the
more reason that we have to go in and actually put some
controls with the proxy advisors. We are marking up that bill
next week, and it is essential that we get that passed on
behalf of the American people. Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Nickel, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nickel. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman. Director
Gerding, it's good to see you here. I represent North
Carolina's 13th District, which includes Raleigh, the Raleigh
suburbs, and out to Durham and Duke. But I get this question a
lot, which is, Duke-Carolina or Duke-NC State? You get those
versions. For me, that is always a trick question. You don't
want to answer any of those if you want to get elected in the
triangle, but for you, if I say Duke-Carolina, who do you
choose?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, my dad is a Tar Heel, so I am
going to choose not to answer that question----
Mr. Nickel. I saw you went to Duke. My wife is a Tar Heel,
too, so I also avoid answering that question. But for me in the
13th District, housing is consistently one of my constituents'
biggest concerns. Escalating costs have created significant
barriers to entry, making it increasingly difficult for
aspiring homeowners to fulfill that American Dream of owning a
home.
And I am concerned that the SEC's proposed conflicts of
interest rule may have negative effects on the housing market
by preventing the securitization of assets. I certainly share
the Commission's goal of preventing conflicts of interest, but
I hope that the final rule isn't overly broad. In 2021, over 65
percent of mortgages were securitized, which is the key to
providing stability in the housing market. How important do you
think securitization is to mortgage lending?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I think securitization is
incredibly important. As we proposed the rule, we carefully
considered the statutory mandate from Congress to pass the
conflicts of interest rule. We carefully considered our
recommendations to the Commission on the scope of the rule and
the hedging, market-making liquidity commitment exemptions. And
we have received comments on the scope of the rule, and the
definition of, ``conflicts of interest,'' in those three
exemptions, and are carefully considering those and the
economic analysis of those provisions.
Mr. Nickel. So if firms aren't able to participate in
securitization because of an overly-broad rule, just taking
that hypothetical, how would this impact the liquidity and
stability of the housing market?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the proposed rule contained an
extensive economic analysis of the economic benefits and costs
of the rules. We have also solicited comments on what the
economic costs and benefits would be and are taking those
comments very seriously as we formulate any recommendations to
the Commission on that.
Mr. Nickel. So, you have conducted a cost-benefit analysis
that examines how this proposal would impact affordable
housing?
Mr. Gerding. The overall economic analysis, which I refer
to you in the proposal, looks at the potential economic costs
of the proposal, including on a number of securitization
markets.
Mr. Nickel. I have also heard from industry participants
that mortgage insurance-linked notes could be inadvertently
captured by this regulation. These are used by private mortgage
insurers to manage capital and serve homebuyers across the
country who continue to experience affordability barriers. Has
the SEC considered tailoring the regulation to ensure that this
isn't an issue?
Mr. Gerding. The proposal solicited a number of comments on
tailoring the rule, changing the scope of the rule, and
changing the scope of the exemptions. We have received a number
of comments, including comments expressing the type of concern
that you have mentioned, and we are going to carefully consider
those comments as the Division formulates any recommendations
to the Commission.
Mr. Nickel. Thanks so much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, for having this
hearing today. And thank you, Director Gerding, for being here.
Congress plays a important role in encouraging agencies to
achieve regulatory harmonization across the Federal Government
in order to ensure that any additional incident reporting
requirements do not create duplicative regulations. I am
speaking specifically to cybersecurity. The SEC's proposed
cybersecurity disclosures require issuers to publicly disclose
a material cybersecurity incident within 4 days, using Form 8-
K. This, I believe, falls under your Division.
Additionally, there are rules that introduce new
obligations on risk management and governance, including
disclosure of policies, procedures, and board members'
expertise in cybersecurity. All of this comes when the SEC has
proposed five additional cyber disclosure rules. I have heard
from a number of stakeholders who have said that about 40
percent of their cyber staff's time is spent on compliance
matters instead of the day-to-day protective mission, and some
experts in the field believe that this could rise to 50 percent
in the near future with all of hese other regulations coming
out.
With all this in mind, Mr. Gerding, has your Division
worked with or received technical assistance from other
agencies, such as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA), on the implementation of this proposed rule, and
how it may interact with existing regulations and laws?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, we have consulted with a number
of Federal agencies on the rule proposal. We are also carefully
considering the interactions of this particular rule proposal
with other Federal statutes and other Federal regimes. We have
also received a number of comments on the proposal related to
the issues that you are mentioning and are carefully----
Mr. Garbarino. Did you speak to CISA about this?
Mr. Gerding. That is one of the Federal agencies that we
have spoken to about the rule, yes.
Mr. Garbarino. They have a 72-hour disclosure rule. Why
make yours 4 days, and why make it public, because CISA's rule
is public? When you talked to them, did you get a differing
opinion as to what you should not do with this rule, or what
was the discussion? Did you just say, hey, we are doing this?
Mr. Gerding. One clarification, Congressman. The cyber
incident security reporting provision that you are talking
about is for business, days after a public reporting, a company
will determine that a cyber incident is material.
Mr. Garbarino. Material, yes.
Mr. Gerding. I will note that we are closely following our
statutory authorities, which may differ from those of CISA
under other rules.
Mr. Garbarino. I understand that, but do you understand
that there are businesses out there which have cyber employees,
and a lot of them have shortages. There are 750,000 open jobs,
and when their employees have to spend 40 percent of their time
doing compliance matters, wouldn't it be better for the SEC and
CISA and other agencies to say, hey, you know what? Maybe 72
hours works for all of us instead of 72 hours for you, and 48
hours for somebody else. What I am saying is we need to get
these people back into the job that they are supposed to be
doing: protecting the companies.
So I think when you have these discussions in the future,
it doesn't matter about statutory authority, there is still
supposed to be harmonization, and that is what Congress wants
to see. So next time, if these rules come up, I hope the SEC
takes that into consideration, especially considering there are
six rules that the SEC is proposing. They are not all under
your Division, but they don't make sense together, so I think
that is something on which the SEC really has to focus.
Because I have a little bit of time left, I want to move
over on to the changes to Bulletin 14L. How do you justify the
shift? How does the SEC justify the shift in their position?
Did they study how the increased number of ESG proposals would
affect shareholder value and the ability of corporations to
make efficient and effective business decisions?
Mr. Gerding. I think you are referring to Staff Legal
Bulletin No. 14L?
Mr. Garbarino. Yes.
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, that is informal views of the
staff as we conduct our shareholder review process. It is not
legally binding. It is not a rule or a notice. It is not a
notice-and-comment rulemaking.
Mr. Garbarino. How much discretion do staff members have
when they are determining whether something is exempt?
Mr. Gerding. I think you are asking about the informal
shareholder review process----
Mr. Garbarino. Yes.
Mr. Gerding. ----that we have. That is driven by
professional career staff. It is something that offers informal
views to both management and shareholder proponents as
management elect to seek a shareholder--I'm sorry no action
from the----
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. You
can respond in writing with the rest of your answer.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
holding the hearing. Let me just take a few seconds to
associate myself with the earlier comments of my colleague from
California, who talked about the impact of weather. The
projected temperature today in Phoenix is 115, going into the
12th day above 110. And I am going to go around the country,
and frankly, around the world to point out how the weather is
dramatically and dangerously changing. But let me go on to
another issue about which I am very concerned.
My colleague, Blaine Luetkemeyer, and I sent a letter to
the SEC on May 23rd, to Chair Gensler, on this issue you
addressed a bit earlier, Section 27B, the one my colleague
raised a few minutes ago. And we sent a letter in May to raise
the concern that mortgage insurance-linked notes could be
interpreted, as has been suggested, to be a conflict of
interest under this rulemaking.
After hearing from a number of housing organizations,
mortgage insurance-linked notes are used by mortgage insurers,
they believe, to disperse concentrated risk and provide
protections against elevated losses. And I don't believe that
they are the sort of transactions the rule is targeting, but
given the fact that the Division of Corporation Finance
oversees the Office of Structured Finance Responsibility, for
the rule, have you had any time or have you spent any time with
your staff to work through these concerns raised by Congressman
Luetkemeyer and myself?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, thank you for that. I have read
your letter and the letter that you co-wrote with
Representative Luetkemeyer, and we have put it in the comment
file for that rule. We have read a number of comments and heard
a number of concerns, including the ones that you have
expressed. I will note that I don't want to pre-judge the
particular facts until I fully understand them, but I am not
sure that the particular financial product that you are
mentioning would, in fact, be covered by the rule. And we will
carefully consider your comments and all comments as we address
those particular concerns, including on the scope of the rule.
Mr. Cleaver. Obviously, I have a lot of concerns about
housing and real estate, the real estate industry as it relates
to this rulemaking. But I think I can speak for Mr. Luetkemeyer
when I say that we would be very much interested in sitting
down with you or even having members of our staff sit down with
your staff to do some final discussions before the publication
of the final rule. Is it possible that we can have some kind of
conversation on that rule?
Mr. Gerding. I would be happy to meet with your staff. I
would have to work with our Office of Legislative Affairs, and
we may have to put together a memo, a little file, obviously,
if we are considering facts or data on the rule, but I assume
that you and Representative Luetkemeyer would be comfortable
with that.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, I believe we would. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Garbarino. [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Lawler,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Staff Legal Bulletin
No. 14L explains that the SEC has shifted its focus from the
materiality of a shareholder proposal of a company to the
social policy significance of the issues. This change has made
it significantly easier for politically-motivated proposals to
be included in annual proxy statements. The result is clear, as
we have seen a 51-percent rise in environmental proposals, a
20-percent increase in social proposals, and a 25-percent
decrease in companies seeking no-action relief. By focusing on
costly non-material ESG issues at the expense of sound
financial regulation, this shift detracts from the primary
purpose of public markets: to enable companies to raise capital
and foster economic growth.
Mr. Gerding, Staff Legal Bulletin No. 14L states that
certain exclusions under Rule 14a-8 should not apply to a
proposal that staff determines to be significant social policy
issues, regardless of whether the issue has a nexus to the
business: ``For these reasons, staff will no longer focus on
determining the nexus between a policy issue and the company,
but will instead focus on the social policy significance of the
issue that is subject to the shareholder proposal. In making
this determination, the staff will consider whether the
proposal raises issues with the broad societal impact such that
they transcend the ordinary business of the company.''
Under this aligned approach, proposals that the staff
previously viewed as excludable because they did not appear to
raise a policy issue of significance for the company may no
longer be viewed as excludable under Rule 14a-8. You say this
is informal, not a big deal, but yet, this obviously is having
a dramatic impact. Can you explain to this committee two or
three criteria that the Division of Corporation Finance uses to
determine whether an issue has a broad societal impact?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, when you refer to Staff Legal
Bulletin 14L, that was reverting to a previous position that
the staff had taken and had followed for several decades of not
tying that particular inquiry to a particular company, and we
believe that is consistent with the Commission's statements in
that regard. So, we were reverting to earlier views and
earlier----
Mr. Lawler. Okay. That is wonderful, but I asked you a
different question. I asked you, what criteria you use to
determine whether a particular issue has a broad societal
impact? Who elected you to determine a broad societal impact?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the overall inquiry there that
the staff engages in a non-political way in formulating
informal----
Mr. Lawler. In a non-political way? Are you kidding? Come
on, let's be real here. This has been entirely political. And
again, I asked you a question: What criteria do you use to
determine a broad societal impact? Stop trying to circumvent
the question. Answer it directly.
Mr. Gerding. Congressman----
Mr. Lawler. What criteria?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, in formulating the career staff's
informal views on particular grounds for exclusion, the staff
considers whether a particular matter has become a question of
widespread public debate.
Mr. Lawler. Who are you to determine what has become
widespread public debate? Did you run for elected office?
Mr. Gerding. I am not an elected official, Congressman.
Mr. Lawler. Right.
Mr. Gerding. I am here to carefully follow our statutory
authorities, including protecting investors and promoting
capital making.
Mr. Lawler. So, what statutory authority do you have to
determine broad societal impact? What criteria are you using to
determine that?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, when the Commission's career
staff are looking at the ordinary management grounds for
exclusion, we are carefully considering Rule 14a-8. We are
carefully considering----
Mr. Lawler. You are having exceptions for it based on some
undefined criteria that you still can't explain.
Mr. Gerding. Again, Congressman, the criteria that we are
looking for and offering informal views on is whether a matter
has become a subject of widespread public debate, and the
current----
Mr. Lawler. Give me an example of one.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Nunn, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for calling
today's hearing and for the groups on both sides of the aisle
who have, I think, some legitimate concerns here.
My colleagues and I protect the interests of everyday
retail investors and foster a competitive capital market system
that upholds market integrity and maximizes the opportunity for
all Americans, including those Iowans in my district, not just
to uphold their wealth, but to make sure that they are able to
be successful in their long-term retirement planning and
investment decisions.
Since the 1990s, the cost of entering the U.S. public
market has doubled, leading to a two-thirds decrease in the
number of companies that have chosen to go public with an
initial public offering (IPO). In contrast, our foreign
adversary, China, has seen a significant IPO increase,
contributing to its global competitiveness. I would offer that
the rogue SEC and its overregulation has as many as 52
rulemaking proposals pending, none of which deal with 1 of 3
three missions, facilitating capital formation. Instead, this
SEC before us has prioritized increasingly-costly regulatory
and disclosure obligations, making our U.S. capital markets
less attractive.
Let's start from the bottom up here. In our overall
perspective, the SEC rules are not only overly burdensome,
particularly to small businesses and Main Streets, as I shared
with Mr. Scott here concerns about our family farms, our local
ranchers, but it is also allowing foreign-owned proxy
companies, which make up over 97 percent of the market space,
to overwhelmingly have a voice in America's retirement
portfolios. And as we have seen, politically-motivated
portfolios have, in general, a 14-percent less return on
investment than those that are market-driven.
Mr. Gerding, in your opinion, will small businesses like
the ones I just highlighted, that are not registered with the
SEC and have never had any business dealings with the SEC, be
compelled to collect and submit information to the BDC as a
result of the proposed Scope 3 requirements?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the climate risk disclosure
proposal, again, only requires public disclosure from publicly-
registered companies. That being said, we have heard companies
express comments in the comment file on the scope of the Scope
3 requirement, including impacts on----
Mr. Nunn. And wouldn't you agree that those businesses
would face additional costs because of this new regulation?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, the climate risk disclosure
proposal includes an extensive economic analysis of all aspects
of that proposal. We solicited----
Mr. Nunn. Would they be paying more as a result of having
to meet your regulatory requirements?
Mr. Gerding. As I mentioned, the economic analysis, what we
often call the EA----
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Gerding, we recognize that there will be an
increased burden on small businesses, particularly the first
time out there, correct?
Mr. Gerding. The economic analysis solicited comments on
that economic analysis----
Mr. Nunn. I understand you asked for their feedback, and
they said overwhelmingly that it will create an increased
burden for them. I am going to move on to my next question,
since you are non-responsive on the first. In your opinion, how
many of our rulemaking proposals are specifically focused on
capital formation?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, all of our rule proposals focus
on all aspects of our statutory----
Mr. Nunn. I want to follow up with a speech given by then-
SEC Commissioner Allison Lee, who argued in favor of highly-
malleable interpretations of the SEC's material standard. She
said, ``The idea that the SEC must establish the material for
each specific piece of information required to be disclosed in
our rules is legally incorrect, historically unsupported, and
inconsistent with the needs of modern investors.'' Do you share
former Commissioner Lee's views regarding the material
standard? Yes or no?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, I don't have that speech in front
of me. I wouldn't know that any time a Commissioner speaks or
an Acting Chair speaks, she----
Mr. Nunn. You have supported her in the past. Have you
changed your position on this?
Mr. Gerding. The view of materiality that my Division
follows is, as I mentioned to one of your colleagues earlier,
the same definition of materiality that the Supreme Court has
articulated. That is the definition that animates and guides
all of our rulemakings.
Mr. Nunn. Regulation S-K requires that companies provide a
discussion of the material factors that make an investment
speculative or risky, yes. Can you explain why after less than
2 months on the job, Chair Gensler sought to overhaul the 2020
adopted rule, issued a redo proposal, changing from Chairman
Clayton's tenure?
Mr. Gerding. Congressman, as I noted to one of your
colleagues earlier, there are important provisions of the 2020
rule that remain in effect. Proxy voting advisory business----
Mr. Nunn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman's time has expired. I would
like to thank our witness for his testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this witness, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to this witness and to place his responses in the record. Also,
without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days to
submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in the
record.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:43 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 18, 2023

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
