- CONFRONTING THE FULL RANGE OF IRANIAN THREATS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONFRONTING THE FULL RANGE OF IRANIAN THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 11, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-80

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
27-160 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable James F. Jeffrey, Philip Solondz distinguished
visiting fellow, The Washington Institute for Near East Policy
(Former U.S. Ambassador to Iraq, Turkey, and Albania)..........     5
General Charles F. Wald, USAF, Retired, distinguished fellow and
co-chair, The Gemunder Center Iran Task Force, The Jewish
Institute for National Security of America (Former Deputy
Commander, U.S. European Command)..............................    13
Mr. David Albright, founder and president, Institute for Science
and International Security.....................................    19
Mr. Jake Sullivan, senior fellow, Geoeconomics and Strategy
Program, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (Former
National Security Adviser to the Vice President; Former
Director of Policy Planning, U.S. Department of State).........    26

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable James F. Jeffrey: Prepared statement...............     7
General Charles F. Wald, USAF, Retired: Prepared statement.......    15
Mr. David Albright: Prepared statement...........................    21
Mr. Jake Sullivan: Prepared statement............................    28

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    74
Hearing minutes..................................................    75
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    77
Written response from Mr. Jake Sullivan to question submitted for
the record by the Honorable Dina Titus, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Nevada..............................    79
Written responses from the Honorable James F. Jeffrey, Mr. David
Albright, and Mr. Jake Sullivan to questions submitted for the
record by the Honorable Bradley S. Schneider, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Illinois.........................    80

CONFRONTING THE FULL RANGE OF IRANIAN THREATS

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 11, 2017

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:12 a.m. in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order. We will
ask all members to take their seats at this time.
And today we consider how the United States should confront
the full range of threats that Iran poses to our national
security and poses to the security of our regional allies and
partners. And I will give you my view of this.
I believe that President Obama's flawed nuclear deal was a
gamble that Iran would choose to become a responsible actor, a
country focused on prosperity for its people and security along
its borders. And unfortunately, and predictably, the Tehran
regime clearly sees itself as a movement, one that uses
ideology and violence to destabilize its neighbors, to threaten
others, mainly the United States and Israel. That is why we
still hear ``death to Israel,'' ``death to the United States,''
``Israel is a one-bomb country.'' That is why we hear this.
In Iraq and Syria, Iran's Revolutionary Guards have taken
advantage of the fight against ISIS, and they are using their
shock troops and Shia militia to brutalize Syrians and to seize
much of the territory. As ISIS loses ground, the risk is real
that one version of radical Islamist terror, ISIS, is simply
replaced by another.
Meanwhile, Hezbollah, ascendent in Lebanon, has thousands
of fighters in Syria. It is well positioning itself to
intensify its original mission: The destruction of Israel. This
terrorist organization is building a deadly rocket arsenal
ready to rain terror on the Jewish state. I was in Israel
during the 2006 Hezbollah rocket campaign. Its capabilities
then, quite substantial, are far more concerning today. This is
a powder keg.
This makes it all the more critical that we stop Iran from
completing a ``land bridge'' from Iran to Iraq to Syria to
Lebanon. This would be an unacceptable risk and, frankly, a
strategic defeat. It is not just Israel's security on the line.
I feel that if Iran secures this transit route, it will mark
the end of the decades-long U.S. effort to support an
independent Lebanon. Jordan's security, too, would be
imperiled.
This threat grows infinitely worse if Iran develops a
nuclear weapons capability. In this regard, Iran's continued
pursuit of intercontinental ballistic missiles funded by the
cash bonanza it received when sanctions were lifted, is
telling. No country has run such an expensive program without
also seeking nuclear warheads to go on top. These missiles are
designed to hit us.
While the nuclear deal may have constrained Iran's ability
to produce fissile material, these restrictions begin to sunset
in less than a decade, leaving Iran with an industrial
enrichment capability. The reluctance of international
inspectors today to demand access to military bases means that
we don't know to what extent Iran is engaged in the complex--
but more easily hidden--work of designing a nuclear warhead.
And that is why clear majorities on this committee and in
the House opposed the nuclear deal. Ultimately, however, the
Obama administration rammed it through anyway. And as a result,
roughly $100 billion was handed over to Iran. Much of this is
now in the hands of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps--an
incredible amount of leverage lost.
As flawed as the deal is, I believe we must now enforce the
hell out of it. Let's work with allies to make certain that
international inspectors have better access to possible nuclear
sites, and we should address the fundamental sunset
shortcoming, as our allies have recognized. This committee will
do its part tomorrow by marking up the Ballistic Missiles and
International Sanctions Enforcement Act.
We must also respond to Iran's efforts to destabilize the
region. This includes using our allies in Europe to designate
Hezbollah in its entirety as a terrorist organization and
providing the administration with additional tools to go after
this Iranian proxy, as we voted to do this last week in this
committee.
Finally, we should be supporting the Iranian people who
want a better life, who want more freedom, instead of suffering
under the brutal repression of an ideologically inspired,
hateful regime. We have no ill will toward the Iranian people.
It is their government that gravely threatens us and threatens
our allies. This is the approach that I believe the United
States must take for our national security.
Later this week, the President will make a legislatively
mandated decision on certification of the nuclear deal.
Whatever he decides, it is critical that the President lay out
the facts. He should explain what his decision means. He should
explain what it doesn't mean. And then I hope, as I have tried
to do here today, the President will define a responsible path
forward to confront the full range of threats posed by Iran.
I now will go to the ranking member for his remarks.
Mr. Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
calling this hearing.
To our witnesses, welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Thank you all for your history of service to our country. It is
very much appreciated.
There is no doubt whatsoever that Iran poses a grave threat
to security in its neighborhood and around the globe. In Iran,
we find the world's number one state sponsor of terrorism, a
government developing illegal and dangerous ballistic missiles
that could deliver a devastating weapon, a critical lifeline to
the barbarous Assad dynasty in Syria, and a regime that flouts
international human rights norms, brutally suppresses its own
people, and unlawfully detains foreign citizens, including
Americans.
How to grapple with this challenge is one of the most
important questions for our foreign policy and for us as
lawmakers.
I have long advocated tougher sanctions that go after
Iran's harmful activities. Earlier this year, with the
chairman's support, we passed into law new sanctions on Iran's
destabilizing activities, including its ballistic missile
program, its support for terrorism, and its conventional arms
transfers.
This week especially, we cannot talk about how to deal with
Iran without talking about the nuclear deal, whether staying in
the deal will make it easier or harder to meet this challenge.
I opposed the deal. I voted against the deal.
Mr. Sullivan, I say this with respect and gratitude for
your hard work to bring Iran to the negotiating table, but I
felt the sunset provisions left too short a time before Iran
could become a legitimate nuclear power. I also felt that Iran,
being the number one state sponsor of terrorism, would reap a
windfall in money from this agreement and therefore could use
it and would use it to carry out its terrorist activities to an
even greater state than they have been in the past.
But I was on the losing side of that debate. Since the deal
was reached, like the chairman, I have called for it to be
strictly enforced while we look for other ways to address the
range of non-nuclear challenges coming out of Iran.
So today the administration seems poised to take the first
step in withdrawing from the JCPOA. I must say that I view that
course as a grave mistake. We in the United States have to live
up to our word. If we withdraw from the deal now, Iran would be
free today from the constraints on their program and the
intrusive inspections that the JCPOA puts into place. They
could race headlong toward a nuclear bomb, hold all the
benefits of sanctions relief, and continue fomenting
instability across the region.
We need to work with allies and partners on a shared agenda
that holds the regime in Tehran accountable, not dividing
America from our closest friends across the globe. If we pull
out of the deal, I believe we lose whatever leverage we have to
drive that agenda.
At the same time, walking away from the JCPOA would
announce to the world, to our friends and adversaries alike,
that the United States cannot be counted on to keep its word.
In North Korea, we are staring down a rogue regime that
already has nuclear weapons. If we pull out of the Iran deal,
we would lose all credibility as we try to negotiate with the
regime in Pyongyang on nuclear disarmament.
One of the arguments I have heard in the last week is that
the administration should withhold certification but that we
should stay in the deal anyway. I think that is trying to have
it both ways. It doesn't work. I think it is a political cover
for opponents of the deal who have been saying for years that
we should withdraw and who are now having second thoughts. I
think it is a distraction from the real issues involving Iran
that demand our attention. And I think it is playing with fire.
Failing to certify the deal is the first step toward ending
it. That is how governments around the world will perceive it,
possibly including Iran, which could spark a second nuclear
crisis on top of North Korea.
We need to be tough on Iran. We need tough sanctions and
multilateral actions to make clear that the regime will face
consequences for its dangerous activities. We need to reclaim
the mantle of leadership, bring countries together, and hold
Tehran accountable.
Saying we are going to tear up the deal sounds like tough
talk, but I believe it won't help us meet this challenge. It
would merely hamper our ability to make progress, to get
tougher in the areas where we can. It would be cutting off our
nose to spite our face.
So I hope the President heeds the advice of Secretary
Mattis and others. I hope he understands the importance of the
United States keeping its commitments. If we are serious about
cracking down on Iran, the best path forward is to stick with
the deal, despite what I view as its flaws, and hold Iran
strictly to its obligations. That will put us in a far better
position to address all the other problems Iran is stirring up.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on these
questions.
Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
This morning we are joined by a distinguished panel. We
have Ambassador James Jeffrey with us. He is the Philip Solondz
distinguished fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East
Policy. Previously, the Ambassador served as U.S. Ambassador to
Iraq, to Turkey, and to Albania.
We have General Charles Wald. He is a distinguished fellow
and co-chair of the Gemunder Center Iran Task Force at the
Jewish Institute for National Security of America. Previously,
General Wald served as the former Deputy Commander of the U.S.
European Command.
We have Mr. David Albright, founder and president of the
nonprofit Institute for Science and International Security. Mr.
Albright has written numerous assessments on nuclear weapons,
secret nuclear weapon programs, throughout the world. And we
appreciate him being with us as well.
Mr. Jake Sullivan is a senior fellow at the Geoeconomics
and Strategy Program at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. Previously, Mr. Sullivan served as a
National Security Adviser to former Vice President Joe Biden
and as the Director of Policy Planning at the U.S. Department
of State.
Without objection, the witnesses' full prepared statements
will be made part of the record today, and members here will
have 5 calendar days to submit any statements, questions, or
extraneous material that they want to put into the record for
today's hearing.
So I would just ask Ambassador Jeffrey, if you would like
to summarize your statement. And then after each of you have
presented, we will have the questions from the members of the
committee.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JAMES F. JEFFREY, PHILIP SOLONDZ
DISTINGUISHED VISITING FELLOW, THE WASHINGTON INSTITUTE FOR
NEAR EAST POLICY (FORMER U.S. AMBASSADOR TO IRAQ, TURKEY, AND
ALBANIA)

Ambassador Jeffrey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking
Member, members of the committee, my distinguished colleagues
here on the table. It is an honor to be here today to discuss
something of such extraordinary importance just before the
President will talk to the American people about Iran policy.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that in certain circles, in
Washington and elsewhere, there was a belief that this Iran
deal could do more than constrain Iran's nuclear program. In
fact, the preamble to the agreement expressed the hope, and I
quote, that full implementation of this JCPOA, the agreement,
will positively contribute to regional and international peace
and security.
Just last night I heard the EU Foreign Minister, who is
basically the spokesperson of the P5+1, echo a very similar
line back when she announced the agreement in 2015.
And I think that is one of the core flaws of this
agreement. And one of my arguments that I will make in a
second, that we have to look at this agreement in more detail
and where it fits, is that people think that if they are okay
with the agreement, the Iranians are adhering to it, then we
don't have a problem with them. We have many problems with them
inside and outside the agreement.
Right now the greatest danger facing the U.S. and its
allies in the Middle East is Iran allied with various surrogate
forces and to some degree Russia. The U.S., as yet, does not
have a comprehensive policy to confront Iran that should
include both containing Iran in the region and, as you both
mentioned, looking at the JCPOA.
The stakes here are high. If America does not stop the
Iranians, they will soon emerge with their allies as a dominant
force in the region.
Such a policy, however, has to consider some key elements
that any such policy needs to look at. I will give you my views
on them. But more important than my views are that the
administration and that this body look at each of these
elements.
First, Iran must be the first U.S. priority in the region,
it must be number one, apart from terrorist attacks on the
homeland. Specifically, we need to shift our attention and
resources now from the almost-finished ISIS campaign to Iran.
That is critical because right now the administration is still
focused on ISIS.
Second, we need to know what our basic purpose is in
confronting Iran. Is it to push back on Iran's specific
regional moves, or is it to affect significantly Iran's overall
goals and role in the region, or is it regime change? There are
voices on all three here in Washington.
In view of the need for as broad as possible an
international coalition, as both you, Mr. Royce, and you, Mr.
Engel, noted, I think we should limit this to pushing back on
Iran-specific actions, particularly military and paramilitary
in the region. That will allow us the biggest and strongest
coalition.
Next, as we have discussed, the JCPOA cannot be sacrosanct
in our approach. Given, however, the absence of an
international consensus for a new better agreement and our need
for such a broad coalition to contain Iran successfully, we
should not abandon the agreement. Rather we should use our
problems with it to push, at least diplomatically, for a
potential new agreement, raise our problems with missiles,
challenge the commitments we have made, I think foolishly, in
the agreement to support Iran's economic development, and
basically make it more difficult for businesses to work with
Iran.
The central fronts to contain Iran are Iraq and Syria.
Iran's intent is to create, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman,
vassal states, as we have seen or are seeing in Lebanon, in
that region. If it succeeds, it will threaten, again, as you
have mentioned, Israel, Jordan, Turkey, and eventually the
Gulf.
But the U.S., focused on ISIS, appears to be leaving the
day after in both Syria and Iraq to, in Syria, the Russians--I
was just there for a week with them, and believe me, they don't
want to and won't help us--and in Iraq, to the Abadi
government.
I know him and the people around him. They would like to
help us. They are not strong enough without a strong American
presence. That presence includes not only diplomacy and
economic help, it includes a military presence on the ground in
both countries over time, ostensibly to contain ISIS, but
focused on Iran.
Finally, we need to know: Do we talk to Iran? Do we need a
diplomatic plan? Do we talk to Iran? Under which circumstances?
How do we signal to it?
Equally important, we need to reunify this alliance. The
Saudis, the Turks, the Egyptians are going in all directions.
Finally, to the members of the committee, as I and many
others have experienced, if you push back on Iran, they will
come at you. They will come at you real hard. We need to know
what we will do in advance, and that includes potentially
striking them in their homeland.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Jeffrey follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. General Wald.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL CHARLES F. WALD, USAF, RETIRED,
DISTINGUISHED FELLOW AND CO-CHAIR, THE GEMUNDER CENTER IRAN
TASK FORCE, THE JEWISH INSTITUTE FOR NATIONAL SECURITY OF
AMERICA (FORMER DEPUTY COMMANDER, U.S. EUROPEAN COMMAND)

General Wald. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Engel, and members of the committee. Thank you again for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss responses to
the full range of threats posed by Iran.
I have followed Iran closely throughout my career,
including in my current capacity as the co-chair of the Iran
Task Force at the JINSA Gemunder Center.
This summer, our task force issued a report on the need to
restore U.S. leverage to confront the full spectrum of Iran's
menacing behaviors. Understandably, current debate is focused
on the JCPOA and whether continued adherence to the deal serves
our national interests.
Our JINSA task force has been an outspoken critic of this
agreement, which gives Tehran great financial, military, and
geopolitical benefits while robbing the United States of our
previous leverage against Iran.
An effective strategy against Iran must prioritize
restoring our lost leverage, and I applaud this committee's
effort to examine the range of options available to us and our
allies.
This is urgent because the deal places Iran on a trajectory
to become as intractable a challenge as North Korea is today
and very possibly worse. Sanctions relief is bringing renewed
foreign investment to Iran, and with it the capital and
technology for increased spending on ballistic missiles and
IRGC operations in places like Syria, Iraq, and Yemen.
The deal also legalizes Iran's ambitious military buildup.
U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231 gives Iran, and
specifically the IRGC, a major opportunity to advance its
nuclear-capable ballistic missile and intimidate our regional
allies. That same resolution will lift the conventional arms
embargo on Iran, allowing the IRGC to become an international
arms dealer.
The IRGC's ability to inflict heavy costs on our forces and
possibly deny our access to the region will grow significantly
as it augments its air defenses, attack craft, submarines,
unmanned vehicles, mines, radars, and missiles.
Finally, the U.N. resolution also eventually permits the
IRGC to access highly advanced missile technology and materials
from abroad. This will aid its development of a more
sophisticated nuclear delivery vehicle, including intermediate
range and intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of
targeting the heart of Europe and the U.S. homeland.
It is important to note that Tehran can push for ICBMs
around the same time as it approaches nuclear weapons
capability, effectively giving it a direct nuclear deterrent
against the United States before the JCPOA ends.
Already, Iran is moving more aggressively against us and
our allies. Since day one of the deal, it has been testing more
accurate and mobile multistage stage ballistic missiles with
reentry vehicles that are harder to intercept and are better
suited for nuclear warheads.
Meanwhile, its proxy in Yemen uses IRGC assistance to lob
dozens of ballistic missiles at Saudi bases and cities, not to
mention targeting U.S. Navy ships. I was told yesterday that
the Houthis in Yemen have shot 63 scuds in Saudi Arabia over
the last days--which, by the way, because of the PAC-3
missiles, the Saudi Arabians have been able to defend against,
but it is growing.
Overall, if Iran does not materially breach the JCPOA, the
deal already is a boon to its dangerous ambitions and a
strategic disaster for us. We need a coherent set of responses
to reverse this untenable strategic imbalance before it
continues from bad to worse.
I applaud this committee for its tireless efforts to
pressure Iran and Hezbollah through sanctions. Such measures
are necessary, but their message and impact must be reinforced
with military leverage.
First, American officials should make clear they are
preparing contingency plans to defend against further Iranian
tests of nuclear-capable missiles. This must include
unequivocal threats to shoot down future tests if necessary.
Second, we must undertake concrete military preparations,
including forward deploying part of Aegis-equipped missile
defense fleet to the Persian Gulf. Congress should consider
requiring the Pentagon adopt their use and other changes as
part of the broader reassessment of U.S. force posture and
contingency planning for the region.
Third, we need a post-ISIS strategy and a force presence in
Syria to prevent Iran from dictating the country's future and
consolidating its land bridge.
Fourth, we need to augment the new MOU on defense aid to
Israel by removing artificial caps on missile defense,
especially given Iran and Hezbollah's growing presence in the
Israeli northern borders.
And fifth, we need to work with Saudi Arabia and UAE on
robust theater missile defense and potentially help transfer
Israeli missile defense systems to the country.
Finally, we need to ensure the interoperability of air and
maritime defenses between the United States and Gulf allies to
counter Iran's growing capability thanks to the nuclear deal.
Regardless of the JCPOA's future, these measures will
demonstrate resolve to roll back Iranian aggression and
dissuade the regime from advancing toward nuclear weapons
capability.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for my time, and I look forward
to the committee's questions.
[The prepared statement of General Wald follows:]

quote deg.``Tehran will not allow any foreigner to
discover Iran's defensive and missile capabilities by
inspecting the country's military sites.'' And Under Secretary
of State, Wendy Sherman, and others, continually talked about
any time, anywhere types of inspections.
General, you might want to speak to this. She then went on
to say, absent the deal that was signed, that was merely
rhetorical. Ronald Reagan used to say, on-sight verification
was key. Any time, anywhere, and you brought up, and Mr.
Albright, this Section T problem, you might want to elaborate
on that, if you would, for the committee. General.
General Wald. Congressman, thank you. First of all, on the
money issue, I would just say from my perspective, I am not a
treasury expert, but $100 billion to Iran may not necessarily
have gone directly to the IRGC, but it freed up the money that
they would have given the IRGC had they had it in their own
coffers. Maybe it didn't go directly to them, I think it is a
nuance that----
Mr. Smith. The money is fungible, in other words.
General Wald. Money is money, it is fungible. On the
inspection issue, I don't think any of us should be naive to
think Iran is not cheating on what we considered the deal with
the military installations. That to me, is almost
flabbergasting that we would think that was going to be an
acceptable issue where we have, you know--frankly, underground
facilities could be built almost anyplace. We don't have
perfect intelligence. We have some pretty darn good
intelligence. We don't have perfect. I would venture to say
that I would be 99.9 percent sure Iran is cheating on the deal,
and that portion of it needs to be looked at closely.
And I am very disturbed that we are basically void of a
real broad strategy in the Middle East that would both defend
our interests and Israel's.
Mr. Albright. I think one of the unfortunate mistakes that
the Obama administration made was to downplay the importance
and of getting demonstrated access to military sites in Iran,
and solving what are called these possible military dimension
issues prior to implementation day. It set up a very unworkable
dynamic for the inspectors.
There is a mechanism in the deal to really press Iran to
accept inspections, but it happens to have a huge risk of
bringing down the deal. And the international inspectors don't
want to be put in that position. And I think that has been part
of their timidity to push this issue. I think that one of the
things that if the President does decertify, and in fact if he
doesn't, there is a need for Congress to start thinking through
legislation to fix this deal.
And I think there is many ways to do that, but I think it
is a priority to focus on how to ensure that the inspectors get
in there. And I would add, that most of this new talk of
wanting to enforce the deal better among our allies, willing to
look at fixes, is only because President Trump said he would
walk away. Before that, there were big problems in getting the
Europeans to take any of these problems seriously.
So I think that President Trump has done a service, while
we could all argue about how it is played out, but he has done
a basic service to try to get people to focus on the
inadequacies in this deal and fix them.
Mr. Smith. Let me just ask, in my final second. Iran/North
Korea collaboration, does it exist? Has it in the past? What is
the status of it now?
Mr. Albright. Certainly there is a belief there is
collaboration on missiles. On nuclear, it is much more
uncertain, but it is a concern for the future.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Greg Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, I just got to
make a comment, General Wald, that your last statement is
clearly speculation--is 99 percent pure speculation. And
speculation without facts, sir, is very dangerous. So I just
have to make that comment. I don't need an answer, but I just
need to make that statement because----
General Wald. Well, I would just say one thing. There is
.01 percent it isn't--and number 2 is,----
Mr. Meeks. Well, I have limited time. I am reclaiming my
time.
Mr. Sullivan, number one, listening to your testimony
earlier, I go to church on Sunday. I would have said amen. It
seems to me that it made logical sense. I think people forget
how we got to the table into the first place. It wasn't a
bilateral agreement between us and Iran, it wasn't even the
bilateral sanctions that we had on Iran.
It is the fact that we did lead that was able to get the
other countries to work with us, and for them to also apply the
sanctions multilaterally that brought them to the table so that
we can discuss what issue, which our focus was, to prevent them
from having a nuclear weapon, as you appropriately said.
And that there was nothing to prevent this, because I think
we are all united on the fact that we are not sitting back and
trusting Iran and saying that we are not going to do anything--
other than nefarious activity, we got to stop them. And we got
to use, you know, other sanctions. We have got to try to unite
and bring our allies together, as we did, on this agreement to
prevent Iran from having nuclear weapons.
And I think that we all agree, too, I don't know any bill
ever passed the United States Congress, or anyplace else, that
is perfect. There is no bill that is perfect. We always
negotiate and no one gets their way 100 percent. That being
said, I would be interested to know, Ambassador Jeffrey, you
heard the testimony of Mr. Sullivan, is there anything that you
disagreed with that Mr. Sullivan said?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I was both hoping and fearing that that
question would come up, Congressman, because Jake and I have
both worked a lot in the diplomatic world, and when we
disagree, this is a disagreement of opinion, we can't prove it.
Here is the problem with this agreement and our allies.
First of all, our allies in the region are happy if we not walk
away from the agreement, but we can certainly do quite a bit on
it. We are really talking about our allies in Europe. And they
have an almost rabid embrace of this agreement because of their
philosophy, which is that international agreements and the U.N.
are the way to deal with all problems.
The problem with this is, they also have a rabid reluctance
to engage or even to support us in engaging doing the hard work
of containing Iran. I don't think that us behaving well with
this agreement is going to get them to sign up to more joint
action in Syria and Iraq against Iran. I think, rather, as Mr.
Albright said, if we question that agreement, and say, look, to
the degree we are going to hold to much of it will depend on
how successful we are regionally, and that requires your help.
I think that is the way to go forward.
Mr. Meeks. Go ahead, Mr. Sullivan. I see you wanted to say
something.
Mr. Sullivan. I think this military inspection issue is a
great case in point. The deal provides the IAEA the opportunity
to get access to Iran's military sites, and Iran is not allowed
to simply say no. However, it also requires our allies to work
with us, our European partners to work with us to make that
happen.
When Ambassador Haley goes to Vienna to raise the issue of
access to military sites, and there are reports in the press
here that say the reason the Trump administration is raising
this is they wanted an excuse to walk away from the deal. It is
no surprise the Europeans and the IAEA are reluctant to engage
with United States on that issue.
From my perspective, the way we were able to build a
campaign of pressure against Iran to get to this nuclear deal
in the first place, which the Europeans did not want to go
along with because they were allergic to the really biting
sanctions, it was by making clear that the United States was
going to act in good faith, and that all of the burden of proof
was on Iran.
What the Trump administration has done is created real
questions about where that burden of proof should lie, and that
is why I think we have such a challenge.
Mr. Albright. Could I add one thing. I think Ambassador
Haley went to Vienna for very good reasons, to raise issues and
learn things. Using false statements in the press to try to
impugn what she did, I think is unfair.
Mr. Sullivan. I am not impugning Ambassador Haley, what I
am saying that is the Trump administration's approach, they are
putting out publicly that one of the ways in which they may
want to ultimately walk away from the deal is to point to this
provision. And to make that part of the public theater around
this, I think it is a challenge. That has nothing to do with
Ambassador Haley herself.
Mr. Albright. They never said that----
Chairman Royce. Well, time has expired, regardless. And we
have to go to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of California next.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
again thank you and Representative Engel, for your leadership
on this particular issue, which is of vital importance to the
security of our country. Let me just see if I can ask a yes or
no question.
Is Iran in compliance with the treaty? Just yes or no, down
the line.
Ambassador Jeffrey. Treaty yes; 2231 Resolution, no.
General Wald. No.
Mr. Albright. Not in full compliance.
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So we have two of our witnesses are
saying that they--it was their decision that basically Iran is
not in compliance, and we have one that is sort of both ways,
but in the end that was a no, as far as I am concerned.
General, let me just note, we have to push buttons here,
yes or no, when we go to vote. And when you got 99 percent of
something, you feel something is right 99 percent. That is a
really easy vote for us to make. Maybe I am just talking for
myself, because you do realize there is always a couple
percentage points on the side of the argument.
So let's just say already we have the majority at least of
this--of our witnesses today saying that Iran is not in
compliance. And is there a question then, should the President
of the United States lie about it? We gave him the
responsibility of determining where there was compliance. Of
course not. And we have people who are responsible people
throughout our country telling us they are not in compliance.
And it may mean something really bad for our country in the
future if we simply ignore it, as we have found out in Korea.
And I was right here when we were told about how North
Korea deserved to have the treaty, and we gave them $5 billion,
and now where are we at--on the edge of a catastrophe. No, it
does not--kicking the can down the road, asking the President
not to recognize reality is not the answer here.
And, again, I agree that we owe the President a debt of
gratitude for bringing some reality to decision-makings like
this, rather than trying to have what I call irrational
optimism about the future, which always leads us to situations
where--like we face in North Korea today.
One thing that we--this is not just an alternative,
however, of facing the mullahs down on this particular issue or
dealing with them in some way militarily. We have other ways of
ratcheting up pressure on the mullah regime.
We have some friends here dressed in yellow today to remind
us that the people of Iran don't like the mullah oppressors who
murdered their own people. We have people, Baloch in Iran. We
have Azeris in Iran. We have Kurds in Iran, all of whom feel
they are opposed. We haven't even ratcheted up any of the
pressure on them, even as Iran, the mullah dictators, thumb
their nose at us and take the money, but don't comply fully
with the expectations of that treaty.
We need leadership here. We can't wait for more than 99
percent certainty before we act. And there are avenues that are
non-military confrontational. So I would hope that we act. And
I wish our President well. Our chairman, Ed Royce, in his
opening statement, Chairman Royce mentioned the fact that there
are people in Iran who are not our enemies. The people of Iran
are not our enemies. It is the mullah regime. Just like the
people of North Korea are not our enemies. We have got to be
realistic in our approach and not try to ignore realities, if
we are going to have a better and more peaceful future.
I will give--I have 20 seconds more. If anyone can--Mr.
Sullivan, go ahead and disagree with me. Go right ahead.
Mr. Cicilline. I ask unanimous consent to give him
additional time, disagree with Mr. Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Oh my gosh.
Mr. Sullivan. I would say, first, I wouldn't substitute the
judgment--as much as I believe in myself and respect my
colleagues here on this panel, I would not substitute the
judgment of any of us for the combination of the IAEA, the
United States intelligence community, and the Israeli security
establishment, all of whom have said Iran is complying with the
deal.
And then secondly, as respects the reality of Iran's malign
activities in the region, I laid out my own views about the
threat that it poses, and the steps, the decisive steps the
United States needs to take to do it. I think we do that better
by committing to the deal than playing games with it.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And thank you, witnesses, and Mr.
Sullivan. Does that include a comment from one of our other
guests as well. Yes. Go right ahead.
Ambassador Jeffrey. Very quickly, Congressman Rohrabacher,
the legislation that you gave to the President that he is
acting on with this certification, the Iran Nuclear Agreement
Review Act, has him certify things beyond just whether Iran is
in compliance, including, is Iran doing things outside, this is
number three. Is Iran doing things outside of the agreement,
covert or others, for its nuclear weapons program? Arguably its
missiles would put it in that category. And number four is, is
it in our vital national interest?
I think that the President has room to take step one of
several positions here without necessarily challenging Mr.
Sullivan's view that technically Iran is in compliance with the
agreement, not the U.N. resolution.
Chairman Royce. Okay. We go now to Mr. Ted Deutch of
Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to you and the
ranking member. Thanks to our really esteemed group of
witnesses here today.
Mr. Chairman, I opposed the JCPOA back in 2015. But like
you, I said from the beginning that we have to vigorously
enforce this international agreement to ensure that we hold
Iran accountable where we can. And while I continue to have
some concerns, I believe the President's own Secretary of
Defense and his own Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, and the
opinions that we have heard today, that walking away from the
deal is simply not in our interest.
Mr. Albright, you presented some of the dangers of the deal
sunset provisions. Beyond the ability of Iran in 8 to 13 years
to ramp up centrifuge design of construction, increase
enrichment activity, and pursue heavy water. There are
conventional weapon sunsets coming even sooner. In just 3
years, U.N. restrictions on conventional weapons transfers
expire, in 5 years the sanctions of the missile program
expires, and the EU arms embargo expires. And I think people
are right to focus on the implications of these provisions
lapsing.
But if we walked away from the agreement tomorrow, if the
President pulled us out of the JCPOA, those sunsets would
effectively drop from a decade to a day, since Iran would be
freed of its obligations under the deal. That is the
implication of what happens if the President chooses to pull us
out of this deal.
Mr. Albright, in your testimony you recommend a policy
whereby the JCPOA is but one aspect of many in confronting
Iran's malign activity. I could not agree more. And that is
precisely why Congress passed targeted Iran sanctions earlier
this year, which includes a host of new authorities for the
President to combat Iran support for terror groups like,
Hezbollah, IRGC's regional meddling, ballistic missile
development, and their appalling human rights record.
Like Mr. Sullivan noted earlier, I too am at a loss for why
the administration has been slow to enforce these sanctions.
And so, Mr. Sullivan, I would ask you, as we engage in a replay
of so many of the discussions that took place surrounding the
JCPOA, Iran continues its dangerous activities. We have
provided tools now to do something about it. What should we be
doing?
Mr. Sullivan. I am afraid that for reasons I can't fully
explain, there is a significant gap between the rhetoric from
this administration on Iran and their policy on the ground. I
think one of the reasons is because they have had an ISIS only
focus in Syria. And Syria is a crucible--it is a critical
theater for Iran's efforts to expand its influence in the
region.
I believe that the administration should come forward with
a comprehensive strategy for how we are going to deal with the
future of Syria that is not just about ISIS, but that is about
denying space and capacity for Iran and Hezbollah to threaten
the rest of the region. And even, as Chairman Royce was talking
about, set up rocket factories right near the border with
Israel. I think they have to show us how they are going do
that.
Beyond that, the House and Senate produced a set of non-
nuclear sanctions around ballistic missiles and other malign
activities. And to my knowledge, to date, those various
sanctions have not been enforced yet by this administration,
certainly have not been enforced fully. I would ask the
administration, why not? And I would get to work doing that.
Part of the reason I suspect that they haven't been fully
enforced is the administration is putting all of its time, at
the moment, into figuring out how to resolve this completely
unnecessary debate around certification, and taking their eye
off the ball of these other issues.
My argument would be, because you can and should certify,
do so, and then move on to focus on the immediate threats that
we face in the region.
Mr. Deutch. And you had said in your testimony that the
deal is not a perfect agreement. I agree. I just believe that--
and I also think it is okay to acknowledge that. And I think
that we have an opportunity to try to address the short-falls
of the JCPOA through diplomatic channels, which will be made
exceedingly more difficult if we isolate ourselves from our
international partners and cut off the diplomatic channel that
we need to do something else, which is to finally bring home
the Americans who are held there, including my constituent, Bob
Levinson.
Mr. Sullivan, you noted that we can bring considerable
pressure to bear on Iran's continued detention of American
citizens. Bob, as you know, we have talked about multiple
times, is the longest held American hostage. His family has
been missing him for more than 10 years now. What more can and
should the administration be doing to secure his release and
the release of other Americans who are being held?
Mr. Sullivan. First, I think that senior officials in the
White House should meet with the families of all of these
detained Americans. Should talk to them about what they are
going through and how they are suffering. When I was in
government, I dealt with the families of the brothers and the
parents of detained Americans in Iran, who we ultimately,
thankfully, were able to bring home.
And then I think that the administration should be making
clear to the Iranians that the United States has a number of
tools at its disposal to be able to bring pressure on Iran, as
long as they continue this unjustified and inhumane detention.
And we should do so. We should put this up to the top of the
diplomatic priority list because these are our citizens and
these are our people and we should get them home.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Ted Poe of Texas.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Sullivan, you mentioned a
word, rhetoric. Rhetoric. When the Iranians say, ``The
Ayatollah says he wants to eliminate and destroy Israel,'' do
you believe that is rhetoric or do you believe that that is the
policy of Iran? Which is it?
Mr. Sullivan. I believe that the Iranians were trying to
acquire a nuclear----
Mr. Poe. Pick one. Excuse me. It is my time. Just answer
the question. Is it rhetoric or do they mean it? Take your
choice. Don't explain the answer.
Mr. Sullivan. I think they would like to see the end of the
State of Israel.
Mr. Poe. How about the United States? Number one, wipe out
Israel. Number two, wipe out the United States. Is that
rhetoric or does the Ayatollah mean it?
Mr. Sullivan. I am not familiar with him saying wipe out
the United States.
Mr. Poe. Well, you are not reading his press releases.
Ambassador Jeffrey, what do you think, is it rhetoric or does
he mean it?
Ambassador Jeffrey. On America it is rhetoric. On Israel it
is more serious.
Mr. Poe. So he doesn't mean it when he says he wants to
eliminate the United States from the face of the Earth?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I don't believe so. I believe he does
want to take that position, vis-a-vis, Israel, and he is taking
actions that will allow him to possibly do it.
Mr. Poe. So you think that the United States can afford to
believe that, oh, it is just rhetoric, they don't mean it, they
love us. You want us to take that position with nuclear weapons
at stake, intercontinental ballistic missiles at stake, working
with the North Koreans. They don't need intercontinental
ballistic missiles to destroy Israel, they have missiles to
destroy Israel. They want those missiles for us, maybe the
Europeans. So you just want us to take the chance that, oh, it
is rhetoric, even though he has said that since the day he has
been anointed as the Supreme Leader of Iran. He wants to
eliminate the United States. You want us to take that chance?
Ambassador Jeffrey. This is based upon 40 years of dealing
with the cultural and religious and historical----
Mr. Poe. So you want us to take the chance? Mr. Ambassador,
I am sorry, I have 5 minutes. Don't ramble. You want us to take
the chance that it is rhetoric?
Ambassador Jeffrey. It is not rhetoric, he wants to drive
us from the Middle East and will use every means possible to do
so----
Mr. Poe. Including destroying us. Excuse me. I am
reclaiming my time. I just have a few minutes. I don't want to
be combative in the sense that we are not dealing in the real
world. I think Mr. Rohrabacher said, irrational optimism is a
good phrase. We are dealing with irrational optimism if we can
trust the Iranian Government. They have done everything they
can to move to a place where they can destroy the United
States.
The human rights abuses against their own people, we don't
spend a lot of time talking about that. You got a group of
people here, they have got families and friends that have been
tortured, disappeared, locked up in prison over the years
because of the regime that wants to destroy the United States.
I commend them for being here. Talk to these people and find
out how their families were tortured in Iran, and continued to
be tortured by this guy, who uses rhetoric, to say he is going
to destroy the United States.
Everywhere in the Middle East you find Iran mischief-
making. We had a hearing in our terrorism subcommittee last
week, we used this map to talk about the fact that the Iranians
are using terrorist groups in Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, Yemen,
West Bank, the Gaza Strip, Bahrain, and Lebanon. Everywhere
there is the turmoil in the Middle East, there is the Iranian
Government doing what they can through the IRGC or terrorist
organizations.
We need to take these people serious when they say that
they want to eliminate Israel and they want to eliminate the
United States. I think we are dealing in, like I said,
irrational optimism if we think anything different. So without
using Trump rhetoric, I think the President is being a realist
about the world's situation. We over here, and the Europeans
especially, who have a history of not dealing with actual
facts, especially when it comes to countries that want to take
over the rest of us. So we do what we can to stop what they are
doing.
Now, maybe it is the deal, maybe it is--I would like a
refund on that $150 billion we gave to them. Maybe it is to
stop the intercontinental ballistic missiles, because that is
not rhetoric, they are actually developing those, in my
opinion, with the North Koreans. And you got these two rogue
states in the world who keep talking about how they want to
destroy the United States.
Maybe we should say, okay, we are going to be prepared
rather than say, well, you really don't mean it. So, I know I
have gone over, Mr. Chairman, I apologize. And thank you,
gentlemen.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Judge. Well, unfortunately,
General Wald had to leave us for a previous commitment, but we
appreciate his time and willingness to continue the
conversation, as he has indicated to us with the members here.
We now go to Congresswoman Karen Bass of California.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, as always,
for holding this hearing. I wanted to get at a couple of things
in my questions. One is the differences between you when--I
think it was two of you said Iran was not complying. And you,
Ambassador, said that Iran was complying, but not with the
resolution. And then Mr. Sullivan said there was compliance.
And I wanted to understand what the differences were. Where you
think Iran is not complying, and what is the difference between
Mr. Albright and Mr. Sullivan.
And then I also wanted to ask a couple of questions related
to the consequences of us walking away, if we did. So maybe Mr.
Albright and Mr. Sullivan can begin.
Mr. Albright. Yeah. One is--in my testimony I gave several
examples of where they have--they have been violating the deal,
and I can go through them----
Ms. Bass. Well, just give me one, and then I would like ask
Mr. Sullivan to respond to that.
Mr. Albright. Accepts numbers of centrifuges that they were
operating. They have exceeded on the heavy water cap.
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Mr. Albright. And I can name 5 or 6 others.
Ms. Bass. That is fine.
Mr. Albright. I want to make another point.
Ms. Bass. Okay. Quickly.
Mr. Albright. Quick clarification. The International Atomic
Energy Agency does not rule on whether Iran is in compliance.
It is a misstatement to say that their reports or the
statements of the Director General are saying that Iran is in--
--
Ms. Bass. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Sullivan, can you please
respond?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes. I think Mr. Albright would agree that
these two examples he just gave, both of which have been cured,
were not material breaches of the agreement. In fact, that is
why, in his public writings, Mr. Albright has tended to rely on
the--it is not in our interest prong of the certification
rather than the compliance prong.
I would also say that what Ambassador Jeffrey said in terms
of the distinction between the U.N. resolution and the deal is
correct. The U.N. resolution bars Iran from testing ballistic
missiles, they are doing so. So it is in fact the case that
Iran is not in compliance with the U.N. Security Council
Resolution, which is why steps by this committee on issues like
ballistic missiles are not only justified but necessary.
Ms. Bass. So being not----
Mr. Albright. And I----
Ms. Bass. No. Being not in compliance with the U.N.
resolution, what is the implication of that for the deal?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I have talked to the Iranians on that,
and they say, well, we didn't agree to that. But it turns out
that the U.N. resolution is under chapter seven, which has the
force of international law. And it is not just the missiles, it
is also arms transfers. In fact, that is stronger language in
the resolution.
What it does is, again, it casts into doubt what Iran is
trying to do in the region. Why it doesn't adhere to those
resolutions, that resolution--and again, it raises questions
about the political environment in which this deal was done.
This is not a country coming in from the cold. This is not a
country giving up its--as the Congressman had said--its
rhetorical threats to Israel--and real threats to Israel and
rhetorical threats to us. This is a problem.
Ms. Bass. Okay. So in terms of consequences of walking away
from the deal, that part is difficult for me to understand,
considering, as my other colleagues have said, this was not a
bilateral agreement. So one of the consequences for snapback
sanctions would be sanctioning Chinese companies for doing
business with Iran. How then would this impact U.S. strategy on
North Korea?
Ambassador Jeffrey. Again, we have different opinions here.
I am not for walking away from the deal.
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Ambassador Jeffrey. I think that the deal is flawed and I
think that there are things we can do. I would--frankly, I
would be in violation, if I could, of the two articles that
call for us to help Iran economically, and I would push for a
new agreement. I would pressure Iran, through financial
constraints on companies and such, and I would raise the
possibility that we are going to do more against the deal
because this deal is part of a larger context.
Walking away from the deal is, as everybody has said, is
not going to get a new and better deal. The Europeans, the
Russian, and the Chinese are neither going to negotiate a new
deal, nor will Iran. And, furthermore, they will not apply the
U.S. sanctions multilaterally against Iranian oil.
Ms. Bass. Mr. Albright, consequences of walking away? I am
assuming that you think we should walk away from the deal.
Mr. Albright. No, I didn't say that.
Ms. Bass. Okay.
Mr. Albright. What I said is, I separate the certification
process. There are some real problems in INARA.
Ms. Bass. Do you think we should walk away from the deal?
Mr. Albright. No. I think we should fix it----
Ms. Bass. How do we fix it unilaterally without all the
other----
Mr. Albright. I think we should wait and see what President
Trump says, and rewrite the conditions of the deal.
Ms. Bass. Okay. In, my last 30 seconds. Could you respond,
Mr. Sullivan, in terms of if the snapback sanctions in China--
what I was saying?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes. Both with respect to China and with
respect to any efforts in negotiating with North Korea, going
to them, and saying, hey, work a deal with us on the nuclear
issue, you can count on us to actually enforce it. That would
be a laughable proposition if we just walked away from the
Iranian nuclear deal.
And by the way, we do not have the bandwidth to take on two
nuclear crises in two different regions of the world at the
same time, so let's not create a second one.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congresswoman Bass. We go to
Adam Kinzinger of Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here today, I appreciate it. I think one of the
things that has probably been mentioned, but it bears
repeating, is there are a lot of dead American soldiers as a
result of Iran's intervention in Iraq. And when I was in Iraq,
I mean, there were operations against these--whether it is the
EFPs or intelligence assets, et cetera. So I think that is
something we should never forget.
The big picture, this deal, I think, whether Iran is
violating the technical letter of the deal, there is no doubt
they are violating the spirit of the deal. And I found it
interesting that Foreign Minister Zarif blamed the U.S. for
instability in the region when in fact it is their support for
Bashar al-Assad with the Russians in brutalizing and in
murdering plenty of innocent people in Syria is one of the most
destabilizing forces in the Middle East in a very long time.
And our inaction there is actually shameful.
Mr. Sullivan, just a couple of questions, respectfully, for
you. Based on your role in the negotiations, why was it so
important for the administration to separate the terrorism
support and the missile development from the JCPOA? And let me
ask you more specifically. In the opening salvo of our
negotiations, was missile development on the table and then was
it taken off?
Mr. Sullivan. We made a strong push to curb Iran's
ballistic missile activity as part of the deal. It was clear to
us that we were not going to get to deal on the fissile
material, the nuclear material, with missiles as a part of it.
And we made a decision that not allowing Iran to get a nuclear
bomb was worth doing, even though we have to pursue the missile
issue separately.
With respect to terrorism, there are two reasons. The first
is that that requires a regional negotiation that goes way
beyond what the P5+1 can do, because that implicates all the
countries of the region.
But secondly, trading off what Iran can do in the region
against particular constrains in its nuclear program is a very
strange way to conduct a negotiation. It is better, from my
perspective, to do an arms control agreement with a country
that is an adversary of ours, like we did with the Soviet
Union, and then retain our capabilities to go after them for
all of their malign activities in the region, including, as you
say, the killing of American troops in Iraq.
Mr. Kinzinger. I think the broader thing is, as one of you
all mentioned just a few minutes ago, let's wait to see what
the President unfolds when he talks about this. There is a lot
of speculation about what the President is going to do. I know
some of the strategy and some of my discussion, I actually
think it is well thought out. But we need a broader engagement
of Iran. I think the nuclear deal is a small part of the bigger
piece of the pie.
I do want to make the point, though, that developing the
delivery mechanisms for nuclear weapons is an extremely, in my
mind, important part of the nuclear weapon question. And so I
think that is something I hope we can address.
Ambassador Jeffrey, we have talked extensively about Syria
in the past, and as we mentioned, Iran continues its support of
Bashar al-Assad and instability. On numerous occasion, Iranian-
backed Shia militia have threatened our special forces that are
working with the moderate Syrian opposition on the ground. And
every time Iran has tried to poke the bear, we have responded
with force, which I commend. However, if we continue to allow
Iran to gain more of a foothold in Syria, there is going to be
no stopping them from achieving their land bridge of control
from Tehran to the Mediterranean.
What do you think a permanent Iranian presence in Syria
would look like? And what actions do we need to do to prevent
them from establishing this presence?
Ambassador Jeffrey. It would look a lot like what we have
at present, Congressman, that is, it would have Iranian
advisers, it would have essentially the Quds Force, foreign
legion of militias from as far afield as Afghanistan,
obviously, Hezbollah present there. It would have weapons
systems such as medium and longer range missiles, focused on
Israel initially, but also on Turkey and Jordan potentially.
And it will sooner or later use those forces to roll up
our, as you said, moderate friends and allies, such as the PYD,
such as the Free Syrian Army element that we are still working
with in the south of the country.
The goal of Iran and Assad is to totally retake all
territory in Syria and put it under Assad's brutal rule. Iran
will support that. Russia has some doubts, but in the end will
support it unless they fear that they will face a military push
back from us, and so far they have seen no sign of that. In
fact, we haven't always pushed back from the Iranians. We
abandoned several sites where we were present on the ground
with our troops and some of our allies close to the Iraqi
border a few weeks ago.
Mr. Kinzinger. All right. Thank you. At risk of going over
my time, I will just yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Bill Keating of Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is
important to note that of the three witnesses we have in front
of us now, selected from both sides of the aisle, all three say
we should not walk away from the plan. I think that is
important to emphasize right now. There are areas of agreement
where we go from here.
There is a political narrative I am concerned about right
now, and that is the fact that if the President fails to
certify the plan, and then Congress doesn't do anything for
that period, then no harm, no foul. Well, evidently, a lot of
people don't agree with that, including the Secretary of
Defense.
I would like to ask, Mr. Sullivan, what is the impact of
that? This idea that there is no harm in this? It sends a
message. It is a political message. You know, I don't think it
is only dangerous, it is foolhardy. I would like your comments
on this.
Mr. Sullivan. I agree with you that it is dangerous. It is
dangerous because it is destabilizing, because it creates
doubt, and it creates uncertainty as we go forward. And it
makes all of our partners think you know what, the United
States isn't actually committed to seeing this thing through.
And from my perspective, working to address issues not dealt
within the deal, whether it is ballistic missiles, or working
on what happens after some of these provisions expire in the
out years is much easier to do with a set of partners who have
confidence in your good faith and your willingness to hold true
to your word, where Iran is the one with the burden of proof,
then where they are sitting there constantly worried that at
any moment you could walk away.
Mr. Keating. And you are playing with fire, if I may,
because in that period there could either be a coincidence of a
major incident in that area, or it could be orchestrated to
occur, and that could affect the way Congress deals with that
60-day period. And that is dangerous as well.
Mr. Sullivan. I mean, there is a huge amount of--a range of
unpredictability here. Let's imagine that we have a
circumstance in which the President declines to certify, it
goes to Congress, Congress doesn't act, the President is
unsatisfied with the state of play, and now all of a sudden he
is thinking, okay, what is my next move? And then that next
move could be a further unraveling, and so forth on down the
line.
Or for that matter, he decides, as I think some suggested,
I am going to unilaterally rewrite the terms of the deal
myself. And I think that would be a way of--a sure way to end
up collapsing the deal over time without the rest of the world
joining us and then reimposing pressure.
So I agree with you that it is--playing with fire is a very
good term.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. And I want to commend the
witnesses, too, because, I think--the ones that remain here, in
their testimony, at least they are offering alternatives. They
are saying, you know, I don't want us to walk away, but there
are things we should do. And that is the precise discussion
that we should be having. And that is my concern.
Now, so many other people have commented, even with some of
the questions, criticizing the situation, even outside the
agreement, which isn't what we are here about today. But, also,
it is a very narrow agreement. But, also, not offering where do
we go from here, which invariably goes two ways when you unpeel
the onion.
It either says, we are going to use our sanctions by
ourselves, unilaterally, trying to influence our European
allies on this that would walk away or there is military
intervention. Those are the two main alternatives that are
left.
I would like Mr. Sullivan to comment on 1996 with the ISA.
What happened when the U.S. was left with that alternative of
saying, we don't want Iran to grow its energy program the way
it is now, so we are adopting these strong financial sanctions
in place. Explain to us what happened then when we tried that
as one of the two major alternatives left?
Mr. Sullivan. So in 1996 when the United States passed the
Iran Sanctions Act, the Europeans--and part of that was about
trying to stop European companies from investing in Iran or
doing deals with Iran. The Europeans passed protective
measures, basically telling their companies, don't worry about
U.S. sanctions, we will have your back, you go ahead. And, in
fact, over the course of both Democratic and Republican
administrations, the ISA was never really effectively enforced
against Europeans companies.
We developed an entirely different strategy over the course
of the past several years with help from this committee, but
that strategy relied on a simple predicate, which was that the
world could trust the United States. That the United States was
going to be the constant source of predictability and strength,
and that Iran was the one that had the spotlight shown on it.
And we have reversed that right now in a way that is making the
Iranians walk around with a smile, and is making Europeans
think, we don't necessarily have to listen to Washington.
Mr. Keating. I want to thank you for mentioning the
committee, because I do think we have played a role in
developing a strategy. And as I have listened to all of our
witnesses here, I would say this. We are looking at one of the
real problems here. It is not in the confines of this deal, it
is the lack of an overall strategy and resolve going forward
that we can work on and be strong on, have resolve on as a
country, working with our allies, that is the problem we have
now. That is what we will work forward in a bipartisan way in
this committee, and that is what is lacking right now with the
administration.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thanks, Mr. Keating. We go to Mr. Lee
Zeldin of New York.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier, Mr. Sullivan,
you said this deal is working as intended. You spoke of how
this deal is providing the IAEA access to Iran's military
sites. I would agree that is an important part of the deal to
provide the IAEA access to Iran's military sites. Is Iran
allowing the IAEA access to its military sites?
Mr. Sullivan. No. So far under the deal, Iran has----
Mr. Zeldin. Your answer is no. Thank you. So there is I--
don't know what exactly you meant by this deal is working as
intended. I think we would both agree that it is important for
the IAEA to have access to Iran's military sites. And I
appreciate you admitting to the fact that the IAEA--that Iran
has not allowed the IAEA access to its military sites. But then
later on in your testimony----
Mr. Sullivan. I am happy to answer that, if you would like.
Mr. Zeldin. You did by saying no. So later on in your
testimony you are then going after President Trump. You are
saying--you actually said, it is President Trump's fault that
IAEA is not allowed to have access to Iran's military sites,
when the IAEA has never had access to Iran's military sites.
But you are here, sir, blaming President Trump for not having
access to something we never had access to.
President Obama said this deal is not built on trust, it is
built on verification. Have you read the verification agreement
between the IAEA and Iran?
Mr. Sullivan. I have not read it. No. I have read the deal,
though, which says very clearly----
Mr. Zeldin. You have not read the verification agreement
between the IAEA and Iran. And when Secretary Kerry was here,
he admitted that he hadn't read the verification agreement
between the IAEA and Iran either. So a deal that is built on--
not on trust, but built on verification, the leaders of our
government never read what the verification agreement was. An
entire deal was built on verification.
What we have learned is that----
Mr. Sullivan. I wasn't----
Mr. Zeldin. My time, not yours. We have learned that Iran
is inspecting some of their own nuclear sites. We have learned
that they are collecting some of their own soil samples. You
said earlier that 98 percent of Iran's enriched uranium was
shipped out of the country, correct?
Mr. Sullivan. I did.
Mr. Zeldin. Where is the uranium?
Mr. Sullivan. The uranium is in Russia.
Mr. Zeldin. How do you know that?
Mr. Sullivan. Because there is a supply and accountancy
procedure to ensure where the uranium is collected in Iran,
moved, and then stored.
Mr. Zeldin. Where in Russia is it?
Mr. Sullivan. Sitting here today, I couldn't tell you.
Mr. Zeldin. Okay. Because in my conversations with the
people who are in charge of knowing that, I don't know where in
our government we have anyone who has any idea where the
uranium is, but I appreciate the fact that you, sir, you know
where the uranium is today.
For my colleagues who opposed the deal very strongly, and
are now indicating that we should uphold it because it is not
perfect. I was here witnessing all of the statements, the
testimony about why my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle were opposing the Iran nuclear deal, and they were not
opposing it because it was not perfect, they were opposing it
because it is deeply flawed.
Mr. Smith earlier asked you, Mr. Sullivan, how much money
went to terrorism, and you responded that the bulk goes to
domestic purposes. I would offer that when you provide $100-
$150 billion worth of sanctions relief, and we ask you a very
specific question, how much goes to terrorism. We are not
asking for where 60 percent or whatever the other number is, a
bulk of gets defined as, going to domestic purposes. The
question is, how much is going to terrorism?
And the question was one that was worthy of an answer. And
standing here and calling for an improved Syria strategy to
combat Iranian aggression. I would offer that if you, sir, and
the Obama administration was that serious about combatting
Iranian aggression, we should not have been providing $150
billion of sanctions relief to the Iranians to be able to
conduct all of their bad activities.
Their bad activities--by the way, this is a deal we are
talking about, we never even asked for a signature. Put that
aside. When 10 of our Navy sailors are held hostage, they are
embarrassed. When they are released, Secretary Kerry says,
thank you. And he says, it is because of the Iran deal that
this went so smoothly.
With Iran financing terror, over-throwing foreign
governments, illegally test-firing intercontinental ballistic
missiles, chanting, death to America, calling Israel the little
Satan, America the great Satan. I would say that it was the
wrong answer for us to be propping up the wrong regime with a
jackpot of sanctions relief, and that we should be doing our
part as Congress and as the United States, as the leaders of
the free world, leading and fixing this, and turning this into
a reasonable deal, not one that is very one-sided, and one
where we got ridiculously played at the table. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Okay. David Cicilline of Rhode Island is
next.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to give
Mr. Sullivan an opportunity to answer the question he wasn't
permitted to answer to Mr. Zeldin on the military site.
Mr. Sullivan. Right. So the deal expressly states that the
IAEA, if they have a basis to believe that there is illicit
nuclear activity occurring at any military--any site in Iran,
including any military site in Iran, that they can get access
and that Iran cannot stop them. That if the United States and
the Europeans and the IAEA come forward and decide, we need
access to this site, Iran can't say no.
Now, in the last 2 years, the United States actually hasn't
gone to the IAEA and presented a particular military site, and
said, I want to get access to that. But what Nikki Haley did
was go and generally have a conversation with the IAEA about
how to do this. I believe that American policy and American
strategy could yield access to Iran's military sites under this
deal. And I have no reason to believe, based on what has
happened in the last 2 years, that that is not the case.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Mr. Sullivan you also say in your
written testimony, that because the administration has spent so
much time focused on the--will he or wouldn't we certify
debate--and I will add something in this sort of reality TV
show sort of way, that it has resulted in the administration
and key components of the intelligence and security communities
taking their eye off the ball on the larger questions, or the
broader Iranian threat.
And so I would really like you to focus on that point. We
can all sit here and posture about what we think would be a
better provision, and if it were just up to us as individual
Member of Congress, I would put this provision or that, but
that is not what an international agreement with five or six
other countries produces.
So I think it is really fruitful to think, what should we
be doing going forward to respond in a serious way to Iranian
aggression in the region. Secretary Kerry, in fact, when he
testified before this committee said, one of the advantages of
this agreement is we can put an end to the nuclear threat of
Iran so that we will be in a stronger position to push back
aggressively in a variety of other contexts.
What specifically can we or should this administration be
doing with respect to that? And, secondly, is it not the case
that this agreement permanently forecloses Iran from having a
nuclear weapon, by its own terms?
Mr. Sullivan. There is a permanent ban on Iran acquiring a
nuclear weapon. In the deal, there is a permanent ban on
weapons-related nuclear activity in the deal. And there is a
permanent provision for an inspections regime to monitor that
in the deal. There are expiring nuclear restraints. Those are
things we can work to deal with, but we should work the deal
with them by committing to the deal and moving forward with our
allies.
On the issue of the region more generally. I think Syria,
for me, looms largest because it looms largest in the Iranian
strategic calculus, and because it is a moral and humanitarian
catastrophe to boot. And what we have seen over the course of
the past several months is effective action against ISIS
building on the Obama administration strategy, but no
meaningful thought given to what comes next. And as a result,
as Ambassador Jeffrey and others on this panel have made clear,
the Iranians are on the march in Syria today to a much more
significant degree than they even were 1 year ago.
And Israeli concern about that is reaching new heights, to
the point where Israeli leaders are publicly warning about how
this threat is metastasizing. So I think that we need to be
sitting with our partners across the region, including Israel,
as well as our European allies and others, and thinking about a
broad multi-dimensional strategy that includes everything from
further economic pressure to how we are postured in the region,
to intelligence led operations, interdictions of weapon
shipments, on down to line.
And I would simply submit that having put a lid on Iran's
nuclear program so that today we do not have to worry about
them racing for a bomb because of this deal, we do have the
opportunity to focus on this, and that is where we should turn
our focus.
Mr. Cicilline. And to follow-up. And do all of that work,
the word of United States, our credibility in terms of honoring
international agreements and continuing relationship with our
allies in the region will be key to that. And so I think the
point you made earlier is an important one.
Mr. Albright, you said that there is legislation that could
be imposed unilaterally by the United States that would fix the
deal, as you suggested. I would like to know what you think
Congress could do unilaterally to an international agreement
that would fix the deal?
Mr. Albright. Well, let me answer that in a different way.
I think you have a problem with INARA. INARA does not certify
compliance with this deal.
Mr. Cicilline. With all due respect, sir, I only have a
limited time. You made the statement in this hearing that
Congress could unilaterally take an action to fix the deal. I
am asking you--you are testifying before this hearing. What in
fact could Congress do unilaterally that would fix
international agreement?
Mr. Albright. The same way it created INARA, it can fix
this deal. And I think that the purpose of that is to
straighten out one fundamental problem that is tough for this
administration, is that--the INARA makes it look like President
Trump is certifying compliance with this deal. INARA doesn't
actually do that. But it is putting it in a position to defend
an intractable position. And that Congress needs to fix the 90-
day certification requirement.
It needs to define what a material breach is. We use
violation because we feel any--no violation is too small to
correct. The language of material breach and noncompliance
defined in INARA is unworkable. I would argue, actually, that
the excess centrifuge numbers----
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Albright, do you think that the Congress
of the United States has the ability to unilaterally change the
terms or meaning of terms in an international agreement? You
don't need to answer that question. The answer is, of course
not.
Mr. Albright. First of all, this is not an international
agreement. The nuclear deal was never signed. It is more of--
you can't call that an international agreement, first of all.
The other thing is, if you look at what----
Mr. Cicilline. What would you call it?
Mr. Albright. On the conventional arms, and on the
ballistic missiles, the Congress is actually redefining U.S.
policy on the bans, the 5-year and the 8-year ban in 2031. They
are setting up a situation where, if the ban ends, let's take
the conventional arms transfer restrictions end at 5 years in
the U.N. Security Council Resolution, a country A and goes and
sells heavy armaments to Iran, they will be sanctioned.
So the United States is already under Congressional
leadership rewriting the bans on conventional and ballistic
missiles.
Chairman Royce. Time is expiring. I think we had better go
to Ann Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing.
As North Korea captures the world's attention, we must, I
would make the point here, remain vigilant in responding to
Iranian aggression throughout the Middle East. General Wald,
who, I am sorry, has left, I know that he wrote that the Iran
deal positioned Iran on a trajectory to become possibly more
challenging than North Korea. Ambassador Jeffrey put it well in
his written statement: The U.S. must set clear final goals for
our Iran policy and make those evident and persuasive to all
those at home and abroad.
Ambassador Jeffrey, there may be as many as 60,000 Iranian-
backed troops in Syria. It is no secret that the IRGC Quds
Force and affiliated militias are taking over areas from ISIS
on behalf of the Assad regime. Such activities are not in the
interests of the United States of America.
How should U.S. policy change to counter the growing role
of Iranian-backed forces that target Syrian civilians,
undermine regional stability, and threaten U.S. security
interests?
Ambassador Jeffrey. Well, first of all, Congresswoman, we
have a U.N. Security Council resolution, 2254, and a process to
deal with the internal situation in Syria, because when that
was put together by the last administration, I think 2012,
there was an understanding by everyone, including even Russia
and Iran, which are a part of this process, that that internal
situation is a concern for people in the region and for the
international community, not just for Mr. Assad and the people
of Syria.
So we need to build on that and restore the centrality of
that process, and it needs to be backed with an American
presence in Syria. The problem is, under the Authorization for
the Use of Military Force that has to be to be fighting
terrorists.
But we are never going to completely wipe out ISIS and al-
Qaeda there. And there is a good argument to be made to keep
limited forces to protect those Syrian opposition in the north
and in the south while we try to sort this thing out
politically. That is pushback against Iran.
Mrs. Wagner. General Wald also raised an important military
recommendation, and I would offer this question to anyone who
would like to speak on his behalf or about it.
Would you suggest forward deploying our Aegis-equipped
missile defense fleet to our existing bases in Gulf countries?
And how can the U.S. better coordinate with Israel and the Gulf
countries to establish a comprehensive missile defense system?
Ambassador.
Ambassador Jeffrey. We have four Aegis ships already in the
Mediterranean, one of which is on station all of the time off
of Israel. We have THAAD systems and our allies have THAAD
systems and Patriots and phased array radars in the Gulf and in
Israel. There is a phased array radar in Turkey, and there are
SM-3 missiles designed to intercept Iranian rockets in Romania
and in Poland. So there is already a very robust----
Mrs. Wagner. You feel confident in our coordination with
Israel and our others?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I think on that particular matter, at
this point, yes. But I yield to General Wald's military advice.
Mr. Sullivan. I would just add one point, which is I think
this is one of those areas, and maybe there aren't as many as
there used to be, where there is actually real bipartisan
cooperation on the ballistic missile issue and missile defense
generally in the region. I think the Obama administration and
the Trump administration have taken very similar lines on this,
one building on the last.
It is a constantly evolving threat, so our posture and our
cooperation with our partners has to constantly evolve. But I
actually think we are on a pretty decent track on this issue.
Mrs. Wagner. Ambassador Jeffrey, you wrote that U.S.
military and diplomatic resources should be shifted away from
ISIS and toward Iran. Paying more attention to Iran
necessitates paying more attention to Iran's activities in Iraq
and Syria.
Why do you think the administration hasn't designated proxy
forces backed by Iran and Hezbollah as terrorist organizations?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I think one reason is force protection.
It fears that, particularly in Iraq but also in Syria, that the
Quds Force, as I mentioned in my testimony, will respond, and
they will respond. It is just that we shouldn't be in the
Middle East if we are worried about people shooting at us. We
have had a lot of experience with Iran shooting at us, and the
answer to that is to shoot back.
But I think that is part of it. The other thing is there
really is almost an obsession with the ISIS fight. When the
Kurds declared their independence, the statement out of the
U.S. was they should stop doing that because this interferes
with the fight against ISIS. That fight is almost over right
now.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. I am out of time.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go to Dr. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sullivan, you were integral in negotiating the Iran
nuclear deal. Is that correct?
Mr. Sullivan. Part of. I always hate to say ``integral.''
Mr. Bera. Part of the team.
Mr. Sullivan. I was part of team. I was part of the team
that began the negotiations that arrived at the interim deal
and then that worked toward the final agreement. Yes, I am a
proud member of that team.
Mr. Bera. Great. You would state that the ultimate goal of
the deal was to reduce the Iran nuclear threat?
Mr. Sullivan. Correct.
Mr. Bera. Would you say that the deal has reduced the
nuclear threat given what was prior to the deal?
Mr. Sullivan. I think there is no doubt about that. And,
indeed, if you ask the chief of staff of the Israeli Defense
Forces, he would say that the nuclear issue has gone down the
list of strategic threats to Israel today compared to where it
was before the deal.
Mr. Bera. Ambassador Jeffrey, would you agree with that,
just on the nuclear issue?
Ambassador Jeffrey. For a temporary period of time. And
there I would disagree with Mr. Sullivan. For a 10-year period,
yes. But no less an authority than Barack Obama said after 10
years, in off-the-cuff comments, they are going to be on their
way to, if they want to, a nuclear capability.
Mr. Bera. Okay. But at today's point in time, the threat is
lower. At the time the deal was being negotiated, Mr. Sullivan,
what would, in open source estimates, what would breakout
capacity be? How close was Iran to breakout capacity?
Mr. Sullivan. The time for Iran to acquire one weapon's
worth of weapons grade uranium before the deal was done was a
matter of weeks, at the most 2 to 3 months, but probably a
matter of weeks, and shrinking.
Mr. Bera. So would walking away from this deal, do you
think that would reduce or increase the nuclear threat to Iran?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, let's say if we walked away from the
deal--right now we have put Iran in a position where we have
extended that breakout time out beyond a year. If we walked
away from the deal and they began reinstalling the centrifuges
that have been dismantled, working again to build that
plutonium reactor that we have disabled and neutralized, that
over the course of the next couple of years they would be in a
position incredibly rapidly to move to a nuclear capability.
And our capacity to stop them from doing so by reimposing
the sanctions that were on before, if we are the ones who walk
away from the deal, would be very limited, because the rest of
the international community would say: ``What the heck are we
coming along with you for on sanctions? The whole point of
doing this was to get the very deal you just walked away
from.''
Mr. Bera. And in your assessment, with our hands full
currently on the Korean Peninsula, it would be a pretty unwise
time diplomatically to try to engage with two nuclear threats,
correct?
Mr. Sullivan. You know, what is interesting about what
North Korea presents as an example today is what happens when
you don't have good choices, when you don't have an opportunity
to produce the kind of deal that we did with respect to Iran.
And so today we are faced with a rapidly accelerating North
Korean capability and a completely unstable situation.
We walk away from the deal, we produce a very similar
dynamic in the Middle East, and all of a sudden you are dealing
a nuclear crisis in the heart of East Asia and a nuclear crisis
in the heart of the Middle East, both of which the United
States needs to manage.
The crisis in North Korea is one that has been generated by
Kim Jong-un. If we walk away from this deal, we would be
largely responsible for the creation of that nuclear crisis
today in the heart of the Middle East.
Mr. Bera. And given our strategy on the Korean Peninsula is
one of increasing pressure, increasing isolation, in the hopes
of getting to engagement and reducing tensions with North
Korea, would decertifying this deal make it easier to get a
North Korean agreement or would it reduce our ability to find a
diplomatic solution to the Korean Peninsula?
Mr. Sullivan. I think any fair reading would say it would
make it harder for us to get a deal in the North Korean
context. How much harder is a question that we can debate. But
the idea that the Chinese would say, ``Oh, you know what? The
fact that you are decertifying this deal and potentially
walking away from it, that makes us more confident that we
should join you in something we haven't wanted to do, which is
sanctioning North Korea, because we trust that you are going to
end up agreeing to something in North Korea,'' the same thing
goes for the North Koreans themselves.
So I think the notion that if the United States walks away
from the Iran deal that it would be easier to get a deal with
North Korea is not based on either logic or fact.
Mr. Bera. I would agree with that.
Mr. Albright. Can I add something real quick? I don't think
it will affect our North Korea deal at all if President Trump
decertifies.
Mr. Bera. I think it will affect the reliability of our
word.
Mr. Albright. And people shouldn't conflate decertification
with walking away from the deal. They are two different things.
And I think Ambassador Haley laid out in a speech several weeks
ago that there are various pillars that need to be addressed
and considered. And I think thinking that decertification would
affect the North Korea deal, I think, is lunacy.
Mr. Bera. But on the issue of reducing the nuclear threat,
the deal has accomplished that. Now, we can speculate where we
are going to be 10 years from now.
The concern here is we have given the administration the
tools to address what we are really concerned about, the
ballistic missile issue, cracking down on Hezbollah. We,
through this committee, have given the administration some
tools that they are not currently using. I would ask the
administration to use those tools.
Mr. Albright. And I would add too, there is a lot of
agreement on this panel, at least I hear. The sunsets are a
real problem. I hear it in the committee. They are a real
problem. What I am saying, and I think there is support in the
Trump administration, is that we can't wait to deal with those
sunsets when Iran is a strong, well-armed, powerful regional
force. We need to deal with it now.
Chairman Royce. We need to go to Tom Garrett right now from
Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much.
Mr. Garrett. Those who do not know history are condemned to
repeat it, and this has all played out before almost
analogously. I will start with a little bit of a soliloquy,
because I am so disgusted.
The talk of, number one, the United States credibility on
the global stage as it relates to one with whom an entity can
engage in deals, I think that the Iranian credibility is
certainly far more in question than the United States
credibility insofar as the stability of our Nation and its
reliability internationally is well demonstrated over
centuries, whereas this regime has a record that hasn't been
touched in this room but spoken to by the people who sit here.
In 1979 and 1982 and 1996 and 2009 in the Green Revolution,
people stood up against this regime, and on most occasions, the
United States sat back and did nothing while they were murdered
by the Quds Forces, who are their very cousins and brothers and
sisters, in the streets in Iran, and we did nothing.
And with all due respect, Mr. Sullivan, as Daniel Patrick
Moynihan once said: You are entitled to your own opinions, but
you are not entitled to your own facts. Don't talk about how
there is bipartisan agreement on the antiballistic missile
defenses in Europe, and particularly Poland, when the previous
administration's first action as it relates to foreign policy
was to withdraw from a commitment to defend Europe and the
Poles from the very Iranian missiles that we contemplate today.
That happened.
Now, let's go back in history. I heard Mr. Sullivan state,
Mr. Chairman, that if the IAEA has indications that there are
violations, that they have a right to inspect. Really?
Worcester v. Georgia. When Andrew Jackson was President, he
anecdotally is credited with saying that Justice Marshall has
made his ruling, let's see him enforce it. The IAEA and what
army will go in and verify when there have been violations?
You know where the uranium is? That is news, that is
newsworthy, because nobody else does. And ironically, if we
credit the uranium with being in Russia, it would be an
interesting departure from the individuals who don't trust
Russia on anything except, apparently, where the uranium
fissile material might be. And I guess that is convenient.
But as it results to presuming to operate in a world where
individuals keep their word, understand that the current regime
of Iran has burned the effigy of every single President of the
United States since Carter and literally depicted a lynching of
our first African-American President in 2015 while this deal
was being finalized. And they reference the Great Satan, and
they reference the Little Satan, and they chant, ``Death to
America,'' and they talk about the death to the devil's
triangle, the United States, the U.K., and Israel.
And if that is not bad enough, if we adjust for population,
the murder of Iranian citizens by the current regime would be
tantamount and comparable to the deaths experienced by the
United States during the entire Second World War.
So I am very curious, in fact, I am delighted to have
someone here who claims credit for having negotiated the JCPOA,
I am sorry--how it is that we talk about the international
community not being willing to agree to harsher sanctions as it
relates to ballistic missile development when U.N. Security
Council Resolution 1929 of 2010 read, and I quote, ``Iran shall
not undertake activity related to ballistic missiles''--I think
at least Mr. Sullivan went to a pretty prestigious law school--
and U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231 of 2015, which
mirrors the JCPOA, reads, ``Iran is called upon not to
undertake activity as it relates to the development of
ballistic missiles.''
It strikes me that if the U.N. Security Council agreed on
Resolution 1929, which said, ``shall not,'' that we have
evidence the international community will agree to stronger
sanctions, which will prohibit the delivery systems of nuclear
weapons from being developed by the Iranians, and it has
already been done, and the JCPOA quite literally, in moving
from ``shall not undertake'' to ``is called upon not to
undertake,'' created more latitude.
Next, everyone that knows about this issue knows that the
long pole in the Iranian tent is the IRGC, that the IRGC
controls the bulk of the black economy in Iran, probably over
90 percent, and, in fact, funnels a vast, vast quantity of the
real economy in Iran through its own coffers.
And so I heard someone state that the ISA was never fully
enforced. And I have created a paradigm, because I am not that
smart, but this seems to make sense to me, that I would wager
that if we said to our allies in particular--and I will call
out some European nations if anybody wants to ask for
specificity--that they can choose between doing business with
Iran, and specifically the IRGC, or us, and we put some teeth
in the sanctions, that we can watch this monstrous, murderous
regime, which has repeatedly called for the destruction of
everyone in entire nations, whither on a vine, and the millions
of Iranians who have been displaced against their will and the
hundreds of thousands who have been murdered might then be
justified, and then we can know that there is hope for peace
and no nuclear exchange with a radical, defiant Iranian regime.
I apologize for running over.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Garrett.
We now go to Robin Kelly of Illinois.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I, too, agree walking away from the JCPOA would weaken the
United States position to increase pressure in the future while
endangering any future nonproliferation agreements that the
U.S. might seek to make.
As you know, this committee recently passed legislation
that cracked down on Iran's nefarious actions. Mr. Sullivan,
how should the U.S. continue to put pressure on Iran while
adhering to the JCPOA? And is there a red line for Iran where
certain sanctions would push them out of the agreement?
Mr. Sullivan. Just on the second point, on the question of
red line, to respond to what Mr. Garrett said, the IAEA and
what army, the fact is that if Iran violates the access
provisions of the JCPOA, that would be a violation that would
trigger the reimposition of sanctions, and the United States
would have the capacity then to marshal the international
community, because it would be Iran who was violating the deal,
not the United States.
So from my perspective, we retain tools under this
agreement to make sure that Iran stays in compliance. And if
they violate those terms, I will be the first one to say the
United States should snap back sanctions, and the deal creates
the capability for the United States to effectively do that. It
maintains the sanctions architecture.
With respect to how we go about dealing with Iran in the
region, I really do believe this needs to be a whole-of-
government approach. It needs to be multidimensional. It needs
every aspect of our power, our economic power, military power,
intelligence, et cetera, working with allies and partners in
the region, to put increasing pressure on Iran and to raise the
cost for their destabilizing behavior and their sponsorship of
terrorism in the region.
It also means that we need to invest in the defensive
capabilities of our allies and partners, as the previous
discussion about ballistic missile defense indicated. I have a
different view on the issue of Poland, but my answer to Mrs.
Wagner earlier was about ballistic missile defense in the
Middle East, where I actually do believe that there has been
strong bipartisan cooperation, and we should continue that.
So that is just some of what I think the United States
should be working on as part of a multidimensional,
multilateral strategy to push back against Iranian aggression
in the region.
Thank you.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Ambassador Jeffrey, in your testimony you talked about
communicating with Iran. Do you believe the President's tweets
and treating certification like a reality TV show cliffhanger
are productive ways to communicate? Do you think this is
helping?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I think that, when I talk about
communicating with Iran, I am talking mainly about doing it
quietly, as we did between Ambassador Crocker and the Iranians
during the Bush administration and Baghdad.
The tweets are unique to President Trump. I think that the
world recognizes that he does it. I don't think they are a
major problem. I don't think they are a major plus. I think
they are just there. But they are not a substitute for
diplomatic communication. I will answer your question that way.
Ms. Kelly. Very diplomatically. Do either of the two
witnesses----
Mr. Albright. If I could go back to another question you
asked. I think the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency is asking for guidance because he does not feel
he has the resources or the authorities to go and implement
Section T, which would involve going to military sites. It is
different than saying we have a suspicion of going and we need
to go. This has to do with more routine verification of bans on
nuclear weapons development.
And so I would say there is already a big problem in
implementing the JCPOA inspection architecture, and the United
States is going to be called upon to deal with this. Russia has
already made its opinion clear. It said the IAEA cannot go to
military sites, should not go to military sites. So we already
have a problem. And it is beyond what was envisioned in the
language of the JCPOA.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Sullivan. Just to respond to that. First of all, we
anticipated the possibility that maybe Russia would say, ``Hey,
you know, we are not that interested in having the United
States get into Iranian nuclear sites.'' They don't get a veto
over that. In fact, if the Europeans and the Americans and the
IAEA agree that access needs to be granted, the Russians can't
stop it, nor can the Iranians. That is point one.
Point two is, the fact that the IAEA Director General is
seeking guidance from the United States and from the other
members of the P5+1 on this issue is not in and of itself a
problem.
What is a problem is if the United States, rather than
bringing our partners together and saying, ``Let's work this
out and enforce the deal, including through military sites,''
says, ``We don't really like this deal, this deal stinks, you
know, screw it.'' That is just going to make it much harder to
actually effectively enforce this critical provision. And I
agree with Mr. Albright that access to military sites is an
important part of the long-term enforcement of the JCPOA.
Mr. Albright. But the structure of the JCPOA puts an unfair
burden on the IAEA. If they demand to go to military sites and
they invoke this clause, then it brings down the entire deal.
And so I think that it is incumbent upon the P5+1, and I
would say the United States is leading that, to straighten out
this issue and actually strengthen the deal's conditions on
access to military sites. But it isn't put on the IAEA to have
to ask the question: If we ask to go, do we have to--are we
really risking bringing down the entire deal?
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. My time is way up.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Thank you, Congresswoman Kelly.
We now go to Mr. Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, panel, for being here. I appreciate you giving
us great information on this.
The era of strategic patience as far as the diplomatic and
negotiating policy or foreign diplomacy I think was a mistake
of the last administration. It led us to pulling out of support
of Poland with a missile defense system, led to the Russia
unnamed army to invade Ukraine, even though we were supposed to
protect them, and allowed them to annex Crimea. It allowed
China's aggressive encroachment to the South China Sea as we
stood by with strategic patience hoping it would go away.
I am a veterinarian by trade, and when you have benign
neglect, that is strategic impatience--or patience. Benign
neglect is when you look at something knowing it will probably
get better on its own. These things aren't going to get better
on their own, so we can't have strategic patience.
My question to you, Ambassador Jeffrey, is the JCPOA, as
Mr. Sullivan stated, says that the IAEA can inspect any time,
anyplace. Does that happen?
Ambassador Jeffrey. As we have discussed at some length,
not military sites.
Mr. Yoho. Right. But the military site Parchin in
particular said--it gave Iran the ability to pick up the soil
and have it tested. Is that correct? Is that the way I
understood that?
Ambassador Jeffrey. On the one IAEA intervention on
inspection in Parchin, that was what the IAEA negotiated with
the Iranians.
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Ambassador Jeffrey. The IAEA claims that they were
monitoring that with cameras and all of that. But, of course,
it raises a really--it looks strange, let's face it.
Mr. Yoho. It would be analogous to a drug addict bringing
in a urine sample that he collected himself in private and
saying, ``Here is my sample.''
Ambassador Jeffrey. It is not quite that bad. I will stand
with it was a strange formulation.
Mr. Yoho. It is a stretch.
Mr. Albright, is the overproduction of heavy water allowed
under the JCPOA?
Mr. Albright. There is a cap of 130 tons.
Mr. Yoho. And they have bypassed that twice.
Mr. Albright. Yeah. And there is also--Iran has exploited
a--what I guess you would call a loophole, that they have been
able to take overage of heavy water and deposit it under their
control overseas. And so that is another problem in the deal,
is that Iran has exploited loopholes.
Mr. Yoho. So we should talk to somebody that negotiated
that deal, how that loophole got here.
Mr. Sullivan, do you want to explain how that happened?
Mr. Sullivan. How what happened?
Mr. Yoho. That there was a loophole that allowed Iran to
overproduce heavy water and that they could store it and
monitor it on their own. Is that what, Mr. Albright----
Mr. Sullivan. It is under accountancy and monitoring by the
IAEA, meaning that they do not have the----
Mr. Yoho. In Russia, right?
Mr. Sullivan. I am not sure where the heavy water is
stored.
Mr. Albright. In Oman.
Mr. Yoho. But they have overdone that twice, and that is in
disagreement with the JCPOA. Is that?
Mr. Albright. I think if you had a strict interpretation
terms of it, I think yes.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Has Iran built and operated more advanced
centrifuges than allowed? And has it misused the quality
assurance limitations to conduct banned mechanical testing of
advanced centrifuges?
Mr. Albright. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. All right. And that is in violation of the JCPOA,
right?
Mr. Albright. Yes.
Mr. Yoho. All right. And then, you know, I can remember the
past administration, and John Kerry sitting right here, that no
deal would be better than a bad deal. And they are already in
violation of so many things on this. This is a bad deal. And we
are talking about if we don't stand up to this.
You know, we are used to a strategic patience from the last
administration. What we have now is a Commander in Chief that
says what he means, and he is going to stand up. And the world
isn't used to this, the world community. But we have to have
somebody willing to do that, because this will strengthen our
negotiation with North Korea.
Ambassador Jeffrey, do you think so?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I don't think we have a negotiation
with North Korea. I think we have a military confrontation with
North Korea. I think these two issues are totally separate. I
don't think----
Mr. Yoho. I agree. But I hope we don't have a--you know,
our goal is not to have a conflict. But if we come to the table
weak and we don't show resolve, we have a weakened hand, and we
won't get anywhere in negotiations.
Ambassador Jeffrey. Very quickly, because I have wanted to
say this at several points. Walking out of an agreement is a
perfectly legitimate diplomatic activity.
Mr. Yoho. I agree.
Ambassador Jeffrey. It doesn't mean that we are a bad
person or that nobody trusts us anymore.
Violating an agreement that you claim you are adhering to
is very different. We walked away from the ABM Treaty and
international relations survived.
I think that North Korea will judge us on the basis of how
strong we are deterring Iran across the board, period.
Mr. Yoho. And you got out exactly what I wanted to hear.
Thank you all for your time.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Yoho.
We go now to Mr. Brad Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
having this meeting.
To the witnesses, thank you for sharing your perspectives,
but also the endurance of staying here for all this. I greatly
appreciate it.
Let me echo the earlier remarks of the chairman and ranking
member in saying that while I opposed the JCPOA, now that it is
in place I believe we have to aggressively and rigorously
enforce it.
But as we enforce it, it is vital that we acknowledge that
the JCPOA, like any agreement, has inherent risk, but that this
deal in particular has serious shortcomings and gaps, including
but not limited to the sunset provision.
The urgent responsibility of our government, in conjunction
with our European partners and our regional allies, is to
develop the comprehensive strategies and commit the necessary
resources to work to close the gaps and reduce the risk. I
believe we must clearly and fully articulate as a matter of
national policy that the United States will never allow Iran to
have a nuclear weapon and that we will aggressively work to
confront Iran's malign activities in the region and around the
world.
These are clearly topics for a much longer exchange than we
have time for with the 5 minutes today. I only have a few
minutes, so let me turn to a couple of very focused questions.
First, in the context of the JCPOA, do you believe Iran has
changed its ambitions to have a nuclear weapon, Ambassador
Jeffrey?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I believe it has always had that option
open. They were very close to a weaponization program until
they stopped it in 2003. They are ready to turn that on again
when they deem it necessary or useful.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Albright.
Mr. Albright. I think they are, under the current
conditions, extended. Yes, I think they will seek nuclear
weapons.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. Sullivan. I think the way that Ambassador Jeffrey put
it is right. They have wanted to maintain the capability. They
still want to maintain the capability. And part of what a
diplomatic solution has to do is to deny them the opportunity
to exercise it.
Mr. Schneider. We will go the other way. Has Iran moderated
its regional goals in the context of the JCPOA?
Mr. Sullivan. No, it has not, although I would like to say
something that I have wanted to say for much of the hearing.
Iran was aggressive before the JCPOA. You guys held
multiple hearings on that before 2015. It was aggressive during
the negotiation of the JCPOA, and it remains aggressive. I do
not believe that money has been the major limiting factor to
Iran's aggression, it has been opportunity, and they see more
opportunity in the region now than they did before.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Albright.
Mr. Albright. No, I don't think their behavior has
moderated.
Mr. Schneider. Ambassador Jeffrey.
Ambassador Jeffrey. I think it has gotten worse. I can't do
a cause-and-effect specifically with the agreement, but it has
definitely gotten worse. They feel more liberated to do what
they want.
Mr. Schneider. Okay. So the broad question is, will the
United States withdrawing from the JCPOA at this time help or
hurt our goals of stopping Iran from getting a nuclear weapon
and thwarting Iran's malign designs and regional goals?
Mr. Albright. I think it is an interesting and important
question, and certainly the administration has been wrestling
with this, that let's say you just abrogate the deal. I
personally believe that is not the best way forward. But there
is an argument for those who say abrogate the deal that you can
actually deal with this situation again. You can repair
relations with the Europeans after you have reimposed all the
nuclear sanctions and put them in a dilemma: Do you want to do
business with Iran or the United States? And then you would
have a free hand to do whatever you want with Iran.
So I think there is an argument to abrogate. I personally
don't want to go down that path, but I think it is something
the administration has certainly been considering.
Mr. Schneider. Ambassador.
Ambassador Jeffrey. Very quickly. I agree with Mr.
Albright. We are using imprecise terms both in the
certification and in walking out of the agreement. You can walk
out of the agreement and, frankly, I think the Iranians and the
Europeans and Russia and China would continue with it.
If you walk out of the agreement, try to impose the NDAA
oil import sanctions on the rest of the world against Iran, or
you use the snapback provision and bring back all the U.N.
resolutions, then Iran would move toward that 3 or 4 weeks away
from a nuclear device very quickly, and that is the risk.
Mr. Schneider. Okay. Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. Sullivan. I think it would, as I have said over the
course of this hearing, put us in a materially worse position
with respect to the Iranian nuclear capability.
And I would just reinforce that anyone who casually says we
can just tell the Europeans and the Chinese and the rest of the
global economy, ``Either trade with us or trade with Iran,''
they should read the top sanctions official Adam Szubin's piece
in The Washington Post, because, as he says in that piece,
nobody who is making that argument has sat in his seat to build
and execute these sanctions regimes. And I think it is not
nearly as simple as that. And I don't think the sanctions
architecture would come back.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. I am out of time.
Let me leave one last question for the record to follow up
in writing. Part of the JCPOA is this additional protocol under
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. How important is the
additional protocol to making sure Iran doesn't get a nuclear
weapon during the terms of the agreement and afterwards? And
would withdrawing from the agreement put the additional
protocol at risk? And I will leave that for the record.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go now to Mr. Scott Perry of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Perry. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, what was Iran's original claim regarding their
nuclear ambitions? Was their original claim they wanted to have
a nuclear weapons program or it was for domestic emergency
production and domestic purposes, medicine, et cetera?
Mr. Sullivan. They have consistently claimed that they want
this for peaceful purposes, and we believe that that is a false
claim.
Mr. Perry. Right. Right. So does anybody on the panel
disagree with that?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I have heard senior Iranian officials
informally say: Okay, we did certain studies on weaponization,
but it wasn't a weaponization program, so they stopped at that
level. But, I mean, they know we have them dead to rights on
the weaponization information.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Albright, you might as well.
Mr. Albright. They have always claimed it is a civil non-
nuclear weapons program.
Mr. Perry. Right. Right. So, I mean, the point to the whole
exercise of the question is that Iran, at least for the rest of
us in the world, they are known liars. They are liars. They lie
about things. They are liars, cheaters, and stealers. And if
you don't believe me, just ask all these folks back here.
I am sure, you know, Stalin told the Poles that they didn't
kill the Poles in the Katyn Forest massacre either. And the
Poles couldn't prove it, but it doesn't mean it didn't happen,
right? These folks know what we are dealing with. All of us
know what we are dealing with.
Let me ask you this. How many Iranian individuals have been
sanctioned by our European partners regarding their forays or
breach of U.N. resolutions regarding ballistic missiles? How
many individuals have our European allies sanctioned for those
breaches? Any?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I know of none. The Europeans did sign
a joint statement with us stating that the missile activity was
not essentially in compliance.
Mr. Perry. But no sanctions, right, no punishment? I mean--
--
Mr. Albright. You are exactly right.
Mr. Perry. Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. Sullivan. I am not aware of it, but I am also not read
into the strategy to get them to. And part of my argument is
that should be our focus, not the certification.
Mr. Perry. Yeah, the strategy. Let me ask you this. How
many American members are on the IAEA inspection team in Iran
inspecting these sites?
Mr. Albright. None.
Mr. Perry. Zero, right? Well, I have spent some time in the
military. And to me, you don't look for military nuclear
weapons down at the power plant. That is probably not where
they are going to be. They are going to be on the military
sites. But, unfortunately, we can't inspect the military sites.
Now, I don't know if it was our genius or Iran's genius,
but for someone who says that it is a peaceful program dealing
with medicine and power and so on and so forth, but really, in
reality, it is a military program, the last place you are going
to put them is where we are going to find them.
And with all due respect, Mr. Sullivan, I appreciate your
good charity and your goodwill to these other people and these
other nations. But the reality is that Iran wants to be a
nuclear power, just like North Korea wanted to be a nuclear
power. And they are going to tell us whatever they want to tell
us, whatever we are going to believe, whatever the rest of the
world is going to believe as long as they get there.
And it strikes me as curious if not just downright scary
that we seem to be willing to trade security now at some
level--or stability now at some level--by saying, well, they
are not going to have it for 10 or 15 years. Everybody in this
room knows what is going to happen in 10 or 15 years.
And it also strikes me that maybe that plays right into
Iran's bigger strategy while they are in Yemen, while they are
in Syrian, while they are in Lebanon, while they are supporting
Hezbollah, to coalesce all that territory and all that power so
that at that time they will be able to spend more money on
their nuclear weapons.
Who develops a ballistic missile? Are they going to drop
leaflets on the United States with that? Everybody knows where
this is headed. Everybody knows. And for, I don't know, 30
years, since the Shah was deposed and they took our Americans
hostage, we have been playing this game of, ``Well, we are
going to do this, and we hope they will do that. And we will
sign this agreement. We will have this negotiation.''
Let me ask you this, Mr. Sullivan. Who signed this
agreement? It is not a treaty. Who signed this agreement? Did
Iran sign it?
Mr. Sullivan. No. As David Albright said before, this isn't
a treaty. It is not a signed document. It is an agreement----
Mr. Perry. Right. We know it is not a treaty. It is some
kind of an agreement between somebody here in the United
States. Who from the United States signed it?
Mr. Sullivan. Nobody signed the agreement. The
administration, the executive branch of the United States,
signed the United States up the commitments under the deal.
Mr. Perry. And who from Iran?
Mr. Sullivan. The Foreign Minister of Iran and the
Secretary of State of the United States were the ones in the
room, along with the Foreign Ministers of the P5+1 nations, who
reached the agreement.
Mr. Perry. They signed it. Iran signed it.
Mr. Sullivan. No. As I have said couple times now----
Mr. Perry. What kind of agreement? We don't have any
agreement. We can't walk away from an agreement we don't have,
because they have not agreed to it. They haven't signed it.
I mean, these people have been lied to over and over again.
Their families have. We are in agreement on nuclear weapons
with a lying, cheating nation who wants to kill us and has said
so. There is no agreement, sir.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Sullivan. The issue wasn't their signature. It was
ours. We didn't want to have sign it because we wanted to
maintain maximum flexibility.
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much, General Perry.
We now go to Tom Suozzi of New York.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is so good to have
spent this time with you.
I want to thank all of our witnesses so much for their
attention today and their preparation, the good work that they
do.
Let's assume that the JCPOA deal has flaws and
inadequacies. Let's assume that we will not walk away from the
deal, especially after we have already given so much benefit to
Iran in the form of monetary payments.
Let's assume that the IAEA hasn't done the inspections that
they need to do. Let's assume that Iran is purveying evil and
instability and terror throughout the region with their Tehran-
backed militias in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Bahrain, Gaza, and
elsewhere. Let's assume all these things for argument's sake.
I would like each of you to just please tell me what is the
number one thing we can do to, one, enforce compliance of the
treaty--not the treaty, of the agreement. And number two, what
is the number one thing we can do, the number one toughest
sanction we can impose without violating the deal?
Ambassador.
Ambassador Jeffrey. Number one, enforce the agreement.
Number two, tougher sanctions without violating it.
Ambassador Jeffrey. Use the joint committee process to
start challenging Iran on all of these issues that we have
talked about today, the militarization--rather, the access to
the military bases, the issues that have been raised by Mr.
Albright, and some of the other actions that are in 2231, the
U.N. resolution, and press the Iranians through that process.
Because at the end of that process there are steps we can take,
short of walking out of the agreement, that could limit some of
our commitments, for example, to provide them technical
economic trade----
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. So what is the number one thing we should
do, is use joint committee to----
Ambassador Jeffrey. Use the Joint Commission to challenge
Iran's violations and behavior. That is on the agreement on
the----
Mr. Suozzi. What would you say the number one violation is?
Ambassador Jeffrey. I would say it is the missile program.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay.
Mr. Albright. The U.S. should change its policy that it no
longer accepts the sunsets and then work with its European
allies to try to create a joint position on how to----
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. So that wouldn't be enforcing the
existing deal, that would be to change the deal.
Mr. Albright. Well, that is right, to change the deal. To
enforce it, certainly, what the Ambassador said about using the
Joint Commission to try to give access to military sites.
Mr. Suozzi. Get access. So you are saying ballistic
missiles. You are saying military sites.
Mr. Albright. But in terms of U.S. actions, I think that--
--
Mr. Suozzi. Toughest sanction we can do without violating
the agreement.
Mr. Albright. I think we do need to step up non-nuclear
sanctions on Iran, and we need to have a broader----
Mr. Suozzi. So what would the number one sanction we could
be, non-nuclear sanction we could do?
Mr. Albright. Well, I am not an expert on sanctions. I look
to what this committee is working on, and I see many
possibilities and think that those are very sound things to do.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay.
Mr. Albright. Including the ones in the bill to be marked
up tomorrow.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you.
Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. Sullivan. I think we should work with the IAEA and with
our European partners on how to interpret and enforce Section T
and Section Q of the agreement, which go to these military-
related nuclear--potential military-related nuclear activities
of Iran.
And in terms of additional sanctions that we can impose
that are compliant with the JCPOA, I think that our key two
areas of focus should be economic pressure around Tehran's
proxies, meaning trying to disrupt the financial flows and the
means of payment from Hezbollah to its proxies in Syria----
Mr. Suozzi. Through the State Department and the Treasury
Department?
Mr. Sullivan. Through the Treasury Department chiefly. I
mean, I believe that our Treasury Department is the gold
standard when it comes to disrupting illicit financial flows if
they have the resources and the authorities they need to go do
it. And I think we should give that to them.
And then I also believe that we should be thinking about
how you tighten the screws on the supply chain for ballistic
missiles.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much, Mr. Suozzi.
And I also want to thank the members of our panel here
today. We very much appreciate these informative exchanges that
you have had with the members, including the ability to get
into some clarification of some issues that I think are very
helpful.
I think there is a broad and bipartisan agreement that Iran
is, in fact, a threat, a deadly threat to the United States and
to our allies. And I think our intent here is to continue our
oversight work, but then to drive policy with respect to
countering this radical regime. And I think that the ideas that
come out of this hearing can be very helpful in terms of how
exactly we do that.
The hearing is adjourned. Thank you again.
[Whereupon, at 12:51 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
