- U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE COUNTERTERRORISM BUREAU: THE FY 2018 BUDGET

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE COUNTERTERRORISM BUREAU: THE FY 2018 BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 7, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-87

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-759 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade

TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida               BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESS

The Honorable Nathan Alexander Sales, Coordinator for
Counterterrorism, Bureau of Counterterrorism and Countering
Violent Extremism, U.S. Department of State....................     3

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Nathan Alexander Sales: Prepared statement.........     5

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    24
Hearing minutes..................................................    25
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and chairman, Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade: Prepared statement................    26
The Honorable Dina Titus, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Nevada: Questions submitted for the record............    28

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE
COUNTERTERRORISM BUREAU:
THE FY 2018 BUDGET

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 7, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Paul Cook
presiding.
Mr. Cook [presiding]. The subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, all members may have 5 days to submit
statements, questions, and extraneous materials for the record,
subject to the length limitation in the rules.
This hearing right now--I had the pleasure of meeting with
our guest and talking about some of the issues beforehand. This
is an area that is extremely important in light of what is
going on in the world. And counterterrorism is something that
has a lot of different opinions, solutions, and what have you,
but this is one which is not going to go away and I am
delighted that we have our guest with us.
And right now I don't see anyone else, and I am not going
to chastise the ranking member for taking his time getting down
here, but I know here is my very, very good friend,
Representative Keating, from the great state of Massachusetts.
So I was just in your district where I spent some time with my
family and it was absolutely great. So I am going to turn to
the ranking member for 5 minutes for an opening comment.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you Mr. Chairman and thanks for
coming and spending money in my district, and it is always a
pleasure to team up with you as we have on many issues and will
continue to do in the future. And for Chairman Poe and yourself
and myself, this is an important hearing on a very important
subject; so I would like to thank you and I would like to thank
the chairman for holding this hearing.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Sales for joining us
today. And once again, I had the pleasure to do this the other
day, extend my congratulations on your appointment to this
position and I look forward to working with you on U.S.
counterterrorism policy and how we can be more effective in
addressing what is truly a global threat.
Terrorist attacks, we have witnessed, take innocent lives
and wreak havoc in communities not just domestically but around
the world. And they underscore how critical the issue is for
promoting greater security for us here at home and for our
families around the world because of these great and
challenging threats.
It is widely understood that the fight against terrorism is
not solely taking place on battlefields. Violent extremism
incubates where individuals are denied access to justice and an
opportunity to provide for their own families' basic needs. It
spreads when we do not dismantle terrorist financing networks
or when governments turn a blind eye to terrorism, even as it
undermines their own legitimacy and ability to guarantee
security for their own people.
It grows when conflicts emerge, humanitarian crises unfold,
or new governments struggle to establish the institutions that
are necessary to bring their countries through what are often
turbulent transitions. This is why the State Department is so
critical to our security and combating terrorism. Terrorism is
a global threat and requires coordination with our allies and
partners throughout the entire world.
We cannot shut down terrorist financing networks, support
new democratic governments, stimulate investment and economic
growth, track foreign fighters, and train law enforcement and
counterterrorism units on securing our communities by
ourselves. Yet these and so many other steps are necessary--and
if we want to live in a world we do not have to wake up daily
to new developments in the fight against terror, we will have
to address these issues.
And our diplomats, Foreign Service officers, and countless
individuals serving their country at the State Department make
our partnerships and cooperation with other countries possible.
State Department funding provides the relief, training, and
investment that is critical for generating the stability and
security needed for eradicating the threat of terrorism.
This funding comes with the expertise of the entire
department of individuals who understand the local contexts and
leaders and geopolitical issues to different conflicts and who
are best positioned to make sure when the money is being spent
to combat terrorism it is being spent in ways that further
American security as well.
That is why I was joined by so many of my colleagues in our
disappointment with the President's State Department budget,
cutting nearly a third of the Department's budget at a time
when we face numerous complex security challenges throughout
what is an increasingly more dangerous world.
Today we are here to address the counterterrorism aspects
of the budget request and I look forward to hearing from you on
your priorities and plans for using critical human and funding
resources available through the State Department and partner
agencies across the U.S. Government. If we fail to really use
diplomacy and strategic investments in promoting stability we
will be mired in conflict and the threat of terrorism for
decades to come.
Thank you again, Ambassador Sales. I look forward to
hearing your testimony and thank you for being here and taking
the time to meet this week. I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Congressman Keating.
Before I introduce our witness I just want to explain what
is going on here. Right now we have got multiple hearings and
there is one over at the House Committee and there is one in
Judiciary which have a lot of attention going on, besides that
votes and everything like that; so I want to apologize for the
three-ring circus that you are part of. And sometimes you come
in here it is very, very busy, sometimes you feel like the Lone
Ranger--no pun intended. But I am personally delighted to have
you here particularly after our conversation, and I am rest
assured you are going to do a great job.
So without objection, the witness' prepared statement will
be made part of the record. I ask that the witness keep your
presentation to no more than 5 minutes. Hopefully we are going
to have other members that will join us here because this
subject is so important.
So right now I want to introduce the Ambassador, Ambassador
Sales. He is the Coordinator for Counterterrorism at the State
Department. Ambassador Sales was previously a law professor at
Syracuse University of Law, and before that Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Policy at the Department of Homeland Security.
And he is from, as I said, Syracuse in the Northeast, where I
had occasion to spend some time and I hope he has thawed out
since those experience after leaving California.
So, Ambassador Sales, once again, it is our honor to have
you here, and please give your presentation. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE NATHAN ALEXANDER SALES, COORDINATOR
FOR COUNTERTERRORISM, BUREAU OF COUNTERTERRORISM AND COUNTERING
VIOLENT EXTREMISM, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Sales. Thank you very much. Thank you, Chairman
Cook and Ranking Member Keating and members of the
subcommittee. It is a wonderful opportunity to discuss----
Mr. Cook. Excuse me. Do you have your microphone on or----
Ambassador Sales. Yes, I do. Closer, point. Right.
Chairman Cook, Ranking Member Keating, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
discuss the Counterterrorism Bureau's work and our efforts to
keep America safe. I have been on the job about 3 weeks now,
and I am grateful for the chance to speak with you so early in
my tenure at the State Department.
Since 9/11, the United States has been the world's
counterterrorism leader. We have invested a great deal of blood
and treasure in taking the fight to our enemies. CT will always
remain a top American priority, and we emphatically state that
we will not retreat from our global leadership role, but it is
time for the rest of the world to step up too.
Our friends and allies must share more of the burdens,
financial and otherwise. We need them to make the same
commitments that we have made to fight terrorism around the
globe. Now sometimes that means military action, but it is just
as important to confront terrorism with civilian tools.
The administration's goal is to degrade the terrorism
threat to a level where it can be addressed with civilian
mechanisms like law enforcement, diplomatic engagement, and
capacity building--measures where the CT Bureau has long played
a central role. In our fiscal year 2018 request we have
prioritized three programs: The Counterterrorism Partnership
Fund, the Antiterrorism Assistance program, and the Terrorist
Interdiction Program.
Let me quickly run through a few of our most important
diplomatic efforts and programmatic efforts. First, the
protection of soft targets: Terrorists increasingly are
attacking soft targets like hotels, resorts, and cultural
sites. We have seen the trend in Barcelona, Berlin, London,
Manchester, and Nice, and here at home as well in places like
Orlando and San Bernardino.
To counter this growing threat, CT has spent the past year
working with our international partners through the Global
Counterterrorism Forum to develop a set of international good
practices on the protection of soft targets. We hope to
finalize these recommendations and announce them publicly in
the very near future.
Second, information sharing: It is essential that we share
counterterrorism information especially at international
borders. Working with our international partners here at home,
the State Department has concluded bilateral agreements under
HSPD-6 for sharing information about known and suspected
terrorists.
Since 2007, 65 countries around the world representing all
corners of the earth have signed HSPD-6 agreements. That
includes all 38 members of the Visa Waiver Program. When fully
implemented, these agreements will help us identify, track, and
prevent the travel of those who would do us harm.
Third, aviation security: ISIS, al-Qaeda, and other
terrorist groups continue to prioritize attacks on commercial
aviation. Look no further than last year's attack on Daallo
Airlines or the recently thwarted plot in Australia. Along with
DHS, the CT Bureau is working to elevate the baseline of global
aviation security and ensure that our foreign partners can
respond to these deadly threats.
Fourth and finally, capacity building: The CT Bureau uses
the foreign assistance funds that Congress appropriates to
improve our partners' counterterrorism capabilities. We are
helping them help themselves. In particular, we assist in
building their ability to investigate, prosecute, and
adjudicate terrorism-related cases. To investigate we provide
training, equipment, and mentoring to law enforcement; to
prosecute we teach lawyers how to prepare persuasive, well-
developed cases that will lead to convictions; and to
adjudicate, we work with judges so they have a better
understanding of the complexities and challenges of deciding
terrorism cases. In my written testimony you will see examples
where these efforts are yielding concrete and tangible results.
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, the terrorist threat is
constantly evolving and along with our friends and partners
around the world, we too must evolve to meet that threat. We
greatly appreciate Congress' support in this shared endeavor. I
look forward to your questions and to our discussion. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Sales follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Cook. Thank you very much, Mr. Ambassador. You are
going to have quite a job on your hands, and this is one--I
don't envy your situation. And I support the ranking member's
concern about funding. I think this is something that we cannot
ignore. If we don't fund some of your activities or what have
you, all we are going to be doing is funding more as Secretary
Mattis talked about, more guns, more money, you know--that is
going to be the end result.
So some of the programs that you are involved with, my
question basically is how are you going to constantly
reprioritize? And you know, this is like what day of the week
is it, what has happened recently, and of course we are
approaching the anniversary of 9/11 and it is like okay, what
is the biggest terrorist threat that we are facing? And by the
way as an aside, your comments about working with our allies
and everybody on the same sheet of music in a common goal I
think is laudatory--and very, very happy that you are saying
it.
So in regards to all the threats and I won't even list
them, you know them better than I do, how are you constantly
going to reevaluate on an almost daily, weekly basis? What is
the greatest threat facing the United States and Americans?
Ambassador Sales. It is an important question, Congressman,
and an important challenge that we have to meet. The terrorist
threat is, as you say, constantly changing, constantly
evolving, constantly adapting. Our enemies are capable of
learning from their mistakes. They are capable of learning from
our successes. And a good example of this is the rise of what
you might call self-directed terrorism.
The al-Qaeda model of carrying out terrorist attacks is one
where you have a centralized, hierarchical, command-and-control
structure that issues orders to operatives to go out and carry
out attacks. It provides them with training. It provides them
with resources. It provides them with marching orders. What we
have seen in recent years is, coexisting with that earlier
model of terrorism, a model of terrorism in which individual
terrorists are responsible for selecting targets on their own.
They don't necessarily require detailed instructions or even
any instructions from a centralized command structure. They are
self-directed and capable of striking independently.
And that rise of that model of terrorism is one that we
have seen here in the United States, in San Bernardino and
Orlando. We have seen it increasingly in Europe as well. And so
the challenge is to adapt our capabilities to meet that threat.
That has to be based on an analysis of the problem. It has to
be informed by intelligence reporting about what our
adversaries are doing and what their plans are and how they are
adapting, and it has to inform as well by our diplomatic
engagement with allies around the world to understand the
problems that they are experiencing in their countries.
Mr. Cook. Thank you for your answer. Before I turn it over
to my colleague here, I just want to--I know you have been on
the job 3 weeks, but I think the people on this committee are
very, very interested in your activities. Don't be afraid to
keep us in the loop. We have got a lot of things going on, but
everything is so important and I think your efforts and your
education can go a long way to produce allies in this battle
that you have.
So at this time I am going to turn it over to the ranking
member, Congressman Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And not only as
ranking member of this committee, I am also on the subcommittee
on Homeland Security on counterterrorism as well as aviation
safety; so the issues you spoke to are longstanding concerns of
mine.
One of the things as we traveled around looking at
different airports through Europe and even in Africa, we were
looking at resources that our country was offering to certain
countries and we found in that trip that people, other
countries were reluctant to even take advantage of our
resources. But I think, given the string of terrorist attacks
in Europe in particular, we have seen a change of mind. Are you
seeing that change and receptiveness to our resources and our
help?
Ambassador Sales. I certainly am, Congressman. I think--you
mentioned Europe in particular. I think Europe, leaders in
Europe, are very well aware of the severity of the threat that
they face. And I think atrocities like we have seen in
Barcelona and London and Manchester, and the list goes on, have
really galvanized leaders at the national level and at the EU
level as well to work internally together within Europe and to
work as part of our Transatlantic Alliance with the United
States to counter this threat together.
Mr. Keating. You know, one of the areas of concern was
the--it was in Istanbul and the airport there. There is such a
huge, you know, mecca of travel, and I think that you know
there was a reluctance there, but there have been a lot of
discussion about improvements in that regard. What have you
seen in that area?
Ambassador Sales. Turkey has made a number of important
strides. As you know and as you just said that the Istanbul
Airport has been an important transit point not just for
tourists and business people, but also for foreign terrorist
fighters who are seeking to enter the conflict zone in Syria
and Iraq.
I think when the ISIS scourge started sweeping across the
Middle East for the first time in 2014, we saw 20,000-30,000
foreign fighters traveling into the war zone through a number
of routes, but including through our NATO ally Turkey. Since
then, Turkey has begun to take a number of strong steps to gain
better control of its border with Syria to stanch the flow of
foreign fighters in. Turkey has also stepped up the sharing of
information with other NATO allies to give a heads up about the
possible movements of foreign terrorist fighters. We have still
got some work to do, but I am encouraged by the direction
things are heading.
Mr. Keating. You know, we have had success with our
coalition, military success on the ground with ISIS. However,
ISIS is different. It is sort of like a franchise--it has been
described before as opposed to an entity, because they deal in
ideology and they will go anywhere and they will be receptive
to activities throughout the whole world. And, you know, that
is including not just the Middle East but areas, you know,
Southeast Asia, Central Asia--you see it in the Philippines. We
have even had discussions just recently about concerns with
countries like Bangladesh where there is, you know, the
incubation I talked about, all those characteristics are
there--and how people that are firsthand in terms of their
information have described changes that have occurred.
So with that as a given it brings us back to the importance
of USAID and other initiatives that we have, because if indeed
they are this franchise that local people on the ground given
fertile territory to exist and grow will take advantage of, if
we are not countering that we are not going to be successful in
stemming this because it is a moving target.
And all those moving targets are over the world, but they
could be a threat back here in the United States for all the
reasons that you described in terms of air traffic and in terms
of people using the social media to become inspired and they
don't even have to be directed to act.
So I will get back to the cuts that were there. I honestly
feel although your reference to other partners stepping up to
the plate, I think they are understanding the need of that more
than they did even a few years ago. But for the taxpayer, the
best bang for the dollar in dealing with terrorism is to deal
with these issues because it is spread throughout the world. It
has metastasized.
So how do you get around that honestly? I know that we are
talking about this in our committee. I don't think there has
been a full committee hearing where we haven't right across the
aisle spoke to this need as well as understand that even the
filling of State Department positions are so critical in that
regard.
I think I am speaking for the vast majority of the full
committee both sides of the aisle. This is something we see as
a major need and just want to get your reaction to this. I know
that you are constrained with budgets, but this is about your
budget in a rare instance that Congress offered more money and
it is not getting used for some of these things, so if you
could just address that. I know you are brand new.
Ambassador Sales. Certainly. Well, thank you for the
question, Congressman. It is a very important question. You are
right. ISIS is a franchise. They are branching out all over the
world, not just in their core heartland of Syria and Iraq. We
see affiliates in Afghanistan. We see them in the Philippines.
We see them all across the globe; in every place that ISIS is
we need to be as well. We need to have a presence to counter
their false narrative. We need to have a presence to build up
the capabilities of the countries that are now finding
themselves with us in the front lines of the fight against
ISIS, and we are doing that at the CT Bureau. Where ISIS is
active we are committed to expending the resources that the
American taxpayers have entrusted us with to counter this
threat.
You mentioned Bangladesh in your question and so let me
just address that country in particular. Just last year in
2016, we funded crisis response forces in Bangladesh and last
year they were very successful in carrying out a raid against
suspected terrorists at a safe house in an apartment building.
The CT Bureau-funded officials managed to arrest one of the
terrorists. Several others were killed in a gun battle. The CT-
funded officials found 13 hand grenades, five kilograms of
explosives, 20 detonators, and additional bomb making
equipment.
So the Bangladeshis are safer because of the work that our
Bureau did, and ultimately, the American people are safer
because of the work that this Bureau did in helping take down
that terrorist cell.
Mr. Keating. All right. I think, Mr. Chairman, we might
have time given the conflicts that people had today to have a
second round of questions. So I will yield back and maybe we
will entertain a second round. Thank you.
Mr. Cook. Thank you. We are joined by Congresswoman Torres
and I hope she has some questions for us, and turn it over to
you.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And good afternoon, I think it is afternoon, Ambassador
Sales. I would really like to bring it back to our
communities--this conversation. I represent San Bernardino
County. I have lost constituents in that attack that took place
2 years ago. It will be 2 years in December. As a former 911
dispatcher, I understand very well how key it is for our first
responders, our police departments, to have a very close
working relationship with our communities.
What is the role of community policing in the Bureau, in
the Bureau's law enforcement assistant program?
Ambassador Sales. Well, I couldn't agree more with the
premise of your question, Congresswoman. We need at that
Counterterrorism Bureau and at the State Department generally
to engage all levels of government--not just foreign ministers
and other cabinet secretaries, but also law enforcement
officials, community activists, civil society organizations,
municipal authorities, the sort of people who are on the front
lines of the struggle against ISIS and al-Qaeda, and I think we
have been successful at doing that.
Recently, we launched an initiative known as the Strong
Cities Network which is designed to accomplish exactly this
vision that we are talking about where we partner with local
governments, municipal governments, including law enforcement
authorities, to better protect their communities and the nation
as a whole.
Mrs. Torres. Right. A concern that I have is that I don't
think that our cops in the street are getting a lot of
information or proper training on how to identify and how to
deal. There are some grants that are unattainable for small
municipalities and I think that we need to focus more in the
homeland in ensuring that our first responders have that
information and have data and are able to work together, you
know, with our alphabet soup at the Federal level.
One thing that I am very proud of is that prior to--6
months before that incident happened--I was able to actually
bring together Homeland Security, the FBI, ATF at a gathering
with our local police departments and sheriffs. So the first
time that they met was not when this incident happened. They
had previously met, they had exchanged business cards, phone
numbers, and therefore I think that that call when that
incident happened to the FBI office, it wasn't a cold call. You
know, they had a contact there.
And my concern is, I just don't think that we are doing
enough to share information and to properly train our cops in
the street on how to deal with counterterrorism issues.
Ambassador Sales. Well, thank you for that concern,
Congresswoman. I can tell you that I am encouraged to hear
about the institution-building that you helped facilitate in
your district. That is the very sort of thing that we at the CT
Bureau are trying to do on the international stage. You know,
here at home we take a backseat to domestic entities like DHS
and FBI who have the lead in building those relationships among
domestic law enforcement players and municipal authorities, but
we have the exact same vision when it comes to community
engagement on the international stage working with exactly the
same sorts of entities.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Cook. Congressman Keating, you had another question?
Mr. Keating. Well, another region--and it is really hard
because it is becoming so widespread to pick out entities. But
another area of concern I have had too in terms of foreign
fighter travel and radicalization is in the Balkans too, and it
is becoming an increasing concern there. Could you just share,
you know, your views on how things are going, what we could do
to improve that specific area? And it is one of those areas I
think where there is a difference on how the U.S. is perceived.
And I guess as a secondary question, it is really important
if we want cooperation as to how our country is viewed by the
people, not just their leaders, themselves. So what is being
done on that secondary level, and more specifically what is
your view on what is going on with the Balkans?
Ambassador Sales. So Congressman, the Balkans are a very
important focus and priority area for the CT Bureau. The
Balkans have the geographic fortuity of sort of lying right in
the pathway of some of the migration routes into Iraq and
Syria. And just as troublingly, they are right in the migration
routes for people who having gained battlefield experience, are
returning home to Europe perhaps to carry out more attacks like
we saw in the Paris attacks, in the Brussels attacks.
We are very active with government authorities in the
Balkans. The CT Bureau has funded a number of law enforcement
training initiatives and we have worked with the Justice
Department funding resident legal advisors. Those efforts are
paying, I think, very real dividends. Since we made the Balkans
a priority, I believe 131 people have been convicted of crimes
related to the movement of foreign terrorist fighters and my
understanding is there is about 33 more who are currently under
indictment and going through the criminal process right now--
all of them in Kosovo.
So the criminal law is a very powerful tool for deterring
terrorist activity including terrorist travel and we are doing
our utmost to use that tool in the Balkans.
Mr. Keating. Just on the secondary part of that, the way
the U.S. is perceived in some of these areas is a concern--
areas where I think we were much more--viewed much more in a
supportive way that is not quite the case now for a number of
reasons.
And I guess if you could comment too, one of Russia's
objectives, have you seen any of their efforts, part of their
engagement in elections there as they did in France as they are
trying to do in Germany and as they are doing throughout the
area as well as the propaganda that they have so successfully
engineered to try and split our coalition apart; is that
creating a problem too?
Ambassador Sales. Well, Congressman, I think our
Transatlantic Alliance is strong and durable and it is built on
shared history and even more importantly, shared values. NATO
of course is the bedrock of our security regime, security
posture, and it is the bedrock of the post-war international
system. I think it is unshakeable and I think you are seeing
not just the United States, but our European allies redouble
their commitments to NATO. Not just to deal with traditional
adversaries, but also to focus on new threats that we face like
counterterrorism.
And as you know, NATO has recently announced the
appointment of a counterterrorism coordinator and the
development of new counterterrorism capabilities. I find that
very encouraging that NATO is adapting in the same way that the
global threat environment is adapting.
Mr. Keating. They were quite anxious to, you know, to get
involved in that area.
Just a quick question, finally is--the committee has had
hearings before on the role of women engaging in counter
terrorist activities for a number of reasons, number one they
are the center point of the families that are involved and they
can spot radicalization perhaps sooner than other members. And
when we put resources in the hands of many of the women they go
more directly to the hands of helping children and helping
education and things that really buffer us from
radicalization--is that going to be a priority with you?
Ambassador Sales. Yes, it will, Congressman. I say that, I
answer that question as the father of two young girls so I have
some skin in this game, as it were, absolutely. Women are often
front-line targets of terrorists. You think of the atrocities
committed against girls by Boko Haram and countless other
examples that readily come to mind. So women and girls are
important assets, important assets in the struggle against
terrorism. Not just potential targets for terrorism, not just
potential victims of terrorist depredations. So I think it is
important to engage all levels of society, all members of
society in this mutual fight.
Mr. Keating. Great. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cook. Thank you. Congresswoman Torres, do you have
anymore? You do?
First of all, I want to thank you very, very much. But to
the committee, I know we had--oh, excuse me. I noticed we have
one more member that snuck in here very quietly and I want to
give the opportunity for Congressman Zeldin to ask him some
questions.
Mr. Zeldin. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this
hearing. And to the Ambassador, good luck--I look forward to
working with you. I think it is great that you are starting to
reach out individually to different members to build
relationships and I think that is great to hear all of our
different concerns. You have an important job ahead of you and
I wish you the best for all my constituents' safety and
security for this country's safety and security.
I have had something interesting happen to me a couple of
times over the course of the last month and a half, right
before the August recess. I was at a dinner off-site with some
members of a foreign affairs committee of a Parliament in the
Middle East and we asked them about battling this
radicalization that exists in their countries. And one person
at the table said something that would be very politically
incorrect to say here in the United States, and when that
person said it everyone at the table agreed. And the person
said we need to, in their country, they said we need to take
them out of the mosques. It gave me a lot to think about.
Coming back from August recess, I just had an ambassador in
my office from another country from the Middle East and I
shared that reflection and that moment that happened and I
asked him and his staff what he thought about it and he said it
was true. I would be really interested to hear what your
perspective is. I know this is a tough question. It is a really
important issue and it is one that we have in many respects
struggled with here because we want to protect America's
national security and I think we in many respects we are always
trying to say and do the right thing.
Fascinating perspective that I got from two different
countries in the Middle East, both Muslims who were sharing
this perspective, both saying that we should take them out of
the mosques. What is your thought of that?
Ambassador Sales. Well, I think, Congressman, you have
raised a very important issue which is how do we address the
threat not just of violence, but of the radicalism that
ultimately culminates in violence? And at the CT Bureau we have
partnered with a number of important partners and allies around
the world to address this very issue and to engage in a
systematic counter radicalization campaign that can offer
opportunities to young people to divert them away from a path
toward radicalization, to offer off-ramps such that people who
might have been inclined to embrace violence see alternatives
to that course, to more fully integrate all members of society
into the economic opportunities that can help dissuade them
from pursuing violence.
But it is not just enough for us to address the risk of
violence. That is merely the tip of the iceberg. What we are
engaged in is a fundamental contest of ideas and there is an
ideological component to this struggle as well in much the same
way that there was an ideological component to the Cold War. We
have to engage our adversaries at the level of ideas and
demonstrate why their false claims are indeed false. And in so
doing, it is important for us to partner with authentic voices
of Islam around the world who likewise reject the siren song of
radicalism and violence.
Mr. Zeldin. Here in the United States and the international
community, we view places of worship and schools and hospitals
as protected sites that are respected, that are off limits--
that are sacred. And it seems like it is pretty obvious, I
guess, at this point that some of what we hold dear and sacred
institutions to us in the United States might not be getting
used in the same way that we aspire to for our own children and
others here in the United States.
So with Israel, when they face issues with Hezbollah
storing missiles inside of protected religious sites or I hear
this story about taking kids out of mosques, or kids learning
with textbooks that are teaching them a version of history that
grooms them to be adversarial to good people, these are all
challenges that you face. I wish you the best.
I thank again the chairman for hosting this hearing, and
please continue to work on building that relationship with each
and every one of us.
Ambassador Sales. I certainly will, thank you.
Mr. Cook. Mr. Ambassador, I want to thank you very much and
I appreciate the members showing up here and asking their
questions. You have been on the job 3 weeks. Speaking on behalf
of the committee, I think we have got to have you back again.
Obviously today was somewhat of an anomaly, but it is a crazy
place.
But I think about funding, about supplemental requests for
funding. This is a very bipartisan committee, and I think a lot
of people, both Democrats and Republicans, realize how
important your job is. So I would ask the staff's indulgence in
the future to let's do this again, I think, in a number of
months where we are not jammed with oh, votes, hearings--on
some very important issues and this and that, because what you
have to say, I think, is extremely important and we can perhaps
help you in lending support for a cry for more money for the
important work you do. So I want to thank you very, very much
and, at this time, this meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 3:49 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
