- VARIOUS MEASURES

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VARIOUS MEASURES

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

ON

S. 371, H.R. 2484, H. Res. 351, H. Res. 354

and H. Res. 355

__________

MAY 25, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-557PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

MARKUP ON

S. 371, A bill to make technical changes and other improvements
to the Department of State Authorities Act, Fiscal Year 2017...     2
Amendment to S. 371 offered by the Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York........    11
Amendment to S. 371 offered by the Honorable Edward R. Royce, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California, and
chairman, Committee on Foreign Affairs.......................    13
H.R. 2484, To ensure that the United States promotes the
meaningful participation of women in mediation and negotiation
processes seeking to prevent, mitigate, or resolve violent
conflict.......................................................    14
H. Res. 351, Condemning the violence and persecution in Chechnya.    26
Amendment to H. Res. 351 offered by the Honorable William
Keating, a Representative in Congress from the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.............................................    30
H. Res. 354, Condemning the violence against peaceful protesters
outside the Turkish Ambassador's residence on May 16, 2017, and
calling for the perpetrators to be brought to justice and
measures to be taken to prevent similar incidents in the future    31
H. Res. 355, Condemning in the strongest terms the terrorist
attacks in Manchester, United Kingdom, on May 22, 2017,
expressing heartfelt condolences, and reaffirming unwavering
support for the special relationship between our peoples and
nations in the wake of these attacks...........................    36

APPENDIX

Markup notice....................................................    58
Markup minutes...................................................    59
Markup summary...................................................    61
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Material submitted for the record.......    62
The Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California: Prepared statement....................    64

VARIOUS MEASURES

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 25, 2017

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:40 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. The committee will come to order. Pursuant
to notice, we meet today to mark up five bipartisan measures.
Without objection, all members may have 5 days to submit any
statements or any extraneous material for the record on today's
business. As members were notified yesterday; we intend to
consider today's measures en bloc. And so without objection,
the following items previously provided to members will be
considered en bloc, and are considered as read. We have Senate
bill 371, the Department of State Authorities Improvements Act,
with Engel amendment 34 and Royce amendment 35 to that Senate
bill; we have H.R. 2484, the Women, Peace, and Security Act of
2017; House Resolution 351, Condemning the violence and
persecution in Chechnya, along with the Keating amendment 12 to
House Resolution 351; we have House Resolution 354, Condemning
the violence against peaceful protesters outside the Turkish
Ambassador's residence on May 16, 2017; and we have House
Resolution 355, Condemning the terrorist attacks in Manchester,
United Kingdom, on May 22.
[The information referred to follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Royce. I now recognize myself to speak on today's
business. And moving onto the markup agenda, speaking a little
bit here about Senate bill 371, this makes several technical
and minor corrections to the State authorities bill that became
law at the end of last year. But in particular, this measure
ensures that the authorizing and Appropriations Committees of
the House and Senate continue to work closely together on
oversight of the Department of State and foreign operations
accounts.
We are also taking up, as I mentioned, H.R. 2484, the
Women, Peace, and Security Act. Now, last year this committee
held a hearing where we heard powerful testimony about the
importance of including women in peace negotiations around the
world. We heard specifically from some of the women who helped
set the fundamental agreement, the Good Friday agreement in
Ireland, the peace agreement there. We also learned of some of
the personal tragedies visited upon them and their loved ones
as a result. But they stuck with that and were instrumental to
that Belfast agreement being completed. And it has brought
peace.
So women have the fundamental right to be represented in
discussions affecting their lives. But when we also see better
outcomes when they participate, as we have in terms of peace
holding around the world whenever women are also involved in
these negotiations, other than just factions or warlords or
governments, represented solely by men, we begin to understand
the importance of this particular agreement. Peace agreements
are more likely to be reached and last when women are involved.
Promoting women's participation represents an opportunity
for improving U.S. efforts to resolve conflicts, improve
peacekeeping missions, and counter human trafficking. So I
thank Ranking Member Engel and the bill's sponsors,
Representatives Noem and Schakowsky, for their excellent work
on this bipartisan issue.
I also want to thank Ranking Member Engel for working with
me on House Resolution 354, condemning the unwarranted attack
last week on peaceful protesters outside the Turkish
Ambassador's residence. That evening, armed members of
President Erdogan's security detail savagely beat and choked
and kicked protesters in an unprovoked assault aimed at
silencing these American citizens' right to free speech and
assembly. And this isn't the first time this has happened with
the Turkish delegation to the United States.
This timely resolution sends a clear signal to the Turkish
Government that we will not allow any foreign government to
stifle the rights of our citizens. It also calls on the State
Department and Secret Service to review their security
procedures to prevent another incident like this from
occurring. This is the third incident. The rights of free
expression and peaceful protest are fundamental values in any
democracy. By passing this resolution, we reaffirm our
commitment to protect these rights against all who seek to
suppress them.
I also want to thank Representatives Meeks and Cook for
working quickly to introduce House Resolution 355, condemning
the terror attack in Manchester. This nail bomb set off by a
suicide bomber claimed the lives of 22 innocent people, many of
them children, many of them teenagers, leaving a concert on
what should have been a joyful and carefree occasion. It left
many, many people maimed as a result. And this resolution
rightly condemns this horrific attack and pledges our
unwavering support to the United Kingdom.
Lastly, we consider House Resolution 351, condemning the
violence and persecution in Chechnya, where Chechen strongman
Ramzan Kadyrov is waging a brutal campaign against men who are
gay, including their abduction, their detention, their torture.
The Russian newspaper which broke this story has also been
threatened.
There needs to be a serious investigation and a stop to
this medieval violence. Russia cannot tolerate such intolerable
brutality and also purport to be worthy of participating on the
global stage. I want to thank Chairman Emeritus Ros-Lehtinen,
Ranking Member Engel, and Representatives Issa and Cicilline
and Smith for their work on this important resolution. I also
appreciate the amendment offered by Representative Keating,
which makes clear that the perpetrators of this violence should
be vetted for sanctions against human rights law.
I now recognize the ranking member for his remarks.
Mr. Engel. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
calling this morning's markup. I am also pleased to support
this entire slate of good bipartisan measures. I hope at our
next markup we can get to marking up the bill I introduced with
Mr. Connolly, the SECURE Our Democracy Act. The bill represents
a tough response to Russia's interference in last year's
election, and it would send a clear message that if you meddle
in American democracy, there are going to be consequences. It
is a commonsense bill, and we are moving in a positive
direction to make it a bipartisan measure. So I hope the next
time we have this markup, the bill will have bipartisan
support, and we will be able to advance the bill.
With respect to the measures before us today, the committee
is taking quick action to respond to two troubling events in
recent days. The first, as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, is a
resolution condemning the barbaric attack that ripped through
an arena in Manchester, England, earlier this week. Mr.
Chairman, the horrific evil deliberately targeted innocent
children. Many of us have sons or daughters and we certainly
know the happiness and sense of community we feel going to
concerts with friends and family when we were younger, and that
our children feel the same way today.
This attack reminds us of the threat violent extremism
poses, the sort of indiscriminate carnage terrorists are
willing to inflict. In the wake of this tragedy, we stand with
our British partners and friends in mourning and recovery as we
work together to meet this shared challenge. This was not just
an attack on the U.K., it was attack on civilization. I am
pleased to support this measure, which sends this important
message.
Secondly, I am sure we have all seen video of what happened
last week at a protest of Turkish President Erdogan's visit. I
was shocked. The last thing we expect to see in the United
States is a strongman's thugs silencing peaceful protesters. I
had been invited actually to go to that meeting at the Turkish
Embassy. I didn't go, and I am glad I didn't go, because I was
just horrified when I heard what happened. Turkey is a NATO
ally and a key partner on many issues. But what happened last
week is unacceptable. This resolution calls for those
responsible to face justice. This is a much bigger issue. We
have seen a troubling pattern from Turkey in recent years. But
if Turkish Government officials come to our country and try to
stifle American democracy and freedom of speech, there must be
consequences.
I am also pleased to support the Women, Peace, and Security
Act offered by Representatives Schakowsky and Noem. This bill
has its roots in the Obama administration's 2011 Executive
order on women, peace, and security. This order took into
account the fact that a range of global issues are better
addressed when women are involved. Conflict prevention, crisis
resolution, peace building--research has shown again and again
and again that when women are at the center of these processes,
the outcomes are better.
So a few years ago, President Obama and Secretary of State
Clinton took steps to ensure our foreign policy focused on
getting more women involved when it came to resolving these
challenges. Since then, we have seen good results, and we want
to make those results permanent. This bill, which we advanced
last Congress, would put into law parts of the Executive order
and work to build even more on these earlier successes. I am
pleased to cosponsor this bill, and I hope this time around, we
are able to get it across the finish line. I ask unanimous
consent to enter the co-author of this legislation,
Representative Jan Schakowsky of Illinois', statement into the
record.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am also a proud
cosponsor of a resolution condemning the unlawful detention,
torture, and murder of gay men in Chechnya. Hundreds of gay men
have been rounded up by local Chechen authorities, some killed
and some tortured because of their sexual orientation. Chechen
authorities deny this and the Kremlin looks the other way. But
the truth has found its way into the light, and now is the time
for people around the world to speak out against these abuses.
President Putin must end these abuses. He must respect and
promote the dignity of all persons, and provide safe haven for
all those fleeing such horrific persecution. I want to thank
Representatives Ros-Lehtinen and Cicilline for their hard work
on this measure.
Lastly, I am glad we are advancing the bill to make a
number of minor technical corrections to our State Department
authorization legislation that President Obama signed into law
last year. During the last Congress, for the first time since
2002, this committee worked together in a bipartisan manner to
get a State Department authorization bill to the President's
desk. I was very pleased with it. The chairman worked very hard
on it, and so did I, and so did members of this committee. Our
legislation helped to modernize the Department, and provide our
diplomats with the tools and resources they need to do their
jobs. Diplomats are at the front line of American foreign
policy, and their efforts are needed now more than ever. So I
want to thank all of our members for their hard work on these
measures. And again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this
markup. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel. We go to Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen of Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and
Ranking Member Engel. It was a pleasure to have worked with
both of you, along with Mr. Issa, Mr. Cicilline, and Mr. Smith,
in introducing House Resolution 351, condemning the violence
and persecution in Chechnya. This committee has a longstanding
tradition of speaking out on behalf of marginalized populations
all over the world, especially those who live under the shadow
of oppression and tyranny. We know that freedom and human
rights are universal, and for all people to enjoy, no matter
their sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, race, or
any other basis. And because we believe in this cause, this
body cannot sit idly by while hundreds of men are being beaten
and tortured, and some even killed by Chechen authorities.
This bipartisan resolution calls on the Chechen leader to
immediately cease the abduction and violence of men based on
their real or perceived sexual orientation, and calls on Putin
to uphold international commitments and protect the human
rights of all people. We have a responsibility to answer to the
plight of this vulnerable community, call for swift action to
end these atrocities, and ensure that the perpetrators are
brought to justice. I thank every one of our colleagues from
both sides of the aisle who have added their names in support
of this resolution, which sends a unified message that the
United States remains committed to promoting human rights, and
that this crisis must end now.
I would also like to offer my support to House Resolution
354, the chairman and ranking member's measure condemning the
violence by Turkish President Erdogan and his security detail
against protesters here in Washington last week.
Later today, my friend and Florida colleague, Gus
Bilirakis, and I
, deg. will be sending a letter to the
Department of Justice and the Department of State asking for
immediate accountability from the Turkish Government for these
disgraceful attacks. This behavior is intolerable. Allies do
not attack U.S. citizens on American soil. And foreign
nationals who cannot respect the rule of law in our great
Nation should not be able to enjoy its rights and privileges.
Our letter asks those involved in last week's attacks be
brought to justice immediately, with the participating Turkish
personnel in the U.S. expelled, and those abroad barred from
future entry.
Many of our colleagues here today have already added their
names to the letters, and I hope that anyone interested can add
their names as well. I offer my full support to the chairman
and ranking member's resolution, and encourage my colleagues to
do the same. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Ileana. Bill Keating of
Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you and the ranking member for holding this markup, and offer
my support to all the measures that are being considered, and
of which I am proud to cosponsor. These include the Women,
Peace, and Security Act, where we underscore that women,
participating as meaningful actors in national security issues,
make us safer, and it is critical if we are going to be
effective in addressing the complex security issues that face
us today.
It also includes a resolution condemning the violence in
front of the Turkish Embassy. I would also like to thank
Congressmen Meeks and Cook, as well as the chairman and ranking
member, for offering the resolution condemning the terrorist
attack in Manchester this week. As a parent myself, my heart
goes out to the families and communities affected by this
callous and cowardly act.
I would also like to thank the chairman and ranking member,
as well as the fellow members on the committee, Congresswoman
Ros-Lehtinen, Congressmen Cicilline and Smith, for their
leadership in introducing the resolution condemning the
violence in Chechnya. The violence being perpetrated by state
actors against innocent men in Chechnya is despicable, and it
is critical that we speak out against these horrific crimes. In
addition, I have offered my amendment included in the en bloc
because it is important that our President speak up and take
action as well to help ensure that this administration acts in
accordance with two very important human rights laws brought
forward through our committee. My amendment calls on our
Government to identify those individuals who must be sanctioned
for their heinous acts of violence under the Magnitsky Rule of
Law and Accountability Act and the Global Magnitsky Human
Rights Accountability Act.
All of these things we are dealing with today were done on
a bipartisan basis, and again, speaks to the importance of this
committee as a strong voice in our country's policy going
forward. I would like to thank all members of the committee for
their cooperative efforts. And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. I thank the gentleman for yielding back. We
go to Mr. Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you and Ranking Member Engel, again, for putting forward
a very, very good grouping of bipartisan bills and resolutions.
And I support them all. I want to make special note that the
resolution on the violence against American citizens outside
the Turkish Embassy after Erdogan had visited with President
Trump is especially egregious. There is a woman from New
Jersey. Her name is Ceren Borazan. She lives in East
Rutherford, New Jersey. As she has pointed out, a security
officer put her in a headlock, threatened to kill her during
the altercation.
Like many members of this committee, I am sure, I watched
the video depiction of this, and the police couldn't even
contain it when these thugs from Erdogan's government went
after American citizens. She was hurt during this. She is
asking for justice. And she absolutely deserves it. And at
least 12 people, including a police officer, were hurt during
the melee. And as she said, violence is never an appropriate
response to free speech.
We support the rights of people everywhere. This is
something that the U.S. Department of State said. And again, a
New Jerseyan and people from throughout our country were hurt
by these so-called security officers.
I also want to thank Ileana Ros-Lehtinen for her leadership
on H. Res. 351. The fact that it appears to be beyond any
dispute that about 100 men, due to their actual or suspected
sexual orientation, were abducted, detained, and tortured, and
as many as three have been killed, maybe more. That is
outrageous. And that needs to be condemned roundly, as this
legislation does.
Then, of course, the Manchester attacks. Again, another
senseless manifestation of radical jihadist hate that needs to
be roundly criticized. This resolution would put the entire
U.S. House of Representatives on record in so doing.
And again, the new bill, Kristi Noem's Women, Peace, and
Security Act, is another very strong assertion, backed by
truth, that we need more women in peacemaking capabilities and
capacities in government and elsewhere. And I think this is a
very good affirmation by this committee and then, by extension,
by the Congress to do just that. And I thank the chair and I
yield back.
Chairman Royce. I thank the gentleman. Mr. David Cicilline
of Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the ranking member for holding this markup today to
consider five important bipartisan pieces of legislation, which
I am proud to support. I would like to start by conveying my
sincere condolences to the families, friends, and loved ones of
those who were lost and those who were injured in this
despicable act of terrorism that took place in Manchester this
week. Their suffering has, in many ways, just begun, and I will
keep them in my prayers as they move forward from this
despicable attack.
Before I address the legislation before us today, I regret
that I have to, once again, register my profound disappointment
that it is now almost June and this committee still has not
considered a single piece of legislation to respond to the
unprecedented attack leveled against us by Russia last year. As
17 of our intelligence agencies agree, throughout the 2016
Presidential campaign, Russia carried out a large-scale
concerted hacking and propaganda effort meant to undermine our
democracy and interfere in our elections.
More than 2 months ago, we held an eye-opening hearing on
Russia's ongoing attempts to undermine Western democracies,
during which we heard from witness after witness that Russia's
intentions are clearly to weaken the United States, our
partners, and our alliances. Yet, this Congress has done
nothing to respond to this attack. This is nothing short of an
abrogation of our responsibility as lawmakers. I have spoken in
the past in support of legislation that I have introduced,
legislation that Mr. Engel and Mr. Connolly have introduced.
But I implore you, Mr. Chairman, if you don't like our
bills, let's consider something, anything that will show the
Russians and other countries, who we know are watching, that
there will be consequences for the interference in our
democratic elections. The longer we let the issue of Russian
interference go unaddressed, the more it interferes with the
other important and bipartisan issues that we all want to see
move forward.
We are considering pieces of legislation today that have
strong bipartisan support and tackle extremely timely and
serious issues. I want to thank the chairman and ranking member
for the work they have done to ensure that these measures come
to the committee quickly and in a bipartisan way.
I want to thank Mr. Meeks for introducing H. Res. 355,
which condemns the terrorist attacks in Manchester, and
reiterates our dedication to fighting extremism and terrorism
worldwide, while paying tribute to the British first responders
who acted selflessly in the face of danger. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the victims, their families, and the British
people. We stand strongly united with our close ally, and
together, we will continue to fight against those who threaten
to destroy democratic values through violent and nonviolent
means.
I want to thank my friend, Congresswoman Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen, for introducing H. Res. 351, which condemns the
violence and persecution in Chechnya. She, along with Chairman
Royce and Ranking Member Engel, has shown great leadership in
making sure that the atrocities being perpetuated against gay
men in Chechnya do not go unnoticed. And she has been a strong
voice for many years in condemning violence and hate against
the LGBT community.
I would also like to thank Mr. Smith, Mr. Issa, and Mr.
Lowenthal for their work on this resolution as well. I also
want to voice my support for the amendment being offered by my
colleague, Mr. Keating, to this legislation, that will make
clear that the brutal targeting of suspected gay men by Chechen
authorities is sanctionable under U.S. law. This resolution
will send a strong message to Chechen officials who have
overseen the arrest, detainment, torture, and murder of gay, or
suspected gay men. The language being used by Chechen
authorities in respect to these activities is shocking, with
reports that President Kadyrov has indicated that he wants to
wipe Chechnya free of any gay men before Ramadan. This type of
language and the concerted campaign against the gay men of
Chechnya is an atrocity that must be condemned in the strongest
terms by the international community.
I would also like to speak out in support of H. Res. 354,
condemning the violence against protesters outside the Turkish
Ambassador's residence on May 16, of which I am a cosponsor.
The attacks carried about by President Erdogan's so called
security detail against American citizens and legal residents
were absolutely appalling and will not be tolerated. I look
forward to covering this issue in more depth in the
subcommittee hearing on this topic this afternoon. And once
again, I would like to thank the sponsors of each of these
pieces of legislation and reemphasize my strong support. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Mr. Cicilline. Yes, of course.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend from Rhode Island. I just
wanted to add my voice. I am very pleased at the bipartisan
pieces of legislation in front of us and happy to support them.
But I exhort the chairman, it was our understanding that the
Engel-Connolly bill on sanctions against countries that
interfere in our elections was going to be in the markup
scheduled today. It was pulled. And we would welcome some
direction from the chairman as to when it might be rescheduled.
We think this is an important statement we hope will be
bipartisan. And I would ask the chairman if he could respond.
And I thank my friend for yielding.
Chairman Royce. I know there is interest in Mr. Engel's
efforts to press back on election hacking and on interference
by the Russian Government in our election. And Mr. Cicilline's
as well. We are looking at both measures. We are working to try
to develop bipartisan support for both measures. I will say
that we do have sanctions on nine Russian entities now. We have
sanctions on the GRU, we have sanctions on the FSB, their two
main intelligence services, and also sanctions on the
individual officers of the GRU, four of them that were
involved, along with three companies that provided material
support for the GRU.
We are looking at ways of sending an additional message. I
will mention also that last week, the House passed this
committee's legislation to throw the book at Russia in terms of
other activities, including their activities in supporting the
Syrian regime and arms to the Syrian regime. So my hope is to
keep working with the members to continue to highlight Russia's
dangerous activities and advance legislation in a way that all
the members can support.
Mr. Connolly. If the chairman would just indulge a follow-
up.
Chairman Royce. Yes.
Mr. Connolly. With respect to the Engel-Connolly bill, is
it the intention of the chairman to, at some point, schedule
that for markup?
Chairman Royce. I wish to schedule that for markup.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
Chairman Royce. I hope to. I also hope to try to work out,
you know, on our ballistic missile legislation. I am trying to
work that in a way that all members can support it. But we will
continue to try to do that.
Mr. Connolly. I know both Mr. Engel and I would be glad to
work with the chair to make that happen. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Mr. Joe Wilson of South
Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Ed Royce, for your
bipartisan leadership with Ranking Member Eliot Engel to
expedite these important resolutions. I support all the
legislation being considered today, but in particular, House
Resolution 355, which condemns, in the strongest terms, the
murderous terrorist attacks in Manchester, United Kingdom, on
Monday night. This serves as a sober reminder of our ongoing
fight against terrorism at home and abroad in the global war on
terrorism. This slaughter was a direct targeting and mass
murder of children. It has been correctly identified by Prime
Minister Teresa May that the murderers who have conducted this
are cowards, correctly identified by President Donald Trump as
losers.
As the co-chairman of the EU and U.K Caucus, I am deeply
saddened by these attacks. Thank you again, Chairman Royce,
thank you, Ranking Member Engel, for your support and
expeditious consideration of the resolution. I would
additionally like to ask my honorable cochair of the EU Caucus,
Congressman Greg Meeks, to add me to this resolution as soon as
possible. Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. Greg Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank
you, Chairman Royce, and Ranking Member Engel for us working
together in a bipartisan manner on these resolutions, of which
I support all of them. First, I want to speak to, of course, H.
Res. 355, which condemns the recent attacks in Manchester. I
think this gives us an opportunity, again, to show a single
voice from our committee, and it gives all the Members of the
House a chance to voice condolences to the families and friends
of those who were killed in these wicked bombings. And I pray
that the Manchester community is able to remain strong and to
continue its beautiful human display of kindness in the depths
of such tragedy as we saw, and Prime Minister May talked about.
Even with such bad circumstances, you see such good coming from
human beings as they work together.
And I think that our hearts reach out to them. The world
needs to know that when we have these kinds of instances, we
are one. I think this resolution tends to give them the message
to let them know that we are with the people of Manchester, and
we are as one.
I also want to just quickly give special recognition to and
thank the sponsors for H. Res. 351, condemning the violence and
the persecution in Chechnya. The persecution and suppression of
human rights seems unfortunately not to be new in Chechnya. But
the recent violence directed toward gay men at the hands of
authorities is completely inhumane and a disturbing reality.
Anyone who looks at the fiefdom of the warlord who seems to be
running that area, Mr. Kadyrov, knows that whether you are a
journalist or a politician, you know, if you try to look into
anything that he is doing, there are grave consequences.
But when you look at these acts--I know from when I have
grown up, that injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere. And so when we see these things happening, our
voices must be heard. We cannot be silent and allow human
beings to be treated in this way. So I thank the sponsors of
this legislation, this resolution, because I think our voices
need to be heard and people know that we are not going to be
tolerant of inhumane acts to human beings.
Finally, let me also lend my voice to what we have all
witnessed in horror what protesters in front of the Turkish
Ambassador's residence were forced to experience. Mr. Erdogan's
posse outside seemed to have done the same thing previously.
But for me, it still strikes at home, because you see, I am one
that have been known at times, and if there is something I feel
is unjust and not right, I go out and I protest in front of
Embassies. And so, therefore, it is a way to speak, and whether
you agree or disagree, you are supposed to have the freedom,
especially here in the United States.
So it cannot go without my voice being heard that those
brutal beatings of protesters who were just protesting and
giving their voices, we must make sure that democracy and
freedom of speech and being able to talk, even if you disagree
with the administration or not, your voice needs to be heard.
What took place was horrific, and we all need to speak out
against that. So I hope that Turkey, who is a NATO ally,
understands that we have certain responsibilities as NATO
allies to protect democracy and to move forward together as a
democratic society. That means all voices, all voices have the
right to be heard. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. I go to Ted Poe of Texas.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to speak on
two of these bills, House Resolutions 354 and 355. Turkey has
been on a downward spiral under the aspiring dictator Erdogan.
Erdogan has spared no effort to undermine Turkey's democratic
institutions, and he attacks civil liberties in Turkey. Now
Erdogan thinks he can bring his crackdown on basic rights to
the United States, to Washington, DC, the seat of democracy in
the world. Last week, when demonstrators peacefully protested
outside the Turkish Ambassador's home, they were attacked by
Erdogan's bullies. His security beat and kicked and choked
unarmed protesters. Video shows that Erdogan watched, and by
watching, he gave a tacit approval to what was going on because
he did nothing except walk into the Embassy. This kind of
vicious behavior is unacceptable anywhere in the world, but
especially here in America, in Washington, DC.
That is why I strongly support this resolution, which
condemns this violence and calls on our government to raise the
issue with Turkey. Freedom of expression is essential to the
foundation of America. And it is clear that Erdogan does not
honor this most basic right. But I am just incensed that he
would bring his concept of no free speech to the United States.
This attack by a foreign dictator on our constitutional basic
right of speech is most disturbing. So while Erdogan continues
his path of dictatorship in Turkey by violently quashing all
opposition, this resolution sends, I hope, a message we will
have no foreign tyrant violating our sacred rights on American
soil. Justice demands that something occur and that he be held
accountable, and Turkey be held accountable. Because justice is
what we do in this country.
In regarding the murder of the innocents in Manchester, as
those fans streamed out of a concert in Manchester, they were
met with the worst kind of evil, ISIS. And we must call ISIS
out for what they are. They are an evil group of people who
murder children and anybody else. The terrorist lay in waiting,
timing his bombing attack to create maximum damage as people
were leaving the concert. We know that at least 22 innocent
people were murdered, including children. The attack claimed by
the ISIS killers is not the first to haunt Europe, and it is
probably not going to be the last until ISIS is completely
defeated. I strongly support this bill and offer my sincere
condolences to the victims and to the families. And I want to
acknowledge the brave efforts of the first responders, who were
quickly there to save many lives that dark night. Many people
who we will never know their identity, but they were there
helping to rescue, because that is what first responders do,
wherever they are in the world.
Islamist terrorist groups continue to threaten peace and
security worldwide. Free nations need to understand and work
together to defeat ISIS in a coordinated effort. Otherwise,
ISIS will continue to pop up its ugly head and take advantage
of peace and try to make a statement by killing folks that they
don't agree with.
So I support both of these. I am glad to be a cosponsor of
both of these. And I also want to make one other comment
regarding what Congressman Meeks said about the protesters out
in front of the Turkish Embassy. I would encourage them to go
back to the Turkish Embassy and protest again. Do it again. And
keep protesting. And stay out there. Because no foreign tyrant,
as I said, has the right or the ability to drive them away. So
for whatever it is worth, I would encourage them to go back.
You might find Mr. Meeks out there with them, and myself as
well.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Will the gentleman yield for a question?
Mr. Poe. I will.
Mr. Rohrabacher. If the protesters return to the Turkish
Embassy, as you have just suggested they do, in order to,
number one, draw attention to this monstrous attack on American
soil of Americans by these goons from Turkey, if they do that,
will you go with me and join them for a few minutes?
Mr. Poe. Yes. Let's go together. We will bring Congressman
Meeks with us as well.
Mr. Cicilline. Will the gentleman yield? I will join you as
well.
Mr. Poe. Maybe we should just recess over to the Turkish
Embassy.
I will yield back.
Chairman Royce. I think the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Espaillat of New York.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Chairman Royce and Ranking Member
Engel. I commend you on this bipartisan work of this committee
in moving these five very, very important bills forward. I join
my colleagues in standing with the people of Manchester. I
mourn for the young lives that were taken too soon in Monday's
terrorist attack. Make no mistake, this was an act of terror.
It was stone cold and heartless. As a parent, I can't even
imagine the heartbreak that these families are experiencing.
I also stand with the LGBT community in Chechnya, and
Chechnya's LGBT cleansing must stop. This campaign is a crime
against humanity. And the atrocities being committed against
the LGBT Chechens must stop. The U.S. Government can and should
do much more. I am proud to sit on this committee that is
willing to go on the record in publicly condemning the violence
and the persecution in Chechnya. President Putin and the
Kremlin need to investigate, prosecute, and protect the LGBT
Chechens. I hope that this is a wakeup call for President Trump
to defend and acknowledge LGBT lives across the world.
Lastly, I am proud to support the Women, Peace, and
Security Act of 2017, which makes permanent the Obama
administration's policy to seek greater involvement for women
in conflict prevention, resolution, and recovery efforts. Women
here and around the world are the spine and a critical part of
the peace-building efforts. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go now to Mr. Paul Cook of
California.
Mr. Cook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I start, I want
to know if Mr. Rohrabacher is going to be soliciting
contributions for bail money for himself and the rest of the
Members that will be joining him outside the Turkish Embassy.
Anyway, I am honored to join Representative Meeks in sponsoring
House Resolution 355, condemning the terrorist action in
Manchester, but saddened that it is necessary. Just as one
horrifying terrorist attack in the United Kingdom left the
headlines, we are, once again, reminded of the constant threat
we face. For the second time in 2 months, the British people
find themselves in mourning for the victims of a terrorist
attack. Our thoughts and prayers are with the victims of the
Manchester attack, and with all of our friends in the United
Kingdom.
Just last month, I led a congressional delegation to the
United Kingdom. Our visit came on the heels of a horrendous
terrorist attack in London on March 22. We laid wreaths on
Westminster Bridge, and inside Westminster Hall, to honor the
victims of that attack. It was an honor for us to participate
in that event, which highlighted the unbreakable bond we share
with the British people.
While that solemn occasion left us with heavy hearts, it
also left us with an even stronger sense of resolve. The
British and the American peoples are no strangers to outside
enemies wishing to destroy our way of life. We have stood side
by side to triumph in these fights before, and have become
stronger partners for the fights to come. During our
discussions with officials in London, it was clear that all of
us shared a fierce determination to prevent the next attack.
Despite our successes and the many plots we have stopped, our
failure rate remains much too high. It has been said many
times, but it is worth repeating: We have to be right every
time; the terrorists only have to be right once. Although the
threat of terrorism is not new, it is rapidly changing. The
terrorists are simplifying their methods, making it harder on
us to prevent these low tech attacks. Terrorist groups have
adjusted their strategies for recruitment and found new ways to
capture the minds of disillusioned youth and inspire attacks
around the world. We must never grow comfortable with the
occurrence of these attacks, or numb to the depravity of our
enemy.
As the Manchester attack shows, there is no target too
innocent or sacred, not even a crowd of children. I am honored
to cosponsor this important resolution, and I am proud to
reinforce our shared commitment to confronting the threat of
terrorism. Once again, I want to thank Representative Meeks for
drafting this resolution, and to thank this committee for its
swift passage. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Brad Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Chairman Royce. I want to thank
the chairman and the ranking member for holding this markup
today. I appreciate the timely consideration of these
bipartisan pieces of legislation that address some of the most
pressing security issues and threats to human rights facing the
world today. I join with my colleagues in offering my sincerest
condolences to the victims of the horrific terrorist attack in
Manchester on Monday evening, many of them children, and
condolences to their families. I condemn this senseless
violence targeting innocent civilians in the strongest possible
terms, and affirm the special relationship between America and
the British people. I fully support H. Res. 355 and the
commitment of the United States to combating terrorism that
threatens our democratic values.
I would like to also express my strong support for H.R.
2484, that calls for women to be actively included and engaged
in conflict resolution processes, and encourages the State
Department and USAID to increase women's participation in
peacekeeping operations. Women and girls face a
disproportionate share of violence and economic hardship as a
result of armed conflict, including horrendous crimes of sexual
violence.
A conflict resolution process that does not include women
will not adequately address these concerns. When women are
included, as the resolution states, negotiations are more
likely to succeed and result in durable peace agreements. The
bill also highlights the critical role of our State Department
and USAID diplomats and development professionals in resolving
conflicts throughout the world through nonmilitary means.
Implementing this legislation will require that Congress ensure
a robust budget for diplomacy and development, which is
critical to a successful U.S. foreign policy.
I am proud to be a cosponsor of H. Res. 354, condemning the
vicious attacks against peaceful protesters by Turkish
President's Erdogan's security detail, calling for the
prosecution of those responsible, and urging the administration
to take appropriate diplomatic steps to ensure that Turkish
officials are held accountable. President Erdogan, through a
constitutional referendum last month, has consolidated
extraordinary power in the executive branch. Under his
administration, press freedoms have been restricted, opposition
party leaders jailed, and ethnic minority groups threatened.
The United States must be candid and consistent in our support
of democratic values and respect for human rights for the sake
of Turkey's future, as well as for the long-term interests in
the region of the United States and our allies.
Furthermore, it is never acceptable for guests of our
Government to violate our sacred right to freedom of speech on
our own soil. Earlier this week, I joined with my colleague,
Congressman Charlie Dent, in sending a letter to Secretary
Tillerson condemning the thuggish attacks which occurred under
the watchful eye of President Erdogan himself. This attack was
a direct offense against all Americans and the rights, values,
and freedoms that underlie the very foundation of our
democracy. These brutal attacks that led to the hospitalization
of peaceful protesters are tantamount to an assault on the core
pillars of our Republic. This is not the first, but the third
case of members of the Turkish President's security detail
acting violently on U.S. territory.
It must be the last. I am also proud to be a cosponsor of
H. Res. 351, condemning the persecution and ghastly violence
and torture against LGBTQ Chechens. I am horrified and
extremely concerned by the recent news that Chechnya has been
illegally arresting men suspected of being gay and forcing them
into secret prisons. As many as 100 men are currently held in
these barbaric prisons, and at least three have died in
detention, not for any crimes they have committed, but simply
for who they are and who they love. President Putin bears the
responsibility for ending this persecution of LGBTQ people. He
has long turned a blind eye to human rights abuses from the
leader of Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov. These atrocities cannot go
unanswered. And indeed, this resolution represents a bipartisan
call for the Trump administration to speak out against these
crimes, demand the release of those illegally detained, and
help those who are fleeing the violence, and pressure Russia to
uphold respect the human rights and hold accountable those
responsible for these abuses. I would like to thank the
committee again for considering these important and relevant
bills. And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Ann Wagner of Missouri.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to express my
support for all of the bills being considered here this
morning. I would first like to express my heartfelt condolences
to the innocent victims, children, and families of the
Manchester tragedy. There is no coherence at all to such
injustice, no words for such despicable hatred. And as a mother
who, on many occasions, took her young children to a concert,
to a festival, a gathering--to specifically target our innocent
youth is barbaric, and, frankly, unthinkable. My heart aches
for the loss of these families. I thank my colleagues for this
resolution.
And I, too, want to join the chorus of others who stand
with the LGBT community in Chechnya. The brutality and the
prejudice is, again, unthinkable. I am glad that this committee
is standing together as a whole.
I especially want to speak this morning about the Women,
Peace, and Security Act of 2017. As a proud mother of an active
duty United States Army captain, I am very invested in good
solutions to conflict situations around the world. It is hard
for me to imagine why anyone thinks it is a good idea to
negotiate anything, let alone peace, without women at the
table. Mothers and women worldwide should be primary
participants in the peace negotiations that so deeply impact
them and their families. We know that peace processes that
include women have a 35 percent better chance of lasting at
least 15 years. That translates not only into dollars saved,
but lives saved. I thank my colleagues for this important
legislation.
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to comment on House
Resolution 354, condemning the violence against peaceful
protesters outside the Turkish Ambassador's residence on May
16. Speaking on behalf of the many constituents in my district,
Missouri's Second Congressional District, who have ties to
Turkey, I was appalled to see such a violation of basic
constitutional rights on American soil. I urge the Turkish
Government to respect freedom of expression, speech, and
assembly for all people in Turkey, and especially here in the
United States of America. Anything less is intolerable. I would
be proud to join my colleagues in protest, again, in front of
the Turkish Embassy. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Ted Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am proud to
cosponsor the resolution condemning the violence and
persecution of the LGBT community in Chechnya and the
Manchester resolution, and I am supportive of all the
resolutions. But I wanted just to take a moment to talk about
what happened in Manchester and the resolution that we are
about to pass. Our condolences go out to the families of all
who lost loved ones and of all the injured. And at this time of
year, like so many of us, I have been reflecting a lot on young
people. I was on stage a couple nights ago as 500 students, my
son included, received his high school diploma. And it is
impossible, at a beautiful event like that, something that is
happening in cities and towns all across America, to think
about the horrific and vile and cowardly actions like that
committed by this terrorist in Manchester.
There is an opportunity at moments like this to express
condolences and to let the citizens of Manchester and the
citizens of England understand how resolutely we stand with
them and how nations throughout the world stand to fight this
evil scourge of terrorism. There is also an opportunity,
though, to think about, particularly as we have seen the photos
come out over the past couple of days, of the victims, to think
about these young people whose lives were extinguished, and to
think about all of the young people who are not much older than
all those students getting their high school diplomas this
month and next month, who are on the front lines fighting back
to keep us safe, who are on the ground as first responders
rushing when there is an attack, who do so much to keep us safe
and to help make us the country that we are in leading this
battle.
This, Mr. Chairman, as you know, is a sometimes divisive
place. It is true for this committee; it is true for the
Congress as a whole. But when 22 lives are taken by terrorists,
and dozens more are injured, and so many of them are children,
are kids, there is an opportunity to pause for just a second,
and to pause as we are getting ready to head home, to realize
that in the midst of all of these very difficult, sometimes
nasty battles that we are engaged in, that ultimately we are
able to engage in these battles because of what we share. And
it is a commitment to freedom and democracy, the same kind of
commitment and openness that our allies share, the same kind of
openness that made people feel comfortable to drop their kids
off at a concert in Manchester. And it is that same commitment
in defending that freedom that we are speaking out in support
of when we pass this resolution.
We have just a moment like this to be grateful that we can
come together to remember how important it is and to let that
guide us as we go about the rest of our work. We will never
bring back the lives of those kids who perished in Manchester,
but we absolutely can help to honor their memory and the memory
of all those whose lives are taken by terrorists in fighting
back to preserve our freedoms, to defend our freedoms, and to
defeat this terrible scourge of terrorism. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We thank you for your eloquent, heartfelt
remarks, Mr. Deutch. We now go to Steve Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle have, I think, so well and so
thoroughly articulated the reasons why each of these
resolutions are so important and ought to be supported, that I
will be very brief in my comments. I would urge my colleagues
to support them all. And just commenting, again, on Manchester,
which happened so recently, you know, the first thing that
struck me was, what kind of sick mind could have done such a
horrible thing? To assemble a bomb made of nuts and bolts and
nails, and then to detonate that bomb among children. What kind
of sick mind would do such a thing? And it is the same kind of
sick mind that drove a stolen truck through a crowd in Nice,
France; that blew up U.S. Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania; that
blew up trains in Madrid, Spain; that murdered innocent people
at a nightclub here in the United States in Orlando; that
slaughtered unarmed U.S. military personnel at Fort Hood; that
killed and maimed innocents at the Boston Marathon; that
butchered people at an office party in San Bernardino; and yes,
that brought down those buildings, and that struck the
Pentagon, not too far from here, on September 11, 2001.
And it is radical jihadist terrorists that we and other
nations around the world have been dealing with for a long
time, and unfortunately we will probably have to deal with far
into the future. And we and the other nations around the world
need to be very serious about this. It has to be fought, yes,
within Saudi Arabia. That is where most of those folks that hit
us on September 11th were from. And that is why I think
President Trump's trip recently was so important, to get those
Sunni nations on our side. And when I say ``our side,'' I mean
the side of freedom-loving people all over the world. And that
is the vast majority of the people on this globe, including
Muslims and non-Muslims. They are, overall, very peaceful
people who just want to raise their children and be able to
take them to a concert and not wonder if they are actually
going to come home, or if they are going to come home
disfigured, or blinded, or with their eardrums burst.
You know, it is just horrific stuff that the civilized
world is dealing with right now. So I hope that the President
made some progress in that trip recently, because we have to
have those folks, in particular, on our side. Because they are
within their midst. They are here too. They are in England,
they are all over Europe and all over the world. So it is a
battle that the world better get serious about, because if it
is not, there is going to be a lot more victims. And I yield
back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Ranking
member for putting together an excellent package of legislation
for us to consider, and that appears to have the wide support
of everyone on the committee. I look forward to marking up the
bill on Iran, which I know that we are still working on and
improving. As to the individual pieces of legislation, if Putin
is going to claim sovereignty over Chechnya, he must take
responsibility for what goes on there. And this savage and
gruesome attack on the LGBTQ community there is simply
outrageous. If we are able to get one of the survivors from
Chechnya here, I think that that should be the occasion of a
hearing either of our committee or of the relevant
subcommittee.
Chairman Royce. I think you are absolutely right, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. The second bill deals with this terrible
incident at the Turkish Ambassador's residence. I look forward
to joining with the gentleman from California and apparently
most of the committee in demonstrating in front of that
residence that we will not be cowed, and that free speech and
the right to assemble continues to exist in the United States,
even if it doesn't exist in Turkey.
But we should go beyond this and say that unless the
perpetrators are extradited with a waiver of their immunity
here to the United States, that we should, by statute, prohibit
Erdogan ever bringing a security detail back to the United
States. They should not be given visas. All of us depend upon
American security for our security. And if the President of
Turkey wants to return here, he should also rely on the host
government, just as our Ambassador relies on the host
government in Turkey every day. It would simply be outrageous
for us to grant visas to the same security force that has
assaulted Americans, fled the jurisdiction, hid behind
diplomatic immunity, and trampled on American freedoms.
As to the resolution condemning the terrorist attack in
Manchester, I join with the comments made earlier by so many of
our colleagues, including the gentleman from Florida and the
gentleman from Ohio, and agree that we need to be talking to
our friends in Saudi Arabia about what version of Islam they
are supporting around the world.
Women are critical for peace and security, and I think the
gentlelady from Missouri expressed that well, as did others.
Finally, as to the State Department authorities bill, any
reorganization plan needs to be submitted for review to this
committee. But it would be good if we could prevail upon the
Secretary of State to actually appoint people to serve in the
various posts of the State Department. If he wants to put
together a reorganization plan later, that is fine. But it is
hard to have diplomacy with so very few of the appointed spots
filled. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
thank you for this pack of bills that put us on record on some
areas that we definitely should be on record as Americans, and
as Members of the United States Congress. First, about the
Turkish Prime Minister or President who came here and allowed
his--not only allowed, but watched as his security detail
brutally beat American citizens, bloodied these people who have
every right to be there protesting as U.S. citizens, and
President Erdogan sat and watched that, I hope he gets the
message through this legislation.
He is not welcome in the United States if he is going to
think that he can attack Americans for expressing their opinion
and their opposition to his policies. Let us note that he is
turning Turkey into what was an acceptable level of democracy
into a country that is being turned over to the worst type of
Islamist terrorist dictatorship that exists in the world. And
he has arrested tens of thousands of people. This is not the
kind of person that we should be kissing up to. And he made the
situation even worse when he called the American Ambassador in
a few days ago, and in an arrogant insult to the American
people suggested that we should, in some way, apologize for the
brutal attack on American citizens by his own bodyguards.
Erdogan, if he thinks this way, is not welcome in our country.
Number two, about Manchester, let us just note this
emphasizes, again, that we are at war, and our primary enemy in
this war are radical Islamist terrorists who murder innocent
people. They are not at war with our military. They are not at
war with the establishment. They are attacking and targeting
helpless Americans and helpless other people throughout the
world. It reminds me, when we talk about innocent people being
killed over in Manchester, it reminds me that, of course, Great
Britain went through another period of bombing. In World War
II, the Nazis brutally bombed civilian targets in Britain.
Well, Britain and the United States and Britain and the rest of
the world stood together against this evil. And we need to
stand together against this evil. Again, let no one doubt that
America will stand with them in this effort to defeat the
current evil that threatens western civilization.
Let us note also, and I am going to put this in passing,
that during the Second World War, the primary evil was the
Nazis and the Japanese militarists. During that time, yes, we
worked with Joseph Stalin in Russia. We should be working with
Russia to defeat the radical Islamist terrorists that threaten
western civilization.
But let us note that I support your bill today, which would
draw attention to the suppression of the LGBT community in
Chechnya. The fact is, when Russia does something wrong, we
should condemn it. We should make sure that is a policy. And
this type of, again, repression by an ally in our fight against
radical Islam, it behooves us to be on record against that
policy in Russia, and let the people of the world know that we
stand for freedom in the United States of America, and also
don't put up with this type of bloody repression. So with that
said, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. You provided great
leadership for this committee on these moral issues.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Any other members seeking
recognition? If not, hearing no further requests, the question
occurs on the items considered en bloc. All those in favor say
aye. All those opposed no. In the opinion of the Chair, the
ayes have it, and the measures considered en bloc are agreed
to. And without objection, the measures considered en bloc are
ordered favorably reported, as amended. Staff is directed to
make any technical and conforming changes. And the chair is
authorized to seek House consideration under suspension of the
rules. And that concludes our business for today.
Again, I would like to thank not just Ranking Member Engel,
but all of our committee members for their contributions, for
their assistance in today's markup. The committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:44 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
