- EAST AFRICA'S QUIET FAMINE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EAST AFRICA'S QUIET FAMINE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON AFRICA, GLOBAL HEALTH,
GLOBAL HUMAN RIGHTS, AND
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 28, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
24-832PDF                        WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and
International Organizations

CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey, Chairman
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         KAREN BASS, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     AMI BERA, California
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
Wisconsin                        THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Matthew Nims, Acting Director, Office of Food for Peace,
Bureau for Democracy, Conflict and Humanitarian Assistance,
U.S. Agency for International Development......................     3
Mr. Ken Isaacs, vice president, Programs and Government
Relations, Samaritan's Purse...................................    29
Mr. Michael Bowers, vice president, humanitarian leadership and
response, Mercy Corps..........................................    38
Mr. Thabani Maphosa, vice-president for food assistance, World
Vision International...........................................    53
Ms. Faustine Wabwire, senior foreign assistance policy advisor,
Bread for the World Institute..................................    64

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Mr. Matthew Nims: Prepared statement.............................     6
Mr. Ken Isaacs: Prepared statement...............................    32
Mr. Michael Bowers: Prepared statement...........................    41
Mr. Thabani Maphosa: Prepared statement..........................    56
Ms. Faustine Wabwire: Prepared statement.........................    67

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    86
Hearing minutes..................................................    87
The Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey, and chairman, Subcommittee on
Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights, and International
Organizations:
2017 Bread for the World Hunger Report.........................    88
Statement of Sean Callahan of Catholic Relief Services.........    96
The Honorable Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., a Representative in
Congress from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Statement of the
Embassy of the Republic of Sudan...............................   104
Mr. Thabani Maphosa:
World Vision East Africa Hunger Crisis Overview................   108
World Vision Somalia Emergency Appeal..........................   109
World Vision South Sudan Situation Report......................   110

EAST AFRICA'S QUIET FAMINE

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health,

Global Human Rights, and International Organizations,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Christopher H.
Smith (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Smith. The hearing will come to order.
I will be joined momentarily by Ranking Member Bass and
some of the other members of the subcommittee. But there are
some votes that will be coming up on the floor so we will start
right at 2:30.
Thank you and welcome to each and every one of you.
According to estimates by the United Nations, more than 28
million people in east Africa today desperately need immediate
food aid.
Three countries in the region have emergency level food aid
needs--Somalia, South Sudan, and Sudan. Meanwhile, areas of
Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda also face crisis level hunger with
some households already in emergency conditions.
In Somalia, at least 6.2 million people need food
assistance and that's more than half that country's population.
In South Sudan, nearly two-thirds of the population
requires assistance and in fact about 4.9 million South
Sudanese, or about 40 percent of the population, face severe
life-threatening hunger with that number expected to rise to
5.5 million by July.
In Sudan more than 5.8 million Sudanese are believed to
require assistance, 3.3 million of them in still-embattled
Darfur states.
Unfortunately, the devastating impact of the current famine
isn't confined to the hardest hit drought areas. Uganda itself,
struggling with the effects of drought in some areas, has had
to contend with nearly 800,000 refugees from South Sudan.
By the beginning of this month as many as 3,000 South
Sudanese a week cross the border into Uganda. Lest we get
caught up in the huge numbers involved in this crisis, we must
always keep in mind what those numbers actually mean for the
people in the long-term as well as the immediate and short
term.
According to the U.N.'s World Food Programme, calculation's
in January, global acute malnutrition rates for Somali children
and pregnant and lactating women entering Ethiopia reached a
whopping 78 percent.
That means that Somali children in the womb won't have
enough nourishment to complete their growth in utero. Most, if
not all, will be born stunted, which will be made worse by
their continuing lack of nutrition once born.
Their mothers will be severely weakened and may not survive
childbirth. All of them will have damaged immune systems and
will be susceptible to diseases such as cholera or acute
diarrhea and may die a preventable death.
In any event, the futures of far too many children and
their potential contributions to their society will be forever
limited and stunting cannot be reversed.
In 2011, the first U.N.-declared famine since the 1980s
occurred in east Africa, directly affecting more than 10
million people.
This subcommittee held a hearing on the crisis on September
28th of that year and worked with humanitarian groups to ensure
that aid was available and provided in the most in-need areas
of east Africa. We will follow this hearing with a similar
effort.
Six years ago, there was great attention given to the
famine then. It was a catastrophe that caught the world's
attention.
Somehow, the current famine has been caught up in the
numerous global crises we face today and is not as much in the
news as it ought have been and it is one of the largest
disasters we have faced in recent years.
In 2011, we struggled with how to get humanitarian aid to
those in Somalia who lived in areas controlled by al-Shabaab.
That problem has not been eliminated 6 years later.
In 2017, not only is the ongoing conflict in Somalia
hampering humanitarian efforts there but the continuing civil
conflict in South Sudan has amplified the impact of the
drought.
In 2015, a congressional staff delegation visited the
historical Equatorial provinces of that country, which still
produced food, even though poor transportation prevented it
from being distributed beyond the borders of that region.
There was no conflict there at the time, only internally
displaced people. Now all three of the former Equatorial
provinces are seeing a spreading conflict and with farmers
unable to plant or to harvest, the lack of food will only
worsen over time.
U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres has accused South
Sudan's Government of ignoring the plight of its own citizens
struggling through the famine.
He accused that government's leadership of refusal to even
acknowledge the crisis or fulfil its responsibilities to end
it.
At a time in which access to food is so critical in South
Sudan, militias in that country supported by both the
government and the rebels have been accused of intentionally
destroying crops, looting cattle, and damaging vital water
supplies.
In July of last year, it is believed that government
soldiers were responsible for looting 1.5 million metric tons
of food from the World Food Programme's warehouse in the
capital city of Juba.
As a matter of fact, Greg Simpkins and I traveled to South
Sudan last August. We went to Juba and we raised all of these
issues, started with Salva Kiir, to the Defense Minister, to
the head of the U.N. mission, and many others including
Catholic bishops, trying to underscore our concern about food
insecurity, the violence that was escalating because we were in
a place where just about a month before that about 200 soldiers
had killed each other from two warring factions right at the
Presidential palace.
It was absurd, and we did raise the concerns of our
colleagues, our Speaker and the President. But not much has
happened in response, sadly.
The conflicts in Somalia and South Sudan affect the entire
region and place added burdens on their neighbors, who must
also cope with recurring drought.
These two countries, along with Eritrea, remain the largest
source of refugees globally. We cannot control the weather
patterns that lead to recurring droughts in east Africa but we
must find a way to end the conflicts of those two nations so
that manmade disasters don't outstrip the impact of nature
itself.
I'll never forget how the famine in Ethiopia during the
Mengistu regime was made all the worse because he used food as
a weapon. We can't see a replay of that atrocity today.
The term famine, like the term genocide, should not be used
lightly. To be considered a famine there must be an extreme
lack of food in at least 20 percent of the households in any
area, acute malnourishment must affect 30 percent of children,
and accrued death rate of more than two deaths per 10,000 must
exist daily in the affected areas.
As our witnesses will describe for us today, the situation
is already or soon will be in a state of famine in areas of
east Africa.
Our mission today is to better understand the parameters of
the crisis, its causative factors and the most effective action
that must be taken now to save lives and end the threat of an
even greater casualty count.
So I want to thank again our witnesses and begin the
witness testimony with Mr. Matthew Nims, who has more than 17
years of international development and emergency programming
experience.
He has been with USAID since the year 2000 and has worked
in Indonesia, Guyana, Afghanistan, and here in Washington.
Starting in August 2011, he began serving as the deputy
director of the Office of Food for Peace and since January 2017
has been the acting director of the office with a $2 billion
budget.
Food for Peace is the U.S. Government's lead for addressing
food insecurity worldwide in both emergency and development
situations.
Mr. Nims, the floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF MR. MATTHEW NIMS, ACTING DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF FOOD
FOR PEACE, BUREAU FOR DEMOCRACY, CONFLICT AND HUMANITARIAN
ASSISTANCE, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Nims. Chairman Smith, esteemed staff, thank you for the
invitation to come speak with you today about the food security
situation in east Africa, especially the threat of famine in
Somalia.
Thank you for drawing attention to the plight of the
world's vulnerable people and your long history of support for
humanitarian efforts.
This year, massive humanitarian crises are occurring around
the world, demanding an immediate, substantial, and creative
response.
Our famine early warning system network, FEWS NET, warns
that an unprecedented 70 million people will need emergency
food assistance this year due to ongoing conflict, severe
drought, and economic instability.
These crises are largely manmade with other compounding
factors like the drought in Somalia, making the situation even
more untenable.
East Africa is facing one of the worst droughts ever
recorded and as many as 15 million people in Somalia, Ethiopia,
and Kenya are facing food and water shortages as a result.
In many areas, vegetation conditions are the worst on
record and if the rains fail this spring, the situation will
continue to deteriorate.
We are seeing the worst in Somalia, where the effects of
drought are being compounded by insecurity. In 2011, nearly
260,000 Somalis, half of them children under five, died in a
famine triggered by what was at the time east Africa's worst
drought in 60 years.
If current trends continue, famine, a term we do not use
lightly, could happen again in Somalia. Already, more than 6
million Somalis, over half the population, are in need of
humanitarian assistance and the rate of severe acute
malnutrition is rising.
The crisis in Somalia also has regional effects, as people
leave to look for food and support in neighboring countries.
This migration, as well as refugees arriving from South Sudan,
strains already depleted neighbors Ethiopia and Kenya.
But even with these challenges, these governments are
proactively responding to the drought and USAID is aligning its
investments with these country-led efforts.
USAID has rapidly scaled-up and redirected its efforts,
providing vital food and malnutrition treatment as well as safe
water, improved sanitation and hygiene, and even in the midst
of an emergency we look for opportunities to build resilience
and strengthen the communities' ability to respond to future
shocks and stresses.
I recently visited a livestock market that is part of these
resilience-building activities in the arid lands of northern
Kenya.
The market, and others like it, support the livelihood
activities of the pastoralists in the region, providing
livestock trading and veterinarian services and in turn spawn
opportunities for entrepreneurs in the local economy.
Jacob, for instance, fixes the motorcycles of people
traveling to and from the new markets, and Mercy runs a
restaurant to feed traders using locally grown food.
These efforts across the region are expanding economic
opportunities, strengthening drought cycle management and
improving health and human capital.
Over the long term, a British study estimates that every
dollar invested in resilience results in nearly $3 in reduced
humanitarian spending, avoided loss, and improved wellbeing.
Challenges remain, however. In South Sudan, years of
intense violence has transformed the world's youngest nation
into one of the most food insecure in the world.
Nearly half of South Sudan's population faces life-
threatening hunger this year, and famine was declared in
several counties just last month.
In northeastern Nigeria, more than 5.1 million people are
facing severe food insecurity and nearly 450,000 children will
experience life-threatening, severe acute malnutrition this
year. Famine likely did occur in 2016 but access has made it
difficult to confirm.
Lastly, I would be remiss not to mention the situation in
Yemen, which is experiencing the largest food security
emergency in the world.
Conflict, political instability, economic crisis, and
rising food and fuel prices have left more than 17 million
people food insecure.
This situation has repercussions in east Africa as refugees
flee to Somalia and Djibouti, who are struggling to handle the
influx even as they face their own domestic crises.
These broader challenges are important to note because we
are never focusing on just one country or region at a time. The
United States cannot do it alone.
We need the United Nations, affected governments, donor
partners, and NGOs like the ones that will be testifying after
me to work together to tackle these challenges.
I want to thank these partners and our staff at USAID for
their tireless efforts and dedication to helping those affected
around the world.
Thank you, Chairman Smith, for your attention to these
issues and for congressional support provided to USAID,
especially our humanitarian programs over the years. Please
know that your support transforms and saves lives every day.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nims follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Nims, for your
testimony and above all for your work, which has been
tremendous over the years and, obviously, during a crisis like
this it is needed now more than ever.
Let me just ask you a few questions. About a month ago, you
had testified that Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia all
pledged regional cooperation and cross-border cooperation to
tackle the drought and the underlying fragility of the region.
Has there been any fruit to that effort? Are they truly
cooperating? And are we ahead of the curve this time, are we
just keeping or head afloat, or are we behind?
Mr. Nims. Thank you for that question.
As far as cooperation efforts of those countries that you
mentioned, through the IGAD network they have brought together
leaders of those governments to work better together to address
this crisis.
I think the efforts, most notably in Kenya and Ethiopia,
are showing the greatest strides. For example, the same drought
that is affecting Somalia is also affecting those two
countries.
But those two countries are better able to withstand what's
happening. Kenya, for example, is putting $1.6 billion of its
own resources toward helping people in Kenya that are affected
by this drought.
Ethiopia has a longstanding social safety net program in
conjunction with USAID and other donors to be able to better
withstand what's going on.
So the cooperation definitely has started and IGAD is in a
good position to do this.
Mr. Smith. Let me ask you with regards to aid workers, when
Greg Simpkins and I were in Juba, again, late August of last
year, we kept raising the issue including with the military--
with five of the top generals and the Defense Minister--about
the need--this was after the Terrain incident where several aid
workers were raped, many aid workers were beaten and
diplomats--one journalist, a South Sudanese man, was killed--
and as it turned out one of the aid workers, and I didn't know
this until about 3 days before we left, was actually from my
district.
She was not raped but she was sexually assaulted and the
two military officers that broke in and broke up what was about
to become a rape prevented even further tragedy to her.
But she has been severely traumatized. She was actually
going to testify at a hearing we had on South Sudan and then
just didn't want--she was going to do it by way of phone with
no name attribution, anonymously. But it was just too much to
tell the story of what an aid worker goes through.
So my question is, the U.N. Panel of Experts for South
Sudan said that South Sudan is the deadliest in the world for
aid workers.
It seems to me that whether it be USAID and our mission
leaders and people on the ground or anyone else from the NGO
community, we have got to just keep pounding away with these
governments and all parties, including rebels, to leave the aid
workers alone.
There needs to be a sacrosanct--this is almost like when
the Red Cross would show up even the most hostile of forces
would at least allow the white flag for humanitarian purposes
to go forward.
What can we do to--maybe an initial assessment of how bad
it really is in each of these countries and what can we do to
make sure that that aid does then flow and that would include
the indigenous aid workers because sometimes they are picked
off and hurt because they are seen, well, they are South
Sudanese and nobody will make a big deal about it.
Of course, we look at their lives as equally important to
everyone else's life. So if you could speak to that.
Mr. Nims. Chairman Smith, thank you very much for that
question, and it is actually incredibly relevant. We have just
received reports as of yesterday that six workers from an
indigenous NGO were killed in South Sudan--three Kenyans and I
think it is now three South Sudanese. They worked for a local
NGO.
USAID does not have a direct relationship with that entity
but they are definitely partners in trying to bring lifesaving
aid to South Sudan for the greater humanitarian community.
I believe that now, since the conflict began in 2013, that
we have had over 80 fatalities of aid workers in South Sudan.
It is an incredibly dangerous place to work.
And I think you're correct in saying that we have to
ensure, all donor governments and all operating partners, that
the safety of our people are of utmost concern and that we
continue to take measures to ensure when they go out to do this
work that they are protected and that all parties know that
these are neutral actors in place.
This has been an issue that we are not just seeing in South
Sudan. We are seeing other parts of the world as well. As part
of the World Humanitarian Summit last summer in Turkey, we
talked about this issue and it is very concerning for donors,
especially for our office where not only do we have our
partners, we also have USAID staff in these conditions.
And this is one of the great changes I think that we have
seen in the last 5 years about the nature of conflict and what
we are responding to is that conflicts are not driven
necessarily by the natural disasters that they used to be.
They are being driven by conflict. Conflict necessarily
puts greater risk on our partners. I also think that the people
that will be following will be able to talk in greater detail
about some of the actions they are taking.
Mr. Smith. Let me just ask you, how much money are we
allocating toward this crisis? Is there a low estimate, medium
estimate, high estimate?
What do you think is going to be needed? Will there be a
request of Congress for additional funding or do you have
enough that you could either reprogram or you already have?
And, secondly, on the issue of prepositioning, again, just
having been in Juba it was appalling that armed forces would go
to WFP warehouse and pretty much strip it clean of all of the
foodstuffs that were there which were intended for extremely
hungry people.
Prepositioning, GAO found that it does save time. It's
there in a way that could be accessed quickly. But it does cost
money, and then there is the risk of theft. How do we balance
all of that?
And the idea of WFP tracking food delivery--are we on top
of that with them to make sure that it gets to where it is
supposed to be in a timely fashion to alleviate suffering?
Mr. Nims. Thank you, Chairman, for those questions.
Let's talk about some of the numbers. Right now, since FY
2016 Food for Peace alone has provided, including South Sudan,
close to $1 billion of resources have been allocated in food
resources to all of those affected countries and that is
primarily from the Office of Food for Peace.
Our sister office, the Office of Foreign Disaster
Assistance in USAID, also has done over $500 million in
conjunction with our funding.
So I think that there is a robust response from the United
States in these crises and we can break down by country some of
these operations, even by partner at a later date if you would
like that.
Mr. Smith. If you could provide that for the record as
quickly as possible that would be very----
Mr. Nims. Not a problem. We will definitely be on that as
soon as this hearing ends.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from Mr. Matthew Nims to Question Asked
During the Hearing by the Honorable Christopher H. Smith

In FY 2016-2017, the U.S. Agency for International Development has
provided more than $983 million to the Horn of Africa to date,
including $762 million in emergency food assistance from Food for
Peace. In addition, the U.S. State Department's Bureau of Population,
Refugees and Migration has provided $286 million in humanitarian
funding for a total of nearly $1.27 billion from the U.S. Government.
In addition, USAID has provided more than $708 million to South
Sudan in FY 2016-2017, including $565 million in emergency food
assistance from Food for Peace. The U.S. State Department's Bureau of
Population, Refugees and Migration has also provided nearly $123
million in humanitarian funding for a total of nearly $831million from
the U.S. Government.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Nims. As far as prepositioning, especially in South
Sudan but it really goes for other places that we are working
as well, but South Sudan is a little bit particular. Because of
the rains in South Sudan, our partners and the donors work
very, very closely to ensure before the rains hit that food is
prepositioned in warehouses throughout the country that needs
to be there so that it can be accessed.
Conflict will disrupt that--our ability to preposition into
those warehouses. The case in Juba you mentioned, WFP in
particular took heroic efforts to remove much of the food
before the conflict actually began.
Not all of the food was taken out but that warehouse in and
of itself they knew that the conflict actors were coming and
the team moved actually the majority of the food out of that
warehouse before the conflict.
So our teams on the ground are very adept at being able to
know what's going on on the ground and to protect those
resources. There is always a danger in prepositioning but
because of the access we get when these conditions allow us not
able to deliver having that food in place is of primary
importance. So we are going to continue to use that tool to
ensure we are best able to respond.
Your final question about WFP tracking or being able to
account for the resources--this is something of critical
importance to USAID in general and definitely our office.
We at USAID partner with WFP and the NGOs to ensure that
those that have been targeted are the ones that are receiving
the aid and there are several ways that we do this.
First of all is ensuring that those identified are the ones
that need the aid. In other words, the most vulnerable are
getting it.
Our partners are very, very good at ensuring when they go
to communities, those relationships that they have they are
able to identify those who are most in need.
The second part, when we actually go for distribution, is
that we have teams of monitors in place and we have certain
biometric measures that we can employ to ensure that those that
have been identified are actually the people that are getting
the aid.
This can go from a retinal scan, to an ID card, to even a
fingerprint that we would employ to ensure that those people
are the ones that are supposed to be getting the aid.
And then finally, we would do, especially in places like
Somalia and in other places, is a follow-up distribution
testing to ensure that the people have actually received the
aid.
This can be done through cell phone surveys similar to our
Nielsen ratings that we have here in the United States where we
will do a random call of beneficiaries to ensure that they
actually did receive the aid as well as setting up hotlines so
that the beneficiaries can actually call in to ensure that
they've got that.
Finally, what we do is that we, the USAID, has employed
third-party monitoring. These are actually groups of NGOs or
other actors that we employ to go back to those areas to ensure
that the food that was allocated to those regions actually was
delivered to those people that we are supposed to.
This all combines to make sure that we have a pretty good
eye on what we plan to do actually happens and reaches those
needy beneficiaries.
Mr. Smith. And before you leave, my good friend and
colleague, Ranking Member Bass, one issue that we pressed Salva
Kiir on relentlessly and have done so since our trip there in
August, to his Defense Minister, his Vice President, who I have
seen since, is zero tolerance for sexual violence--violence of
all kinds but including sexual violence.
The report on the Terrain installation suggested that they
do that, which is what we were asking for. But it still hasn't
happened.
And until the military up and down the command, every
aspect of it, realizes that its security forces cannot rape and
harass people, particularly aid workers who are seemingly one
of the most targeted groups; we really have to raise the bar, I
think.
They have promised they would do it. Kiir told us he would
do it, told Greg and I face to face, and it is about time to
get it done. That was in August.
I know you are absolutely on board pushing that. But know
that we work in tandem, all of us. It is bipartisan.
That has got to end and they need to implement a strategy
that is zero tolerance because just like we had with many of
the peacekeepers when they were deployed to Goma and other
places, and I had several hearings on that. Went there.
As you know, I wrote the trafficking laws for the United
States, the Trafficking Victims Protection Acts. George W. Bush
did a zero tolerance policy for our military and it holds
today, and if somebody violates it, even to the point of
prostitution, the Uniform Code of Military Justice is as clear
as a bell.
It is actionable and they can go to prison and they should
go to prison, those who violate it.
So, Kiir, we told him that. We said, we know that years
back you had a fondness for President Bush--well, he did it
with our military--please do it with yours.
And he said he would and he hasn't. So it is a point of
great consternation and anger now that they have refused to
actually do it.
So I just would hope you would convey that too because,
again, the people we want to protect are the indigenous South
Sudanese, obviously, and the beneficiaries of the aid and all
those wonderful women and men who put their lives on the line
as aid workers to help.
So thank you so much for your testimony.
Mr. Nims. Thank you very much, Chairman. Thank you for your
efforts on that point.
Ms. Bass. Thank you very much for coming and giving your
testimony today and I just had a few questions for you.
We have a markup in the full committee tomorrow and we have
a resolution on the famine, and I just wanted to know what you
thought about it.
Right now the resolution is focusing on South Sudan, but
whether or not you thought Somalia and Nigeria needed to be
included as well.
That's one question. I also want to ask you about the role
of the AU. Is the AU helping and what role they are playing
specifically?
And our chairman here was talking about President Kiir in
terms of the peacekeepers. But I would also want to know
whether or not they have stopped.
I don't know if you mentioned this, Mr. Chair, but whether
they stopped. They had increased the fees for humanitarian
workers.
It was some crazy dollar amount--$10,000 or something if
you wanted to come in and provide humanitarian support. They
got condemned internationally for that. I don't know if they
have backed away.
Mr. Nims. Thank you, Ranking Member Bass, for those
questions.
On the first question about including Somalia and Nigeria
in the resolution, the situation in both of those countries is
very severe as well.
In Nigeria, what we are seeing is over 5 million people at
risk of severe food insecurity and even about the same level in
Somalia.
The difference in Somalia is that in about the next 2 or 3
weeks, if the rains fail, which it is still unknown exactly if
that's going to happen, we could be seeing even more need
because those are very crucial rains at this time.
So it is expected that the needs are going to grow pretty
quickly in Somalia as well. And in Nigeria, the real issue has
been the lack of access in some of those areas--in fact, zero
access in some of them still, and when our partners have had
access they are finding----
Ms. Bass. Because of Boko Haram or because of other----
Mr. Nims. Boko Haram. Because of activities of Boko Haram,
most definitely, and when our partners have had some access
they are finding just horrific conditions on the ground with
severe acute malnutrition rates that are really unheard of in
quite some time--over 50 percent in certain cases.
So that is a very, very severe crisis and I can say that I
think that the partners have really stepped up their game in
Nigeria. I think that there are several issues to contend with
but I think that we are better placed than we were as a better
humanitarian community than, let's say, even 6 or 8 months ago.
That's not to say there is a lot of work left to do and
there is a lot of areas of access that we just are not getting
into.
Coming back to Somalia, what we are seeing, depending on
the rains or not, we are still in midst of a very serious
situation.
We have lots of people--like I said, 5 million people that
are really at risk right now. Again, what's a little bit
different about this is that Somalia definitively it is because
of a drought that's happening right now.
It's not to say that there is not intense conflict that is
really what got us here but the drought is what is most
concerning and what we need to do now--what USAID is doing is
not waiting for this to happen.
We are acting now. We are moving food into the country now
and working with our partners to ensure that we are there.
What's a little bit different than the situation now is the
fact that we have acted a little bit earlier than before in
2011, as the chairman was saying, and we also have better
access, meaning our partners have much better access than they
did in 2011 and really the viability of al-Shabaab has been
reduced. Back in 2011, al-Shabaab was in control of the capital
Mogadishu. That is definitely not the case now.
What our partners are telling us is that in the urban areas
of Somalia we have pretty good access. We have pretty good
sustained access. The rural areas are still of concern.
So around 600,000 to 900,000 people in those rural areas
really are still getting limited to no access and that is very
concerning, especially as the drought conditions worsen.
Your question about the AU, I think----
Ms. Bass. Well, actually before you go there, the--so in
Nigeria the Nigerian Government has also said that Boko Haram
was under control. So----
Mr. Nims. I would not be in a good position to talk about
the military and the government's efforts directly on Boko
Haram.
I can say that our partners definitely feel that there are
places that are unsafe for them to access. And similar to
Chairman Smith's question about putting our partners in danger,
without adequate control of a situation our partners are just
simply not going to go to those places and that definitely
still exists.
Ms. Bass. Of course not. The AU?
Mr. Nims. The AMISOM troops have had significant impact in
Somalia. I think that the combined forces of Kenya and the
Ethiopians have really opened up those corridors and really
allowed the NGOs to be able to reestablish a very good network
and very good operations in there.
It is hoped that that continues and with elections in Kenya
and with continuing growth in Ethiopia, let's hope that
continues. That is a very, I think, good sign of how the AU in
general has had positive impact on this and I think that will
continue.
Ms. Bass. So--and what about the AU and also President Kiir
in terms of aid workers being able to come?
Mr. Nims. Correct. So we did hear about a week or so ago
about a $10,000 per humanitarian worker fee to be able to do
this. I can say for certain to you right now that that has not
occurred--that our partners are still operating, that they have
not been asked to pay those fees.
Ms. Bass. Was that not true or he backed away from it or--
--
Mr. Nims. I think many things----
Ms. Bass. Kind of important if it wasn't true.
Mr. Nims. I think that the announcement was made. We
believe that it was made. But I think the efforts of the donors
and the U.S. Ambassador there has made it very clear that this
fee is untenable and will not be paid and I think that has had
substantial impact on it, going forward.
Ms. Bass. So let me ask you a question. In the President's
proposed budget with a 30-plus percent cut to USAID, if that
cut actually went through, how would you respond to this
situation that you're facing now?
Mr. Nims. So we at USAID, we have seen the President's
blueprint and it hasn't specifically mentioned cuts to Food for
Peace, and we continue to work on the budget.
But I have no information exactly on the cuts for 2018 or
the potential impacts that's going to have on our budget.
Ms. Bass. Okay. I thought that there was a significant cut
to USAID that was proposed.
Mr. Nims. I think that there have been proposed cuts. As
the exact impact of what that's going to be and how that's
going to be, especially on the humanitarian side, we really
have no information at this time.
I feel that it is my job to make sure that with the
resources we are given by Congress that we make the tough
choices that are going to be there in the future and that we
continue to stress the most vulnerable and the most needy in
the world.
Ms. Bass. Is there anything else you think Congress should
be doing right now?
Mr. Nims. I think having hearings exactly like this that
bring attention to what's going on not just in Somalia but I do
think Somalia needs attention--but other places in the world is
incredibly crucial.
I think the chairman's efforts on highlighting the safety
of humanitarian workers as well as the protection issue that is
definitely apparent in so many of these conflict situations is
incredibly useful.
When we are able to get you all to come out to see some of
these programs that is phenomenal as well. Your visits to the
field have tremendous impact for your understanding but also
for us to elevate the situations.
Ms. Bass. So is the chairman going to go?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Ms. Bass. Maybe I'll go with you.
Mr. Smith. That would be great.
Ms. Bass. I yield.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Garrett.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very briefly, the ranking member asked about the situation
in Somalia and Ethiopia. I would just give you carte blanche to
extend whether or not there is a relevant crisis in any other
nations and leave that open ended.
But specifically, obviously, when you look on a map you see
the Republic of the Sudan, obviously, North and South Sudan and
other surrounding areas and these sorts of humanitarian crises,
particularly as it relates to famine, generally don't respect
borders.
Are there other areas where we might consider the
application of assistance?
Mr. Nims. Thank you, Mr. Garrett.
What I had not talked a lot about, which was a little bit
in my opening statement, is the situation in Yemen and I think
the numbers alone in Yemen where we are looking at close to 17
million people that are severely food insecure and with the
pending conflict and the existing conflict and how that's going
to go is definitely cause for concern.
And because of the proximity of Yemen to east Africa, that
is a place that will be impacted by maybe refugees coming in or
large movements of population. Yemen is a place where access is
very difficult.
Ninety percent of Yemen's food is imported and, quite
frankly, the humanitarian assistance alone is just not going to
be able to impact that situation if there is a full collapse of
the market or even the ability to import food. I think that we
should be keeping a close eye on Yemen.
One aspect is South Sudan, and just yesterday, the head of
the World Food Programme's emergency division came in to talk
to us about some issues. She's here in town and is going to
talk about these four areas that we are talking about.
And what was surprising to me is that she brought up as bad
as South Sudan is and how it has just trended down, quite
frankly, over the last 3 years that she is most concerned about
that moving quickly into an even worse status and a lot of that
is because of the continued conflict and what she is seeing.
And I tend to agree that South Sudan is on a simmer and
could very easily go into a boil very, very quickly and I think
that we have to continue our vigilance on what's going on in
South Sudan and the conflict makes it incredibly difficult for
us to be able to do what needs to be done as humanitarians.
Mr. Garrett. So, Mr. Nims, you're here and we are speaking
about a humanitarian crisis that the vast bulk of the world is
not aware of.
To that end, is there something with which the common
observer of world events might put this on scale with? Can you
compare it to--this crisis to another humanitarian crisis to
provide scale?
Mr. Nims. So what we have been saying in humanitarian
circles is that we have not seen this level of need or
population movement or refugees since World War II.
So, in fact, this is unprecedented in, really, quite
frankly, human history, the level of need. I think it is
important to say that even in the case of Somalia where we are
seeing a drought that every single one of these four major
conflicts in northern Nigeria, in South Sudan, in Yemen and in
Somalia, are all primarily due to conflict.
These are man-made situations and I think it is important
for us to understand that as dedicated as the people in USAID,
as dedicated are the people who will be talking afterwards,
humanitarian assistance cannot solve these crises.
We really need to have political solutions. We need strong
leadership from the U.N. and other places to be able to bring
cogent solutions to what's going on.
We didn't talk about Syria or what's going on in Iraq.
These are similar longstanding crises that really exist because
of manmade conflict and we cannot, in the sense as we say
``HA''--humanitarian assistance--ourselves out of this.
Mr. Garrett. So are there any regional players who, if they
were to change attitudinally, might be of key assistance as it
relates to getting the aid where it needs to go.
Obviously, in Yemen, for example, there is real challenges
just getting on the ground much less getting aid where it needs
to go.
Are there any countries where if they were to sort of
change the current status of their activities in their own
region would be able to be particularly helpful, and who and
how so?
Mr. Nims. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
I think you're getting into a realm of me as an operator.
You know, I definitely can look at the situation----
Mr. Garrett. Sure. I respect that.
Mr. Nims [continuing]. That's going on. I think that we
have talked to our State Department colleagues and they are in
a much better position to answer some of those questions and I
appreciate that.
Mr. Garrett. Sure. Yeah, no, I get that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Garrett.
Mr. Castro.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman.
Thanks for your testimony today and I apologize if I ask
something that's been asked already. I had my Western
Hemisphere Subcommittee hearing at the same time so I've been
in and out.
But let me ask you, how will the reduced U.S. contributions
to U.S. peacekeeping affect the humanitarian situations in
South Sudan and Sudan?
Mr. Nims. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
I am really not able to say exactly how reduced funding to
any one group, especially on that level of the U.N., would have
a direct impact.
I do know that the peacekeeping force in South Sudan, for
example, has a critical role to play. But the level of funding
from the U.S. or other agencies I am not really able to say
what that exact impact would be.
Mr. Castro. But I suspect that reduced funding probably
wouldn't be helpful, right?
Mr. Nims. I would agree that probably it would not be
helpful.
Mr. Castro. Yes. Let me ask you, as far as you know what is
China's commitment to humanitarian aid in Africa and in this
region in particular?
Mr. Nims. Thank you for that question.
I am not fully versed on exactly the levels that we have
seen from the Government of China in humanitarian assistance.
I do know that USAID and the State Department have been
engaging with officials from China to increase their role in
humanitarian assistance and I believe that China recently has
announced some bits of funding for Somalia, for example.
But I don't know those exact numbers and we can definitely
get back to you on what those figures have been.
Mr. Castro. Well, and part of the reason I ask, for
example, is because China has been more active in Africa, the
continent generally, in terms of economic development
investment and I wonder if they have also stepped more
aggressively into the humanitarian aid role.
Mr. Nims. I do think that they have increased some of their
funding in certain ways and we are hopeful that it will
continue and I know that we have efforts to engage them in the
humanitarian sphere specifically on how to engage with the U.N.
and other actors. But we can get you more of that information
at a later time.
[The information referred to follows:]
Written Response Received from Mr. Matthew Nims to Question Asked
During the Hearing by the Honorable Joaquin Castro
At the 2016 U.S-China development cooperation dialogue, the United
States and China agreed to enhancing collaboration on global food
security, deepening coordination on humanitarian assistance and
disaster response, and working collaboratively with multilateral
institutions such as the World Bank and United Nations to implement
sustainable development goals. The United States has also urged China
to increase its contribution to humanitarian assistance, both to
countries directly and to multilateral agencies. Recent Chinese
humanitarian assistance funding includes:

At the second Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in
December 2015, Chinese President Xi Jinping pledged $156
million in 2016 emergency food aid to countries faced with food
security crisis caused by El Nino, including approximately $88
million in support for Ethiopia, Somalia, and nine other
African countries.

In September 2016, China announced plans to provide
$100 million to the UN Peace and Development Trust Fund in
assistance to refugees facing humanitarian need.

In 2016, WFP received $5.94 billion in contributions,
including $18.6 million from China--an $8.1 million increase
from the 2015 Chinese contribution of $10.5 million.

In 2016, UNHCR received $3.34 billion in donor
contributions, including $2.8 million from China. This is an
increase of $1.86 million from the 2015 Chinese contribution of
$941,841 to the UNHCR.

China is one of the top 10 donors to the FAO, with a
2017 contribution of $14 million. Other Chinese contributions
to UN agencies for 2017 are not yet publically available.

On the development side of food security, China has a
long-standing strategic alliance with the FAO to support
tripartite cooperation in developing countries, and has
contributed $80 million to the FAO-China South-South
Cooperation trust fund since its inception in 2008.

Mr. Castro. Sure. And, you know, and of course we want the
aid to get there regardless of where it comes from, right? You
want people to be helped when they need help.
But I have said before that the President's posture toward
many nations around the world and his scaling back of funding
for things like humanitarian aid are making the United States
take a back seat to other countries when it comes to being a
leader in the world.
And part of that is not only economic engagement but also
this kind of aid, and when you couple this scaling back with
the hostility that he's shown toward countries like Mexico, for
example, allies around the world, or Germany, Australia, I
think it puts the United States in a very precarious position
and also allows a nation, an economic competitor of ours, a
nation like China to step forward and really become an even
stronger leader around the world, and that Xi Jinping, the
President of China, probably sees Africa as a further
opportunity in addition to what they've done economically there
to step up and be helpful in ways that it looks like this
administration is committed to backing away from. What do you
think about that?
Mr. Nims. I think that USAID has been, and especially the
Office of Food for Peace and our sister office, OFDA, have
enjoyed tremendous support from Members of Congress and what we
have been able to do over the last 3 years has really saved
countless lives.
We look forward to continued support to be able to do what
we do because, as I said earlier, I think we are looking at an
unprecedented time of need and I hope that we will be able to
continue to do that.
Mr. Castro. Well, I appreciate that, and we want you all to
be successful. I worked with USAID on the global development
lab legislation that we got through the House and couldn't
quite get through the Senate. Hopefully, it'll get through this
term.
But I would hate to see the work of this Congress and, you
know, the chairman, I know, has worked on these issues a lot--I
would hate to see your work and the work of this Congress
undone by a lack of commitment, going forward.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Castro.
Mr. Nims, thank you very much for your testimony. We do
have a series of four votes, and I apologize--we will have a
brief suspension of this subcommittee.
But I would point out that the President does propose and
we dispose in the House and Senate. I've been here 37 years;
I'm in my 37th year as a Member of the House and we fought hard
and back--pushed back when Obama wanted to cut tuberculosis and
cut it significantly.
He wanted to cut neglected tropical diseases--we had a
major bill that I have introduced on neglected tropical
diseases--down from $100 million to about $82 million.
Thankfully, in a bipartisan way we pushed back.
I don't know if it is OMB or it is the President but we
always seem to have people in the White House that talk a good
game and then we end up not getting what we think we should
get.
I do think the Congress will very carefully, both the
authorizers and the appropriators, will look at these budgets
and make sure that we get humanitarian aid to where it is
needed most and to do it in a way that does our American public
proud that we care for the least of our brethren and I mean
that by situationally, of course, because they are
disadvantaged by famine.
Thank you so much, Mr. Nims, and we stand in recess.
Mr. Nims. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Recess.]
Mr. Smith. Subcommittee will resume its sitting and, again,
I apologize for the delay because of the votes. I don't think
we will have another vote for a long time. So thank you for
your patience.
We will begin now with our second panel, beginning first
with Mr. Ken Isaacs, who serves as vice president of programs
and government relations for Samaritan's Purse. He has served
as the director of the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance
within USAID.
He coordinated the United States Government response to the
Indonesian tsunami, the Pakistani earthquake, the humanitarian
relief efforts in both Darfur and southern Sudan as well as the
Niger and Ethiopia emergency responses.
He led Samaritan's Purse's organizational efforts in
Liberia in response to Ebola and testified before this
subcommittee on that very issue in 2014.
We will then hear from Mr. Michael Bowers, who is the vice
president for humanitarian leadership and response for Mercy
Corps.
In this capacity he is responsible for leading and
supporting Mercy Corps' global emergency operations, enhancing
their quality and accountability, and ensuring that they bring
the greatest benefit to people in need.
Mr. Bowers has directed the agency's activities in sub-
Saharan Africa, the Balkans, and Asia, managing programs in
food security, shelter, agriculture, and economic development.
Mr. Bowers recently led Mercy Corps' humanitarian
assistance programs in Turkey and in northern Syria in 2017.
We will then here from Thabani Maphosa, who is partnership
leader for food assistance at World Vision International and
acting senior director for the food security and livelihoods
team at World Vision, United States.
In these roles, he leads a global team of technical
specialists across the World Vision partnership to deliver
quality food assistance programming. His careers included 12
years at World Vision working in numerous countries in southern
Africa. He currently serves as the representative to World
Vision International on the World Food Programme's executive
board.
Finally, we will hear from Ms. Faustine Wabwire, who is
Bread for the World Institute's senior foreign policy analyst
at the institute.
Ms. Wabwire provides policy leadership on issues including
climate change, global poverty and hunger, social protection,
the need for strong institutions and local capacity, and the
role of effective U.S., partner country, and multilateral
assistance in providing solutions.
Prior to joining Bread for the World Institute, Ms. Wabwire
held a number of positions in academia, research, and
international development at the national, regional, and global
levels.
I would like to now yield the floor and welcome back Mr.
Isaacs.

STATEMENT OF MR. KEN ISAACS, VICE PRESIDENT, PROGRAMS AND
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, SAMARITAN'S PURSE

Mr. Isaacs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
you and the representatives, all the fellow guests to the
committee for the opportunity to speak here today on behalf of
those suffering as a result of what is being referred to as a
quiet famine in the Horn of Africa, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia,
South Sudan, Sudan, and Uganda.
And the numbers have been gone over in much greater detail
this morning than I need to enumerate now but I will say a
couple of things, that the crisis is a result of many factors.
Certainly there is the weather. There is market influences.
But what I really want to focus on is South Sudan.
We are working in an area, Mayiandit, that has officially
been declared as a famine zone, and between South Sudan, Sudan
and Uganda, Samaritan's Purse is feeding probably 2 million
people a month. So we have a large presence there.
We have large activity. We have solid relationships with
Food for Peace program, with OFDA, and particularly with the
World Food Programme, and I want to acknowledge their great
contribution to everything that is going on there.
The most significant driver of the current crisis in the
worst hit area of South Sudan is political insecurity and
brutal conflict and it continues to engulf the region.
In South Sudan alone, I have got a number here--1.85
million people have been internally displaced, leaving their
homes and their crops behind as they flee for their lives.
A week ago Sunday, we had 15 of our national staff were
abducted. They were taken at 2 a.m. They came into our compound
and they kept them for 3 days. Thankfully, no one was hurt.
There was no ransom made, but it had to do with the local
dynamic over humanitarian assistance and this shows some of
what was being talked about earlier from Congressmember Bass
about the dangers to humanitarian workers, and it is a growing
problem.
The seven that were killed just 2 days ago--the problem is
that the central government doesn't control the people with the
guns anymore. They have control over the main elements of the
SPLA but there are so many factions and factions of factions
and factions of factions that you can make a deal with
somebody, you can get a permission and you don't know that
that's going to extend into the next village.
As a result of the insecurity there what Samaritan's Purse
has done is, to be honest, it has caused us to create our own
security department that reaches all the way back to
headquarters.
So we have a separate analysis and can monitor our people
whether that is electronically--we track them. The negotiations
that go on are all-consuming, but the safety of our staff is
important.
I think that the United States needs to maintain its
leadership in humanitarian response around the world, and with
all of the talk that's going on of budget cuts, I don't know
where that's going down and I don't want to get into the
politics of it.
But there is criticism going around about development aid
or a lot of times you hear sort of a broad term we are going to
cut development money.
I think that there needs to be a clear delineation in the
thinking in people's minds between humanitarian assistance and
development money.
Even at the end of wars America has always fed people. We
fed our enemies, and I don't think that food should be a
bargaining chip and I don't think that food should be a tool of
diplomacy.
I think that giving humanitarian aid represents the best of
the heart and the spirit of the American people and I think
that whatever it takes to do that in supporting Food for Peace
and supporting the World Food Programme I believe that we need
to make that effort.
I think that there are also some things that could be
considered that would be very beneficial in food aid reform.
The system right now--pretty much there is some flexibility
for local purchase with cash but I think that if that could be
reviewed for even more flexibility and that means to buy
commodities out of local markets, arrange local logistics that
would not only stimulate local economies but frequently you
would be able to get more food at a better buy.
In Uganda, 1.5 million people are in phase three of a food
crisis situation. Eight hundred thousand of them have come from
South Sudan.
Right now, we are feeding about 60,000 a month. In 2 weeks,
that number is going to go up to about 300,000 a month.
The pressure that is being created in the region from the
insecurity is going to breed more insecurity is what's going to
happen. So you have a situation where the lack of food is not
only causing suffering, people are moving for food. People are
selling their goods for food. They are sort of using up their
coping mechanisms.
A famine is--here is a great analogy of a famine. It is
like a big tree when the wind blows. The wind blows and the
tree leans and it comes back up. And the wind blows harder and
it leans a little bit more and it comes back up.
But there is a point if the wind blows over the tree can't
get back up and in those areas that the FEWS NET has declared
as a famine zone it is there now.
So what this means from an optical perspective, just
speaking candidly and from a human perspective, is that a lot
of people are going to die.
And I think that it is important that that be said, that
people know that, that the Congress knows that and that we
carefully consider the role that we want the United States to
play in that.
So I think that I'll leave you today with four points to
sort of simplify this. One is that the famine and the situation
is severe.
Two, the crisis is a result of many things but in the worst
areas it is resulting from conflict and lack of access and
insecurity.
Three, I think it requires sustained American diplomatic
leadership to have an effect there. Somebody asked earlier
about the AU and what they are doing. You know, I can't pass
judgment on the AU. I can just say look at what's going on in
South Sudan and make your own conclusion.
And I think also that the situation requires sustained U.S.
leadership and the provision of humanitarian goods.
I think saving lives is representative of American values.
Thank you for letting me talk to you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Isaacs follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you very much for your testimony and even
more importantly for your extraordinary leadership.
We have been joined by Eliot Engel, the ranking member of
the full committee.
Mr. Engel. I will be brief. Thank you very much. Thank you,
Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass.
I am very grateful at the ranking member to the
subcommittee for calling this hearing and bringing attention to
the grave humanitarian crises that's worsening in east Africa
and worsening--it is really scary because it has been pretty
bad up until now.
The U.N. estimates that nearly 300 million people in east
Africa don't have the food they need. Right now Somalia, South
Sudan, and Sudan face dire food needs while parts of Ethiopia,
Kenya, and Uganda face a crisis nearly as bad for several
years.
Seasonal rains have failed in the Horn of Africa, a direct
result of climate change and looking ahead, this crisis holds
potential for massive displacement.
So we have an extreme weather condition caused by climate
change. We have a worsening famine. We have a brewing
displacement crisis.
These sound like the sort of issues our State Department
and USAID are designed to grapple with. So I will reiterate the
points I made this morning at our full committee hearing. The
administration's request to cut our international affairs
budget by a third would be devastating.
The lack of leadership in senior roles including USAID
Administrator, director of USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign
Disaster Assistance, the Assistant Secretary for Africa,
Assistant Secretary for Population, Refugees, and Migration, it
makes it impossible for our agencies to do their jobs because
these slots have not yet been filled.
American leadership is vital and so far this administration
by its actions is undermining our country's role in the world.
Among the two worst cases we see are in Somalia and South
Sudan. I would like to briefly focus on those.
Between 2010 and 2012, Somalia suffered through the worst
drought and famine in 20 years. Failed harvests, a spike in
food prices, and insecurity that impeded the delivery of food
and aid exacerbated this crisis. It exacerbated and was
exasperating.
A quarter of a million Somali refugees lost their lives
including 133,000 children under the age of 5. That just breaks
your heart to see that.
And the main lesson learned from that tragedy is that
humanitarian assistance came too late and we need to remember
that lesson today. More than 6 million people are in need of
assistance in Somalia and nearly 3 million face crisis or
emergency levels of food insecurity.
If the April to June rains fail again, this situation could
worsen quickly, potentially leading to another humanitarian
tragedy and massive displacement in the Horn, which in turn
could lead to instability in Kenya and Ethiopia.
I will soon offer a resolution supporting ongoing efforts
by our Government along with the U.N. and the donor community
to help meet the challenge of drought and food insecurity in
the Horn of Africa.
Turning to South Sudan, more than 40 percent of the
population, nearly 5 million people, currently face severe
life-threatening hunger. By July, that number will likely rise
another \1/2\ million.
Last month, the U.N. declared 100,000 people to be coping
with famine conditions. The security situation on the ground
remains dire. This past weekend, six aid workers were ambushed
and brutally murdered in South Sudan. Since December 2013,
nearly 80 aid workers have been killed.
The United States and our partners have taken on the tall
order of distributing food and other necessities to those in
need. Many of the worst off communities are inaccessible by
road for most of the year and last month famine was declared in
two counties in South Sudan.
So we need to continue providing humanitarian support and
pressuring the government in South Sudan and the armed
opposition to put the needs of their people first.
And I'm pleased to cosponsor Ranking Member Bass'
resolution calling for strong support to address the famine
there.
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm grateful to the
subcommittee for addressing and dealing with these difficult
issues. I'm grateful to our panellists, and I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Engel.
Dan Donovan.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for not
being here earlier. I was at a budget briefing that my good
friend, Eliot Engel, from New York was just talking about.
I understand that part of the crisis is caused by nature
and there's nothing we can do about a drought. But some of the
other difficulties is either a lack of aid or disruption of
delivery of aid.
What are--and you may of--this may repeating because I
wasn't here when you all testified, but are those the two main
problems that we are facing--not enough aid and the disruption
of delivery of aid?
Are there other issues that we should be knowing about so
that if this can be addressed congressionally that we'll be
able to at least understand the causations?
Mr. Isaacs. Thank you, Congressman.
Access is an issue. Access is an issue because it is
insecure, because humanitarian workers are a target of
opportunity or they can become a target of political
opportunity. So that puts our staff in danger.
That's a problem. And there is some generalized breakdown
over the last 15 years on this issue that humanitarian workers
don't get neutral space, I will call it.
But I think that also some of the decisions in the steps
that the Government of South Sudan are taking are hurting
themselves. One of them is the $10,000 per person fee for a
work permit for foreigners.
Another one that is problematic is that they want to
nationalize the staff. We understand that and we have always
worked with that. They've said that they wanted 10 percent of
the staff only to be expatriates.
So we have in South Sudan about 900 staff and we've got,
like, 35 or 40 expatriates. But now they have actually come
back and said this position has to be a South Sudanese--this
position has to be--so you're talking about complicated
financial matters.
You're talking about the oversight that this subcommittee
and other committees would be interested on the use of U.S.
food and that requires expertise and skill.
And if you look around you would see that in South Sudan
maybe 75 percent of the people are illiterate. So they, just as
a nation, have not built the capacity to fill the positions
that they're calling for us to fill and they are putting
pressure on us and they have tied all of that together to the
issuance of work permits.
So they're not creating an inviting environment for NGOs to
come in and help and I think that at the very best they need to
put off whatever roles that they think need to be enforced for
36 months or something. They need, as a nation, to get through
this famine.
They have got all kinds of other wars and other issues
going on. But it is complicated to work there. It is dangerous
to work there and some of the government policies that we see
being demanded are counterproductive, in my personal opinion.
Mr. Donovan. Can you just expound on the disruption of
delivery? Is that caused by government entities? Is that caused
by some of the people that are involved in the conflicts?
Mr. Isaacs. So we had 15 people abducted a week and a half
ago and they are a faction of a faction, and no one is in
control of them.
So it was the local military garrison leader that made the
decision that he was going to come through our compound at 2
a.m., threaded his way past an SPLM garrison. And I want to be
careful here because I don't want to point fingers--I have got
to go back and work with everybody. It's important.
But what I'm saying is that the command and control
structures--that's multiple structures--are weak and they're
fragile. And so you end up with a lot of guys with guns out in
the bush and then they develop their own political thinking and
then they decide to take action and that could be exercised
probably--what happened when these people were ambushed and
killed 2 days ago on the way to Pibor.
You don't know how that's going to be manifested. But it
creates a atmosphere of insecurity and too often humanitarian
workers are the target of that.
Mr. Donovan. Does it create a black market of the items
that are confiscated through a disruption, the folks that you
are speaking about now?
Mr. Isaacs. So I don't know anything first-hand about a
black market. That's not unusual in a war zone. But I will say
this about South Sudan is that their inflation has been so
enormous over the past couple of years and the availability of
food is so low I think that food is going to go to feed hungry
people.
Even if somebody steals it they may get some money but it
is still going to all feed hungry people. Having your trucks
looted is not what you want. But I don't have first-hand
knowledge with large black market activity there.
Mr. Donovan. All right. Thank you. Does anyone else want to
comment on that?
Mr. Smith. Maybe if we could just get through all the
witnesses----
Mr. Donovan. Yes.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. And then we'll----
Mr. Donovan. Absolutely.
Mr. Smith. But great questions. They are very good
questions. Maybe you could incorporate that into your--into
your testimony.
Mr. Bowers.

STATEMENT OF MR. MICHAEL BOWERS, VICE PRESIDENT, HUMANITARIAN
LEADERSHIP AND RESPONSE, MERCY CORPS

Mr. Bowers. By the way, I have worked with Mr. Isaacs
before when we were trying to combat famine in North Korea.
Mercy Corps and Samaritan's Purse had a large program there and
it is always good to be with esteemed colleagues.
But good afternoon, Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass and
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for holding this
important hearing and I appreciate the opportunity to testify.
Mercy Corps is a leading global organization that
specializes in humanitarian development and peace building
programs. We operate in more than 40 countries around the world
including throughout east Africa region and all four of the
countries considered at risk of famine.
As you have heard, the current drought in the Horn of
Africa is more intense and widespread than in 2011. Although
severe drought plays a part, the regional situation is made
worse by manmade causes that we have been talking about today,
which include a deadly mix of conflict, marginalization,
displacement, violent extremism, and climate change.
Moreover, insufficient investment in conflict prevention,
resilience and sustainable development activities allow these
problems to fester, extending these crises unnecessarily.
While the immediate priority must be saving lives, building
resilience and addressing conflict and violence cannot wait.
Across the region we are working with our local partners to
deliver food, water, sanitation supplies, healthcare, and
education in these emergencies.
Where appropriate we try to provide cash assistance as well
that allows families to buy the items they need most and,
Congressman, to your point, where we are seeing opportunities
and where markets can bear and food is available, giving people
the dignity and the ability to buy their own food avoids the
black market issue and it avoids, obviously, a costly pipeline
of food where we can.
In South Sudan, we provide communities with emergency water
and sanitation services, including responding to the recent
cholera outbreak, and we are distributing crop and vegetable
seeds, fishing nets and agricultural tools so that people can
get an option to grown their own food and rebuild their lives.
In Somalia, primarily with private funds, we are rapidly
bolstering ongoing livelihood programming while also responding
to the increasing food insecurity.
This includes providing water and emergency wet feeding to
over 21 schools in the central regions of the country that are
most severely impacted.
Not only are we saving lives there but we are ensuring
access to education of over 4,000 school children continue. In
Ethiopia, in addition to treating malnutrition in the Somali
region we are responding to the drought with a commercial
destocking project that allows income to households that derive
their income from livestock, protects the livestock assets of
pastoralists, and preserves the deteriorating rangeland.
There, we are stimulating market linkages as well between
traders and producers and supports the market prices of
livestock.
In Kenya--today we have talked a little about Kenya with
Matt Nims--there has been little donor funding released for the
emergency response due to the drought to help bolster the
efforts of the government, which is sizeable, and is doing much
what they can.
However, funding which exists for the drought response has
in large part been through private means. I was in Kenya in
2011 during that drought response as unfolded in Somalia and
witnessed the consequences of that ignoring early action.
If we fail to respond now we risk a much larger and costly
emergency response later with too many lives lost in the
meantime.
Although funding is also needed across the region, we are
barely scratching the service with what we have, and I think a
question that the chairman posed earlier today, is there enough
money in FY 2017 from the U.S. Government, and I will say no,
there is not, and I would implore this Congress to not rescind
$360 million that's on the table for current FY 2017. If that
is done so, over 8 million people almost immediately but
certainly in the short term will be left without food.
Another question that raised the issue--and I think
Congressman Garrett brought it up--is why is this famine and
hunger crisis not getting the attention that it did in 2010 and
2011.
Well, in part we have seen before that the media by and
large drives a lot of attention of your constituents. But if
you think of it this way, 20 million people right now are at
risk of starvation.
That is the combined population of the State of New Jersey
and North Carolina. So if you are speaking to your
constituents, and then the American taxpayer is wondering why
should we spend money there, or talking to the administration,
I would remind them of what Mr. Isaacs just said in terms of
our moral obligations but also just the sheer numbers.
So in addition to funding we are also needing access in
conflict zones, as has been mentioned before. Aid workers
continue to be killed, injured, or harassed.
Horrifyingly, these seven individuals that were lost last
weekend in South Sudan are not a strange trend. That is
something that is continuing.
Without safe access to deliver food, water, and vital
supplies, especially in areas which are on the brink of
starvation, we will not be able to save lives, frankly.
Besides the urgent need to respond now, I would also stress
we can do more to prevent these food crises in the future and
now.
To improve food security in the region we need to implement
a variety of programs that strengthen community resilience.
New evidence that we have from a USAID-funded program in
Ethiopia called PRIME confirms that food security resilience
programs can help communities survive crises and stop the cycle
of recurrent humanitarian disasters.
Even as we respond urgently to the crisis in east Africa,
we must continue to build these communities ability to cope
with shocks and stress in the future.
That innovation, that resilience approach, by the way, was
better embraced with the Global Food Security Act, which I have
to thank Chairman Smith as well as the rest of this
subcommittee for helping pass that important bill.
Finally, because conflict also directly and indirectly
impacts hunger across east Africa, we need to support programs
that address conflict where it is happening and mitigate
potential spillover effects that further stress neighboring
countries and exacerbate food insecurity.
This is why we focus on enhancing the capacity of people
and institutions to prevent and manage conflict and this is
something very important for the Congress to take into
consideration as they look through their appropriations.
You in Congress have an integral role to play in helping
prevent the spread of famine and create conditions that
mitigate food crises from happening in the first place.
I have provided a more detailed list of recommendations
including budgetary issues in my written statement. But for the
sake of time I am just going to summarize again that we ask the
Congress urgently provide lifesaving assistance in FY 2017 and
FY 2018 through its appropriations process to address ongoing
humanitarian needs by funding IDA and FFP fully, and that would
be $1 billion.
Invest in building the resilience of vulnerable communities
to prepare for, withstand and recover from these shocks and
stresses and prevent and manage conflict by fully funding Food
for Peace, nonemergency programs including the Economic Support
Fund, and Development Assistance.
And finally, encourage the administration, as Mr. Isaacs
mentioned, to aggressively pursue diplomatic efforts by fully
staffing the State Department and USAID to end these conflicts
and remove obstacles for humanitarians seeking to reach
populations in need.
Twenty years from now when we approach this time we will
want to say what we did to conclude everything we could to save
lives and turn this story of starvation into one of recovery.
I thank you and I look forward to answering some of your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bowers follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Mr. Bowers, thank you so very much for your
leadership as well and the recommendations you've made. They
will--they will go from you to a whole lot of people from this
hearing. So I do thank you for that.
Mr. Maphosa.

STATEMENT OF MR. THABANI MAPHOSA, VICE-PRESIDENT FOR FOOD
ASSISTANCE, WORLD VISION INTERNATIONAL

Mr. Maphosa. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today on the east Africa hunger crisis. Your
continued leadership and focus on these humanitarian issues is
critical and it matters.
I testify today on behalf of World Vision but also as a
person born and raised in Africa who has experienced hunger on
several occasions in my native country of Zimbabwe.
In 1983, a civil war or a near civil war in the southern
part of the country disrupted funding activities and many were
left without food, including my family.
In 1992, a major drought across the country meant there was
not enough food for a greater part of the year. It was then
that I first experienced first-hand the generosity of the
American people when my family received the yellow corn,
famously called Kenya in my country because it was coming
through Mombasa.
While the focus on my testimony today is to put light to
the unfolding situation in east Africa, I also want to take
this opportunity, Chairman, to say thank you to you and the
members and the American people for the help that you provided
to me during the hardest time 25 years ago.
Those who testified before me today have captured the real
and the grim situation in South Sudan, Somalia, Ethiopia and
Kenya. The crisis is affecting over 20 million people who
require urgent and lifesaving assistance. There are other
pressing humanitarian needs across the globe, as you mentioned
earlier on when we touched on Yemen, Nigeria and the like.
But what is unique about east Africa is that a formal
famine declaration has been issued in parts of South Sudan. As
an African, I would like to tell you that it is very uncommon
for African governments to lift their hands and declare these
famines and when they often do it is a little too late.
Without an elevated and immediate response, we are gravely
concerned that the situation could worsen in regions of South
Sudan, Somalia, and other countries as well.
We have spoke today about the refugee situation. World
Vision is working in Kenya, Uganda. In Uganda, we are receiving
refugees. We are currently have 200,000 refugees that we are
dealing with and that number has not stopped. They are coming,
as Mr. Isaacs said, 2,000 a day crossing into the country.
So the burden of South Sudan is actually spilling over to
other countries and that needs to be noted.
World Vision's mission requires us to work tirelessly to
address the needs of children and their families. As a child-
focused organization, we are particularly concerned about the
more than 3.5 million children under 5 who are acutely
malnourished and the nearly 850,000 children who are severely
malnourished.
Interventions made today will not only save their lives but
also reduce the possibility of long-term chronic malnutrition
and stunting that can occur in the critical first 1,000 days of
a child's life.
World Vision has been a partner in these response efforts
and specifically in east Africa where we have been operational
for the last 2 to 3 decades.
We have experienced achievements and challenges and we have
refined our programming and we have used every lesson that we
have learned.
While this crisis remains complex, I would like to present
three key recommendations or points for this subcommittee's
consideration.
The United States Government must maintain its position as
a global leader through continued and robust support of
humanitarian development programs.
For example, I would like to highlight the flexibility that
we have seen shown by Food for Peace in places where programs
were already existing and they made sure that they extended
those programs to respond and to pivot to the needs that were
emerging.
We have also seen great coordination between the Offices of
Foreign Disaster Assistance and Food for Peace where they have
tried to coordinate to make sure that their resources are
stretched and go much further.
But furthermore, it is essential to note that the U.S.
Government cannot be alone in these things. As such, other
governments, international donors, and humanitarian actors
should all join and act swiftly to prevent the crisis from
worsening.
Just like my colleagues have said, I would like to urge
this subcommittee to advocate for funding and programs that
will respond to this crisis.
This includes strong support to the international affairs
budget as Congress finalizes 2017 spending bills and begins
discussions around 2018 appropriations.
The U.S. Government and its partners need to adopt multi-
year multi-sector funding to achieve lasting impact in fragile
contexts. We can thus empower communities to pull themselves
out of poverty and create a more enabling environment that
mitigates against future shocks.
We have experienced this in our work with USAID and the
World Food Programme in South Sudan, in Ethiopia, in Kenya, and
I would say a little story from South Sudan when I visited some
time last year. We saw this community that we have been giving
food for a while. But over a certain period when we invested in
resilience projects--and this was a fish pond, fish ponds in
water view--in just a year we didn't need to actually be
helping that family.
And sometimes I think it is important to help those in need
but come out of that space of needing to help them again.
During these crises, one of the things that I've noted is
that resources are disproportionately skewed toward the short
term. No wonder we find ourselves in the same situation too
often.
Our investment needs to be balanced and we need to have
staying power. Last but not least, while we do our best as
humanitarians, we call upon recipient governments, donor
governments, and the African Union to seek political solutions
to the conflicts that continue to undermine food security in
some of these countries.
I think it has been pointed out well today that it is not
only undermining it for the long term but also in the short
term. I want to reiterate that your leadership counts. One
story that hasn't been told here today is that we have made
tremendous progress in our fight against hunger.
The number of hungry people has dropped by 200 million
since 1992 and I am one of those that in 1992 needed yellow
maize from this country. We know the decisions are hard but we
are also aware how close we are to achieving a hunger-free
world.
Thank you for taking an important step today by holding
this critical hearing. We thank you. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maphosa follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Mr. Maphosa, thank you very much for your
leadership and for being a person who, having been helped, has
been helping others ever since, and so thank you.
That is a tremendous witness to all of us of someone who
just gives back and gives back and gives back some more. So
thank you.
I would like to now recognize Ms. Wabwire. The floor is
yours.

STATEMENT OF MS. FAUSTINE WABWIRE, SENIOR FOREIGN ASSISTANCE
POLICY ADVISOR, BREAD FOR THE WORLD INSTITUTE

Ms. Wabwire. Chairman Smith, Ranking Member Bass and
esteemed members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me
to testify before the subcommittee today on this critically
important issue of drought and famine in the east Africa
region.
I am here in my capacity as the senior foreign assistance
policy advisor for Bread for the World Institute. Bread for the
World advocates for policies and programs to end hunger.
Our 2017 hunger report focusses on the urgency of
addressing crises in some of the world's most fragile
environments, including those we are here to talk about today.
I would like to mention that I have a copy of the most
recent report, which outlines some of the strategies that
governments could do, that multi-lateral agencies could do, and
what governments themselves are doing to address such crises.
Given the scale and the severity of the crisis, Mr.
Chairman, Bread for the World urges Congress to reject the
administration's proposed skinny budget cuts to foreign
assistance in the face of such serious crises.
The proposed cuts include slashing or eliminating
altogether the very accounts that finance the U.S. Government's
support for emergency response, and I would just like to
highlight three specific accounts that will be severely
impacted if the cuts in fact come to effect.
One, is the Food for Peace account, which funds food aid.
The second is the International Disaster Assistance, which
funds nonfood items including water and medical services.
We know what conditions look like in refugee camps. They
are breeding grounds for all kinds of diseases. So this account
is critically important.
The third account I would like to highlight is the
Migration and Refugee Assistance account which provides U.S.
support to refugees in affected countries, neighboring
countries--for example, refugees right now residing in Kenya
and Ethiopia.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to focus my remarks on three
points today. The fact that has been rightly mentioned by my
colleague on the panel this crisis comes at a time when we have
made tremendous progress against hunger and poverty around the
world. And it can be overwhelming because a lot of people think
we keep doing this but where is the evidence that we are
actually making a dent.
I am here to testify that in 1990 approximately one in four
people lived with hunger on a daily basis. By 2015, the hunger
was cut nearly in half and stood at one in nine.
Over the same period, Mr. Chairman, extreme poverty was cut
in half by even more--one in three people in the world to one
in 10. That is progress.
Countries across the continent have invested in efforts to
address hunger and poverty including reducing stunting which,
as you mentioned in your opening remarks, Mr. Chairman, is a
serious--in fact, it's a hidden hunger issue.
We know that when children are affected by hunger,
especially in the critical window between birth and 2 years
old, their cognitive development is severely affected.
It means that even when they grow up they are not as
productive individuals of society, cannot contribute to the
economic growth that we all hope to see in their own respective
countries.
These trends reinforce my belief in the feasibility of
ending hunger and poverty. I must acknowledge that at the same
time conflict and severe droughts related to a rapidly changing
climate are making it much harder for countries to keep up with
the progress that I just mentioned.
I recently visited Kenya in December 2015 and January 2017.
One of the things that really struck me was the effect of the
drought, especially on communities that have managed to feed
themselves all of these decades but are now in severe need of
assistance.
The early warning system, as was mentioned earlier, is a
great tool that today helps us assess the extent of the crisis
and find ways to mitigate its effect.
FEWS NET mentions that today 6.2 million people in Somalia
are in dire need of food assistance and especially if the own
on-coming rains expected in the April season will not be to the
level that it's supposed to be.
It's noteworthy also to mention that although we have this
kind of cycle of issues going on in Somalia, we are at a much
different place, and I would like to echo what Mr. Nims
mentioned earlier, that there is relatively more access to
communities in Somalia compared to when we had the famine in
2011.
In 2011, I also remember that we did not have any form of
government in place. The entire country was pretty much under
the control of the militant group al-Shabaab. Some progress has
been made on that front. As we speak right now there is a
government in place in Somalia.
In fact, the government has declared the drought a national
disaster and is willing to work with partners to address this.
So that's an opportunity right there that we can jump onto.
I would like to mention that at a time of intense debate
over the U.S. budget and proposed cuts to foreign aid let us
remember that investing in food security helps to promote
economic growth. It also promotes global stability, which we
all wish for.
My final point is about the fact that we are not a hopeless
people. We have the tools that we need to address this crisis.
The United States has demonstrated leadership through a range
of tools including long-term development assistance and
humanitarian assistance, as some of my fellow panelists have
already mentioned.
I just want to focus on one of the long-term development
programs that I am very familiar with and which I would like
all of you to support and continue to exercise your leadership
on because it has made such progress in the countries where it
works.
Feed the Future is a U.S. Government's global food security
initiative. It complements funding from countries themselves,
works with American businesses and universities to promote
long-term agricultural development.
It takes a comprehensive and sustainable approach such that
countries own their own plains and eventually are able to fund
their own initiatives.
In addition to all the bilateral assistance I mentioned I
would also like to add that U.S. leadership in the multilateral
world is critically important.
An example that I would like to highlight and which has
helped to see the gains that we are seeing in Somalia today is
the United Nations Peace Fund. This Fund promotes co-existence
and peaceful resolution of conflict.
It supports the government's priorities for stabilization
and peace and also focuses on creating jobs. Another important
multilateral program that the U.S. Government participates in
is the World Bank's International Development Association. It
also focuses on supporting countries efforts to build local
institutions, strengthen governance issues which are so
critical to addressing some of the issues we are talking about,
and to prevent future calamities from happening.
At this point, I would just like to offer three broad
points upon which I believe that a U.S. Government response
strategy should look like.
The administration and Congress should quickly adopt a
response that does three things--combines food assistance and
cash vouchers, allowing people to purchase food in local
markets. It should also specialize on nutrition for most at-
risk populations such as children, pregnant women, and the
elderly.
And finally, provide financial and logistical support to
countries that host refugees to prevent the spillover effects
like have been mentioned before.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wabwire follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Smith. Thank you for your testimony and your leadership
as well. Let me begin. If I could ask you a question. Others
might want to join in on an answer as well, and thank you for
underscoring the devastating impact of stunting.
The outward appearance is mirrored by an inner tragedy that
occurs when a mind is artificially held back because of lack of
nutrition and stunting is a direct result, as we all know, of
insufficient nutrients and food during the critical period, as
you pointed out, from conception to the second birthday.
And this subcommittee and this chairman has made the first
1,000 days one of my highest priorities because if you get the
first 1,000 days right you get the rest of the life most likely
to be far better.
The immune system is bolstered and, of course, cognitive
abilities once lost are very hard to reclaim later on. So it's
an early intervention effort that we have been promoting very
aggressively as a subcommittee for some time now.
And we have actually convened the African Diplomatic Corps
recently and heard from three Ambassadors tell of what they are
doing in their respective countries on this effort of global
food security, particularly focused on mother and child so that
mothers are healthier and babies both unborn and newly born
into that second birthday are healthier as well.
So if any of you would like to expand upon that because it
seems to be the progress that is being made is at risk of being
severely reversed and lives crippled by that lack of food
security.
Second, Mr. Isaacs, you mentioned the issue that many of
the governments do not have control of these militias and as
you go down the line the men with guns increasingly report to a
warlord or somebody else--my question is how hard are the
governments themselves trying to rein in on that practice?
Are they taking a laissez-faire attitude or are they really
trying to say, we need a cohesive military unit with a command
and control structure that truly if we say do this, this
happens?
Because when Greg Simpkins and I spoke to Salva Kiir, we
had every indication that they were in control and that we
wonder if that's at all true when, again, people with guns,
even people who had the insignia of his corps were the ones who
were committing atrocities in Terrain, if you could speak to
that.
Let me also ask are we doing enough? I asked this of Mr.
Nims earlier. Are we doing enough right now? Are we mobilized
sufficiently with enough money to make a difference?
Again, as I said earlier, the President and every President
since I've been in Congress has made recommendations, some of
which were draconian in their cuts.
There was a 20 percent cut envisioned by President Obama on
issues like neglected tropical diseases as well as
tuberculosis, an issue that I know members on both sides of the
aisle care about very, very deeply and there are suggestions
for some severe cuts, which I don't believe in an instant are
going to happen.
But there is still reason for concern because they are on
the table as something that might happen so we have to make
sure that they don't, especially in light of the crises that we
are facing.
So is there enough money in the kitty right now? Are we
doing enough to really make a difference here? And I have other
questions but let me ask you to respond to those and then I'll
yield to my----
Mr. Isaacs. I'll start with speaking about the security
sector reform in South Sudan. So the South Sudanese--the Sudan
People's Liberation Army were formulated over a lot of
different visions that came together, and Dr. John Garang built
that into a national vision that ended up being the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, the Government of National
Unity.
And in the end, the South decided to vote and they went for
independence during the referendum.
But when you look at the different military units they were
never cohesive around the vision. They were cohesive around the
individual leaders.
So the building of the SPLA--there was a core contingent of
it that, let's say, was in the vision and then the rest of it
was I made a deal with this person and they would come in and
swear allegiance. So then all the guys that came with that
person would put on the uniform.
But the allegiance or the command and control capability
doesn't necessarily extend down, and as you saw starting from
December 2013 when the civil war began, when there is a rupture
between relationships at the top it goes all the way down.
But then there can be another rupture down below that and
another rupture down below that. So reform in the security
sector for South Sudan is something that is desperately needed.
The other thing I would like to answer quickly is, ``Are there
enough resources?''
I am not familiar with the details of everybody's budgets
but here is what I do know. About 6 months ago, the World Food
Programme pretty much across the board reduced everybody's
daily rations by 30 percent and that wasn't just in South
Sudan.
That was about 6 months or 8 months ago. Do you remember
this? Okay. So I am not the only one that has experienced this.
We haven't talked here and they are shaking yes, they
remember, too. But this went not only in South Sudan. It was in
Uganda. It was in Iraq. It was in Syria, Turkey, and Greece.
Everywhere straight across the board there was a 30 percent
cut and I think that's reflective that there are so many
displaced people, there are so many refugee people in the world
today and now with this drought and other food needs,
insecurity on top of that, I don't think there are enough
resources. And this is going to breed greater instability,
ultimately.
Mr. Smith. Your point about the 30 percent cut, I chaired a
hearing 2 years ago on why the massive exodus out of the
refugee camps run by the UNHCR, and the UNHCR representative
said it was the 30 percent cut.
Mr. Isaacs. Yes.
Mr. Smith. And then people had said, they are not going to
take care of us--we are voting with our feet, so to speak, and
were going to just--were just going to leave.
Mr. Isaacs. Yes.
Mr. Smith. So in essence it is an ongoing problem.
Mr. Isaacs. And I am--I am not kicking World Food Programme
there. I am just saying I don't think that they are being
adequately funded and I also don't think that it's solely the
role of the United States.
I think that by the United States exerting leadership in
the humanitarian sector that means other countries have to come
forth.
And if I may make one last comment--Mr. Nims said it
earlier but I just want to reemphasize it. Humanitarian aid
will never resolve political conflict and I think that
political decision makers in the world today when they can't
get a political resolution have a tendency to put more pressure
on the humanitarian players to get a conflict resolved and
that's never going to work.
Political division, political strife requires political
resolution. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Bowers. Just a few comments, Mr. Chairman.
We have talked about men with guns. Often, they are boys
with guns. But I also want to portray a more positive story of
what can be lost as well due to budget cuts and some of our
nonemergency food programs funded by USAID, which is
integrating these men and boys back into society when they do
put their guns down.
So a program that we work in northern Uganda is doing just
that. And in many ways Uganda, though still going through a lot
of challenges, has succeeded in looking at how do you deal with
a restive part of your society that has taken up guns for
different reasons.
So there are positive ways actually you can work on this
issue with men with guns. Now, South Sudan is not at that place
yet.
But, clearly, when you look at where cuts will be made, and
peacekeeping/peace-building programs with impacts on
communities' resiliency, helping young men, helping boys,
reintegrate into society and put those guns down is part of
that food security challenge that we want to get to. Because
part of the reasons driving them and a lot of recruitment of
Boko Haram, frankly, was over economics, not just ideology of
an extremist group.
A report we put out last year proved that point. A lot of
them were in debt and they were looking for other financial
means just to make their life successful by recruitment in.
So some of these programs have to be done in conjunction
with other activities both humanitarian as well as development
assistance that works on security and safety.
And then finally on the issue, I guess, is if there is
enough in the kitty. No. Because the world has never been in a
place we are at today.
Sixty million people are refugees or IDPs; globally the
largest ever since World War II. And now we have basically a
food and famine crisis brewing.
Now, we have been focused inherently over the last few
years on what breaks the humanitarian system. Is it
simultaneous wars in Yemen and Syria? Is it a large natural
disaster that hits Nepal, et cetera?
Well, this is another data point in that kind of terrible
story that we are getting to--that without enough resources and
certainly without FY 2017 rescinded money people will be
without food.
So the WFP account was reduced because essentially WP lends
to itself in emergencies. It has its own emergency reserve. So
it pulled internally its funding to meet Nigeria needs, staff
up, et cetera. They exceeded that amount and then WFP basically
had to start dialing back.
Ms. Wabwire. I'd like to briefly respond to the question on
nutrition and how some of the existing programs are responding
to this.
In September 2015 I visited a village in northern Kenya and
I was sitting with this grandma who is 82 years old. After a
couple of times, a ton of children came to her and three of
those were her grandchildren.
We had been talking about the challenges in the area and
she explained how the frequency and severity of droughts have
been increasing over the years, over the course of her
lifetime.
One thing that she told me that really stuck with me was
the fact that she feels so helpless to know that she cannot
provide nutrition support to her grandchildren.
She was able to raise her children but today, because of
the effects of climate change, rapidly changing and erratic
weather patterns, she's simply not able to.
So hunger is also an issue that affects people's dignity
and I think as we talk about addressing some of the world's
challenges it really speaks to the issue of our moral
obligation and the values that we hold as a human society.
Leah came to me and greeted me and the first thing she said
to me--this was an 8-year-old girl--she said, I feel really
dizzy. By looking at her, I could tell she hadn't eaten for a
while. I didn't have to ask her.
Because I have seen so many of these every time I visited
countries where a number of U.S. programs are working I get to
see communities like this.
One of the programs that I really want to expound on a
little more is Feed the Future and how it's working to change
that around. As we may remember, the food price crisis of 2008,
riots across 40 countries all over the world.
The Arab Spring was largely as a result of the food price
crisis where a lot of people could not afford to buy food. The
following year in 2009 at the G8 Summit in L'Aquila, Italy, the
U.S. Government stepped forward and called upon partners to
reverse the decades of neglect in agriculture development. Feed
the Future was born out of that initiative.
Today, Feed the Future is very serious and keen on turning
around the crisis of malnutrition and the way that Feed the
Future works is that it works with governments. It focuses on
areas that bring returns on investments. Addressing nutrition
is one of those.
Like I mentioned earlier, lack of proper nutrition in the
critical 1,000 days window destroys people's lives.
After that, I visited Senegal, a country that's doing very
well on Feed the Future, and the Government of Senegal has
actually adopted a lot of the tools and is carrying on much of
the work on its own.
So Feed the Future, a program run by USAID, speaks to the
effectiveness of U.S. assistance when it is targeted. But I
also want to speak to the fact that we need stronger
institutions. We need a USAID that's able to carry out these
functions like it's currently doing.
Over the last course of about 10 years we have seen major
reforms across the Agency and I think it's very unfortunate
that a lot of the stories we hear about this Agency being
ineffective and wasteful is totally not correct.
One of the issues I wanted to highlight is the monitoring
and the evaluations that are happening currently at USAID.
Since 2011, USAID has conducted more than 1,000 evaluations by
independent third parties.
Ninety-eight percent of these have been used to shape the
Agency's policies and programs. Feed the Future is one of those
programs.
I also wanted to highlight the foreign assistance
dashboard. Out of continued effort from the NGO community, most
of whom are represented in this room, have continued to
advocate for U.S. foreign assistance to be more effective,
return on investment, but also deliver for the people that it
serves.
And we are seeing a lot of progress on that front. We are
seeing more country-led initiatives, governments that are
willing to work in partnership with the U.S. Government to
address their own problems.
So I thought I would use the nutrition piece to just
highlight the effectiveness of the Agency, USAID that would be
severely impacted and would reverse the decades we have made if
these cuts come into effect.
Mr. Maphosa. Thank you, Chairman. On the topic of nutrition
I did mention the 1,000 days in my opening remarks and, you
know, I would like to bring this to life with bringing a
situation that I came across in the field.
When we talk about 1,000 days we talk about a pregnant
mother. That's where we begin, and we talk about a child who is
under 2 who is receiving lactation.
I met this mother who is pregnant. She has got a child who
is under 2 years of age and she has a child who is 5 years old.
And she's going through a program where we have said we are
focusing on the first 1,000 days because our resources are
fewer. And she asks me the question, what would you have me
prioritize? The child who is in my tummy that I don't see or
this child that I am lactating or this child that is crying
loud that is here?
These are choices that women face every day when programs
are not able to meet their needs but also when, really, they
are not able to provide for themselves.
So the first 1,000 days is critical but it is also a very
difficult one for a parent who will be having children of that
age group sitting with them.
Are we doing enough right now? I will say that the stress
migration that we are seeing or we are beginning to see in
Somalia gives me a sense that we are not doing enough because
otherwise people wouldn't move if we are doing enough.
It is important for them to be kept or to stay where they
would rather be productive than to move into a camp. That's the
last place people want to be. But when you see them moving into
that space it's because they are actually stressed out.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Before yielding to my distinguished
colleague, just remind everyone--I think the record should
clearly show it--that there has been a strong bipartisan effort
on food security.
President Bush, beginning in 2002, had the initial
foresight to elevate the important role of food security in the
U.S. foreign policy, especially in Africa, via the Initiative
to End Hunger in Africa, or the IEHA, which was funded through
development assistance and implemented through USAID.
At the same time, the Millennium Challenge Corporation
began making substantial investments in agriculture-led
economic growth programs, particularly in Africa. And as you
pointed out, I would say to my friend that it was built upon at
the G8 Summit meeting in Italy in 2009.
I would like to yield to Ms. Bass.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. Just adding to that, Feed the Future
had definitely been a program that has been--has had bipartisan
support and we actually moved it from just being a program to
putting it into statute.
So I've seen it myself personally work in the hills of
Kenya and to me I think it's an example of really how a lot of
our foreign aid should be transformed so that it's not just
about us providing direct services but it's about helping to
build the capacity on the ground. So, major support here.
And I think along with that, I mean, I think Electrify
Africa follows in the same vein. You know, Mr. Isaacs, you
started by talking about your aid workers and I was just--I
don't remember if you said what happened--if they were returned
or if they were released.
Mr. Isaacs. They were safely released. So the SPLA----
Ms. Bass. Were they South Sudanese?
Mr. Isaacs. Yes, they were all South Sudanese. They were
roughed up a little bit but none of them were killed. None of
them were hurt. And after we did the debriefing we have a six-
page report--the blow by blow detail is fascinating.
So they are kidnapped in a village by a local garrison
whose wife of one of the guys they kidnapped went down and
chewed out the garrison and said, ``What are you doing with my
husband? You got to let him go,'' and he said, ``Well, I can't
let you and your kids go now because we want to fight those
other guys tomorrow. So now you've got to stay with us.'' It's
sort of comical but it could have been tragic----
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Isaacs [continuing]. And it could have been horrific.
They were all released safely and we have gone back. We have
talked with the commissioner in the area and we have even
confronted the guy and talked to him, and we are trying to
build an environment where there is some kind of stability that
we can come back and help people. I mean, it's in the middle of
a swamp.
Ms. Bass. Yes.
Mr. Isaacs. Why would anybody want to come in the swamp and
fight?
Ms. Bass. Well, and I think you raise a real important
issue about where South Sudan is these days--that it's not
really a situation of two factions but many.
Mr. Isaacs. It's multiple factions.
Ms. Bass. And so it's fine to say there needs to be a
political solution but I am not exactly sure what that is or
how that comes about.
I mean, to me without--that's why I always go back to the
AU even though I know the AU has its challenges. But I love
what happened in the Gambia as a perfect example and I wish,
obviously, that wasn't a situation that had ridden to the level
of war but the fact that the countries came together to resolve
a situation is what I certainly hoped for. But I don't see how
it's just political and not militarily as well.
You also mentioned within Uganda that there was a problem
and you mentioned that a percentage of the people were from
South Sudan.
I was wondering in terms of hunger, famine--I mean, I don't
think that there is famine that is beginning Uganda unless you
were saying that, and then what percentage of that is because
of the refugees versus is Uganda having a problem.
Mr. Isaacs. Right. So Uganda is in a level right now that's
probably considered stressed because the agricultural
production and the markets are considered stressed due to lack
of rainfall.
But with now 800,000 people from South Sudan that have
flooded into the area and the Ugandan Government, as Mr. Bowers
said earlier, they have a pretty good handle on how to organize
that.
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Isaacs. But that's drawing resources out of society
somewhere. It's drawing resources out of the WFP pipeline and
that's more resources that need to be replenished or it's going
to create more insecurity somewhere, and there are thousands of
people coming every day, fleeing Sudan.
Ms. Bass. So I am thinking of the cuts that have been made
and also we are doing a resolution tomorrow in full committee
about the famine.
But none of it was going to Uganda. You know, that's not
what we are recommending and I am just wondering if we
shouldn't include Uganda.
Mr. Isaacs. So I would say that--I don't know how your
budgetary process works but if you're considering funds to Food
for Peace and some of their requests are to help South Sudan
refugees, a substantial portion of them are in Uganda now.
So however that funding stream runs. But I think that there
needs to be consideration made for those refugees to feed them.
Ms. Bass. Okay. And Mr. Bowers, you mentioned PRIME in
Ethiopia. Is--and it sounds--I mean, I have read about it in
your testimony. Is PRIME--does PRIME exist outside of Ethiopia
or is it just in Ethiopia?
Mr. Bowers. Well, that particular project was designed for
arid parts of Ethiopia. But I think the construct is what my
colleague was saying because it is a Feed the Future program as
well. It's a 5-year program; over
$ deg.50 million
U.S. dollars were invested.
Ms. Bass. Where are we in the 5 years?
Mr. Bowers. We are at the last year. But the proof is
there. We know the evidence is there to demonstrate, again,
that sort of metric that Matt Nims mentioned today. A dollar
spent can actually reduce humanitarian needs by over $2.90.
So that's a pretty impressive metric, and in an area of the
world where we know there will be cycles of drought again. So
the whole point of resiliency, the whole point of sort of a
systems approach, is looking at the diverse drivers that make
people more resilient so that they are not dependent on us
handing out food again.
Ms. Bass. So what happens? Does it need to go on beyond 5
years or is 5 years----
Mr. Bowers. Well, I think we are always looking for
opportunities to continue to build a momentum where the need
and the government are both in alignment. And Ethiopia has
shown itself to be quite progressive in championing these types
of systems approaches in the region.
Kenya is getting there as well. I think it's more difficult
to do in areas in Somalia but not impossible. And then,
finally, Uganda is another area where we are championing a lot
of these multi-year programs that are building resiliency in
the midst of coping with, as Ken mentioned, 800,000 refugees.
So, you know, these are the signature programs that the USG
should really be championing in addition to our humanitarian
accounts because those are critical for saving lives.
Ms. Bass. I do think it's something that we need to lift up
in terms of the role African countries have been taking in
taking in refugees. We often think of the migration out but do
not acknowledge often that so many refugees are absorbed by
other countries and they do it in principle, which I think is
something that----
Mr. Bowers. I would just quickly add on the fluidity of
that region, obviously, as many people on the subcommittee
know, borders there don't really exist in reality and many of
these societies have cross border trade, cross border realities
that go beyond.
Ms. Bass. Yes, but not for 800,000 people.
Mr. Bowers. So the markets are all cross border there--
religions, ethnic groups. So the fact----
Ms. Bass. That's because the borders were never real.
Mr. Bowers. So whatever legislation language you come up
with, I think acknowledging that cross border dynamic is very
important.
Thank you.
Ms. Bass. So I wanted to ask you, Mr. Maphosa, you
mentioned that the leaders don't want to call it a crisis and I
am not sure if you were making reference to say, for example,
there is a problem in Kenya and it's not really clear whether
the Kenyan Government is saying that there is a crisis, and I
am thinking also specifically of Nigeria. So how do we help
Nigeria if the issue is Boko Haram?
Mr. Maphosa. So that was in specific reference to South
Sudan.
Ms. Bass. Oh, okay. I see.
Mr. Maphosa. I was noting that when you see them accepting
that there is a famine, they are not crying wolf anymore. In
fact----
Ms. Bass. Oh.
Mr. Maphosa [continuing]. They may be behind the curve
because traditionally for them they would not want to be the
first ones out. You need to push them a little bit more.
Ms. Bass. I got it. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Garrett, gentleman from Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to credit the ranking member for stealing my
favorite question. But I do appreciate the follow-up, Mr.
Isaacs, on your aid workers, that at least it dovetails with
another question.
Four extraordinarily effective good organizations
represented on the panel. How many members of your organization
have you had abducted? How many are still being held and what
can be done to help them?
I know it's beyond the purview of the meeting but I think
appropriate in light of the testimony.
Mr. Isaacs. So I can say that we have had people kidnapped
over the years. I don't know the exact number. We have been
blessed not to have too many and we have none that are held
now.
Mr. Garrett. None currently?
Mr. Isaacs. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
Mr. Maphosa. I would say for us we have been fortunate not
to have those situations. But the near misses type of
situations is where we have had to evacuate staff when we
sensed that there was danger.
Mr. Garrett. Sure.
Mr. Bowers. I would just add, usually we don't comment on
these things publicly because some of these cases may be
active.
Mr. Garrett. To the extent that you're not comfortable
commenting on it I would ask that you reach out to any members
of the subcommittee with whom you are familiar and comfortable.
Let us know so that we might be able to help.
Mr. Bowers. Sure. And we are happy to provide additional
sort of international data on that. I mean, most of the
abductions currently are in Syria.
Mr. Garrett. All right. Well, any number of places and
sometimes the government actions might not be classified as
abductions.
But yes, let somebody know and there are members of this
subcommittee, Mr. Smith in particular, who have had some
wonderful success in sort of humanitarian efforts to help folks
out of bad situations, for lack of a more appropriate term.
How about Bread for the World? Are you all in the same
circumstance where----
Ms. Wabwire. No, actually because we are not a direct
service agency. Fortunately, we don't have that problem.
Mr. Garrett. I appreciate that. That's better news than I
thought I might here. So that's very good.
Ma'am, you also spoke to the conditions in the refugee
camps and how, obviously, they are breeding grounds for
disease, infection, et cetera.
Can you also speak to the circumstances as it relates to
exposure to extremism, people who are hopeless and how their
circumstances in some of these camps might lead them to make
decisions they might not otherwise make.
Ms. Wabwire. Absolutely. As I began my remarks, I
highlighted this report which I will just mention again. And
the reason I do that is because, as we were preparing--putting
together this report, we traveled and interviewed lots of
people--including young men in Somalia, a country that,
obviously, is severely affected.
One of the people that presents a story here is a young man
called Mohamed. He works with the Global Youth Innovation
Network. This is a group of young Somali men who, in spite of
all the challenges around them, have committed to try and
prevent recruitment from happening in their own villages.
So what Mohamed and his team do is they bring together
young men whom they know are prone or susceptible to
influential recruitment by al-Shabaab and plan for a lot of
livelihood strategies. They've opened businesses with support
from external partners, to a very large scale, though, have
helped to build roads and canals--just very impressive
initiatives.
And this is really to alleviate opportunities where grounds
for breeding of such extremists happen.
Mr. Garrett. So at the risk of sounding like my colleague,
Mr. Castro, earlier and ending my question with what do you
think about that, I would sort of soliloquy, Mr. Chairman, that
you very rarely see young people make decisions that relate to
transition to extremism where there is an opportunity where
there is hope.
And so the work that we are doing here and I think the
bipartisan commitment to ensure that we continue to do it will
save lives that we will never be able to quantify because we
will see fewer people pushed toward extremism, I think.
And I think that it's hard to--it's hard to do that in
numbers but what you all do, God bless you and thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I don't know if this would be an appropriate
time. I had spoken to you prior to the meeting about some
information that I have received from the Ambassador to the
Republic of Sudan that he wished to have read into the record.
So I will hand that to you now and ask that it be included
in the record.
Mr. Smith. Without objection it will be made part of the
record.
Mr. Garrett. If I might articulate very briefly, Mr.
Chairman, I have had some conversations with leadership from
the Republic of the Sudan on semi-related issues.
Obviously, the Ambassador is not able to testify at this
hearing. But they are trying to make it abundantly clear that
they hope to become better partners, particularly as it relates
to transportation of assets and resources in the South Sudan by
virtue of being landlocked and also that they hope to integrate
themselves better into the region and the world, moving
forward.
And I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, for the record that I
have found them to be engaging and well intentioned, and past
activities notwithstanding I think worthy of sitting down and
maybe having some greater discourse moving forward and I thank
you for your indulgence.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Garrett, thank you very much and this
submission from the Ambassador will be made a part of the
record. So thank you very much for that.
Ms. Wabwire, you have referenced that summary of
recommendations. To the extent possible, particularly things
like the executive summary and some of the recommendations, we
would like to make that a part of the record.
So afterwards we would like to go through it and pull out
some of the most important and salient points to make it part
of the record.
Ms. Wabwire. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Suozzi, gentleman from New York.
Mr. Suozzi. I don't have any questions, Mr. Chairman. I
just want to thank each of you for your testimony today and for
your great service that you provide to people. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. I would like to yield to Mr. Donovan, the
gentleman from New York.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Chairman.
I don't know how I am going to get liked more than Tom
Suozzi right now. That's wonderful.
I also got a chance to ask some questions earlier and I
know they are going to call the votes in 5 minutes. So is there
something else that any of you want to tell us, whether it's to
understand the issue better, to understand the problems,
understand the solutions? I offer that up to you until the bell
rings.
Mr. Isaacs. If I may bring up one other thing.
All of the localities and the populations that we have
talked about today we have not mentioned two people groups. In
the southern part of the Republic of Sudan--that's the people
in Nuba Mountains and Southern Blue Nile--and they have been
totally cut off with no humanitarian access since June 2011 and
they continue to be cut off today. And this is a population of
a total of about 1.5 million people.
So while the words from the Embassy of Sudan are gracious
and I have no doubt that they maybe have made some progress in
some areas, there has been no humanitarian access allowed to
that and that is something that I am very familiar with and I
would ask that you look into that and pressure them to allow
access into those areas.
Mr. Smith. I would add that in the past we have actually
had hearings that focused on the Nuba Mountains almost
exclusively because of that lack of humanitarian access.
So I think your point is extremely well taken and I thank
you for it. Would anyone else like to add before we close? Any
comments? Yes.
Ms. Wabwire. I think I will just close with where I
started--that in order for us to make an effective response to
one of the world's largest humanitarian crises we have got to
protect funding.
We have got to oppose the proposed cuts and I am really
encouraged, Mr. Chairman, by your confidence that these are
going nowhere. That makes me feel a lot more encouraged and
motivated and especially because this is for some of the most
vulnerable people around the world.
This is not for our organizations. This is for mothers and
fathers who watch very helplessly their children die of things
that are so solvable like hunger.
And so just very quickly, a robust U.S. Government response
is needed urgently. We have got to act fast because millions of
lives are on the brink of starvation.
Secondly, please support multilateral assistance including
World Food Programme and the U.N. Peace Fund, which helps build
institutions for peace building over a long period of time.
But at the same time also help to bridge the gap between
the humanitarian and the long-term development assistance
because I think that's where we are not making fast enough
progress.
And finally, as we respond to the current crisis, let's
take that long-term view so that hopefully in a few years we
are talking about a whole different story and how we have made
a difference. And I thank you all very much for the opportunity
to testify.
Mr. Smith. As we close, one of the reasons why we have
called this hearing was to hear from the experts who have just
absolutely compelling information that needs to be heard by
this subcommittee, the Congress, the appropriators, and that's
why it was scheduled for today.
And also we wait for a new USAID Administrator and other
key personnel because personnel is policy. As you know, Mr.
Isaacs, having served--others too as well--the key is having
the right person, the right people in those gatekeeper
positions and a lot of that has not happened yet. So we are not
flying blind but we don't have the visibility that we should
have.
So this hearing and, again, your testimonies become very,
very, I think, informative and motivating going forward. So I
want to thank you very, very strongly for that leadership
because we will take your statements.
The full record won't be ready, it is never done overnight,
the Q&A part, but your written testimonies especially it'll get
very wide distribution. And so I thank you so deeply.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:36 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
