- VARIOUS MEASURES

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VARIOUS MEASURES

=======================================================================

MARKUP

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

ON

H. Res. 54, H. Res. 92, H. Res. 137, H. Res. 145,

H. Res. 187, H.R. 390, H.R. 479, H.R. 672, H.R. 1644

__________

MARCH 29, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

24-833 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

MARKUP OF

H. Res. 54, Reaffirming the United States-Argentina partnership
and recognizing Argentina's economic reforms...................     2
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 54 offered
by the Honorable Albio Sires, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New Jersey.................................     6
H. Res. 92, Condemning North Korea's development of multiple
intercontinental ballistic missiles, and for other purposes....    10
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 92 offered
by the Honorable Joe Wilson, a Representative in Congress
from the State of South Carolina.............................    15
H. Res. 137, Honoring the life of Shimon Peres...................    21
H. Res. 145, Expressing the sense of the House of Representatives
regarding the fight against corruption in Central America......    24
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 145 offered
by the Honorable Norma J. Torres, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California........................    28
H. Res. 187, Relating to efforts to respond to the famine in
South Sudan....................................................    31
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H. Res. 187 offered
by the Honorable Karen Bass, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California.................................    35
H.R. 390, To provide for emergency relief to victims of genocide,
crimes against humanity, and war crimes in Iraq and Syria, to
provide accountability for perpetrators of these crimes, and
for other purposes.............................................    39
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 390 offered by
the Honorable Christopher H. Smith, a Representative in
Congress from the State of New Jersey........................    59
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 390 offered by the Honorable Christopher H. Smith...    70
H.R. 479, To require a report on the designation of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea as a state sponsor of
terrorism, and for other purposes..............................    71
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 479 offered by
the Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas...............................................    83
H.R. 672, To require continued and enhanced annual reporting to
Congress in the Annual Report on International Religious
Freedom on anti-Semitic incidents in Europe, the safety and
security of European Jewish communities, and the efforts of the
United States to partner with European governments, the
European Union, and civil society groups, to combat anti-
Semitism, and for other purposes...............................    89
Amendment to H.R. 672 offered by the Honorable Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida......................................................    97
H.R. 1644, To enhance sanctions with respect to transactions
relating to North Korea, and for other purposes................    98
Amendment in the nature of a substitute to H.R. 1644 offered by
the Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................   138
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 1644 offered by the Honorable Ted S. Yoho, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Florida.....   178
Amendment to the amendment in the nature of a substitute to
H.R. 1644 offered by the Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a
Representative in Congress from the Commonwealth of
Virginia.................................................   179

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD
APPENDIX

Markup notice....................................................   198
Markup minutes...................................................   199
Markup summary...................................................   201
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Rhode Island: Material submitted for the record...   202
The Honorable Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: Prepared statement............   203
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........   205

VARIOUS MEASURES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29, 2017

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:45 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This committee will come to order. We will
ask everyone to take their seats at this time.
Pursuant to notice, we meet today to mark up nine
bipartisan measures and, without objection, all members will
have 5 days to submit statements or extraneous materials on
today's business.
As members were notified yesterday, we intend to consider
today's measures en bloc. And so, without objection, the
following items previously provided to members and in your
packets will be considered en bloc and are considered as read:
House Resolution 54, reaffirming the United States-Argentina
partnership and the Sires amendment 10 in the nature of a
substitute; House Resolution 92, condemning North Korea's
missile development with the Wilson amendment in the nature of
a substitute to House Resolution 92; House Resolution 137,
honoring the life of Shimon Peres; House Resolution 145,
regarding the fight against corruption in Central America and
the Torres amendment in the nature of a substitute to House
Resolution 145; House Resolution 187, relating to the famine in
South Sudan and the Bass amendment 27 in the nature of a
substitute to House Resolution 187; H.R. 390, the Iraq and
Syria Genocide Emergency Relief and Accountability Act and
Smith amendment 23 in the nature of a substitute and Smith
amendment 29 to that substitute; then we have H.R. 479, the
North Korea State Sponsor of Terrorism Designation Act and Poe
amendment 25 in the nature of a substitute; H.R. 672, the
Combating European Anti-Semitism Act and Ros-Lehtinen amendment
to H.R. 672; and we have H.R. 1644, lastly, the Korean
Interdiction and Modernization of Sanctions Act with Royce
amendment 2 in the nature of a substitute, Yoho amendment 8 to
that substitute and Connolly amendment 9 to that substitute.
[The information referred to follows:]
H. Res.
54 deg.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

ANS to H. Res. 54 deg

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H. Res. 92 deg.[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H. Res. 92 deg.[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H. Res. 137 deg.[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H. Res. 145 deg.[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H. Res. 145 deg.[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

H. Res. 187 deg.

H. Res. 187 deg.

H.R. 390 deg.

H.R. 390 deg.

Amendment to ANS deg.

H.R. 479 deg.

H.R. 479 deg.

H.R. 672 deg.

Amendment to H.R. 672 deg.

H.R. 1644 deg.

H.R. 1644 deg.

amendment deg.

Connolly amendment deg.

Chairman Royce. I now recognize myself to speak on today's
business.
I want to begin by thanking Representative Wilson for his
leadership on House Resolution 92, which describes the growing
sophistication of North Korea's nuclear and missile program,
and it reaffirms U.S. security commitments to our allies in
Northeast Asia. I was pleased to see Secretary of State
Tillerson say that the U.S. is rethinking our response to Kim
Jong Un's dangerous provocations.
A good place to start would be through aggressive
enforcement of existing sanctions, as Mr. Wilson's resolution
recognizes, including the North Korea Sanctions and Policy
Enhancement Act that we on this committee passed out last year.
A report last month made clear that Pyongyang is using
increasingly sophisticated techniques to evade existing
sanctions, including through dealings with middlemen and other
countries that are willing to trade in money, in arms, and in
slave labor and that, in turn, funds the North Korean regime.
That is why Ranking Member Engel and I introduced H.R.
1644, the Korean Interdiction and Modernization of Sanctions
Act. This legislation, of course, will expand U.S. sanctions to
target these front companies that fund the regime's nuclear and
missile programs.
The bill includes a provision that has been championed by
Judge Poe, and that is the focus on his H.R. 479, the North
Korea State Sponsor of Terrorism Act, which passed the House
last Congress and which we consider again today. This
legislation takes on new urgency as the regime has reportedly
carried out targeted assassinations of North Korean defectors,
including the recently widely-reported assassination of Kim
Jong Un's half-brother.
This legislation requires the State Department to determine
whether North Korea should be relisted as a State Sponsor of
Terrorism. And I want to thank the judge, along with Chairman
Emeritus Ros-Lehtinen for pressing this issue, as well as
Ranking Member Engel for working on the refined text the
committee is taking up today.
Moving on, I want to also thank Representative Smith for
H.R. 390, the Iraq and Syria Genocide Emergency Relief and
Accountability Act. More than a year after the Obama
administration--under pressure from this committee--declared
that ISIS' actions against religious minorities in Iraq and
Syria constituted ``genocide,'' a year after that, these
communities--which include Christians, Yazidis, Syrians and
many others--are still in urgent need of assistance. This
legislation here recognizes that these minority groups in Iraq
and Syria are key to the social fabrics of the region and
authorizes the State Department to support efforts to collect
and preserve evidence of genocide and crimes against humanity
carried out by ISIS so that, someday, justice may be served on
the perpetrators.
Next, we consider H.R. 672, which reaffirms the U.S.
commitment to combatting anti-Semitism, including collaboration
between U.S. and European law enforcement on efforts to improve
security for Jewish communities. It also urges European allies
to adopt a working definition of anti-Semitism, which is key to
ensuring that this evil is effectively and uniformly
confronted.
And I also thank Representative Sires for his leadership in
bringing forward House Resolution 54. This reaffirms the
partnership between the United States and Argentina. After over
a decade of economic mismanagement and corruption and alliances
with the likes of Iran and Venezuela, Argentina took an
important turn in electing a new President in 2015. Since then,
Argentina has undertaken difficult economic reforms to undo the
damage and return to global markets--and has committed to
investigating the 1994 bombing of the AMIA Jewish cultural
center.
I also want to recognize Representative Torres for her work
to advance House Resolution 145. Corruption and impunity in
Central America have fueled many problems across Central
America and beyond. As this resolution highlights, the U.S. has
an important interest in seeing Central American countries
strengthen weak institutions to tackle corruption.
I next want to thank Representative Cicilline for
introducing House Resolution 137. This honors the life of
Shimon Peres. This resolution appropriately recognizes the many
achievements of this great Israeli politician and peacemaker,
and expresses this body's condolences to the people of Israel
and the family of Shimon Peres in their bereavement.
And lastly, I want to thank Representative Bass for House
Resolution 187, highlighting the deadly famine underway in
South Sudan and urging the U.S. Agency for International
Development to continue providing emergency food assistance.
The resolution emphasizes the need to respond with locally-
sourced food, and I thank her for that, as appropriate, to
ensure our efforts save as many lives as possible as quickly as
possible.
And I now recognize the ranking member for his remarks.
Mr. Engel. Mr. Chairman, thank you for calling this markup.
This markup today is indicative of what you and I have both
tried to do, along with members of this committee on both sides
of the aisle, and that is working in a nonpartisan way to pass
legislation that is important to the American people. So I
thank you again for being a good partner in that effort.
The chairman sets the tone and you have certainly set the
right one.
We have nine good measures before us today and I want to
thank our members for all their hard work. I will start by
voicing my support for three different measures addressing the
ongoing challenge of North Korea. They send a clear message
that we need a careful and comprehensive strategy aimed at
building peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula.
I am glad to be an original cosponsor of the chairman's
measure, the Korean Interdiction and Modernization of Sanctions
Act. This bill updates the North Korea Sanctions and Policy
Enhancement Act. It seeks to build on the U.N. Security
Council's efforts to cut off sources of hard currency to the
Kim regime and the North Korean nuclear program.
I have had occasion to travel to North Korea twice,
including once with our colleague and friend, Joe Wilson, and
if or when you go there, it is like stepping backwards into a
time warp. It is just absolutely amazing and interesting.
I also welcome the bill offered by Chairman Poe and Ranking
Member Sherman to ask the State Department to take another look
at North Korea to determine whether or not they should be
designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism. And Mr. Wilson's
resolution condemns North Korea's development of
intercontinental ballistic missiles, reaffirms America's
commitment to our allies, the Republic of Korea and Japan,
calls upon China to use its influence to bring the North Korea
regime back to credible negotiations, and encourages a
comprehensive diplomatic effort to see that existing sanctions
against North Korea are fully enforced.
Democratic and Republican administrations alike have
struggled with this challenge but we cannot give up. In my
view, we need sustained high-level attention and relentless
diplomatic engagement, and these three measures support that
approach.
I will turn now to the resolution reaffirming the
partnership between the United States and Argentina offered by
Mr. Sires and Mr. Duncan. I have long advocated exploring the
untapped potential of the U.S.-Argentina relationship and,
since the election of Mauricio Macri in late 2015, we have made
good progress.
At the chairman's and my urging, President Obama quickly
ramped up engagement with the Macri administration, including a
visit to Buenos Aires last year.
President Macri will visit Washington next month. I look
forward to welcoming him, and I am glad to support this
measure, which signals our commitment to this relationship.
Next, I am glad to support Mr. Cicilline's resolution
honoring the life of Shimon Peres. In a lifetime, you just
don't meet that many people about whom you can say this person
helped shape a country, helped build a new democracy from the
ground up. That was true of Shimon Peres. He was a giant of
Jewish history. He is a giant of history. He was a champion of
Israel and the people of Israel and he was a visionary for
peace in progress. I attended his funeral in Israel several
months ago. It is a vision we need to keep alive, and this
measure will help to do so.
Moving on, I want to thank Congresswoman Torres for her
work on Central America and for offering her resolution
supporting the fight against corruption there. A big part of
our work in recent years to get to the root cause of child
migration from Central America has been supporting key figures
across the region, particularly the Attorneys General in
Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras and the heads of the
International Commission Against Impunity in Guatemala and the
mission to support the fight against corruption and impunity in
Honduras. This resolution underscores how important it is to
maintain that support and signals that the United States stands
with those who are committing to ending corrupting in those
countries.
I am also glad to support Ranking Member Bass' resolution
emphasizing the need for continued action to deal with the
famine in South Sudan. For more than 3 years of conflict, the
Government of South Sudan and the armed opposition have stood
in the way of humanitarian assistance, leading to the man-made
famine we see today.
Without the United States and our partners, this situation
would, frankly, be a lot worse. Another reminder of what good a
strong foreign affairs budget can do. Still, nearly 5 million
people are in desperate need of food assistance and, without
intervention, that number will rise by another \1/2\ million.
This measure calls for continued strong support to help
alleviate this crisis and I thank Representative Bass for her
leadership.
Next, let me thank Chairman Smith for his bill aimed at
providing support for minority groups victimized by ISIS. The
United States cannot stand by while genocide is perpetrated
against Christians, Yazidis, or any other minority group.
Congress said as much last year, as did the Obama State
Department and this bill follows up on those efforts.
And I was glad to join Chairman Royce to reintroduce the
Caesar Syria Civilian Protection Act last week to press for an
end to that conflict.
Lastly, I am proud to cosponsor a bill introduced by my
friend from New York, Nita Lowey, the Combating European Anti-
Semitism Act. We have seen an alarming resurgence of this
ancient hatred, both overseas and here at home, and we need to
respond forcefully. This measure calls for continued and
enhanced reporting on anti-Semitic incidents in Europe. It also
makes clear why it is so important for the United States, other
countries, and multilateral bodies to confront this problem,
including ensuring the safety of European Jewish communities.
Before I conclude, Mr. Chairman, I would like to reiterate
my hope that this committee will soon take up two additional
pieces of legislation dealing with Russia's criminal
interference in last year's election. The Protecting Our
Democracy Act would establish an independent commission to
investigate this issue. Our country was attacked. Our democracy
is under threat, and too many questions remain unanswered about
contacts between the President's campaign and Russian
officials. I believe the issue is too important to let it get
swallowed up by partisan politics. So, let's get it out of
Congress completely and turn this issue over to a nonpartisan
body just like we did after the 9/11 attacks. The bill to do
that is in our committee's jurisdiction and I hope we can act
on it in the not too distant future.
I would also encourage the committee in the future to mark
up the SECURE Our Democracy Act, which I introduced with Mr.
Connolly. This bill, nonpartisan on its face, would punish
those responsible for interfering in our elections from
overseas and send a strong warning to anyone thinking of doing
so in the future.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back and I think we have
good measures on this markup today.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
We go now to Ileana Ms. Ros-Lehtinen of Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and the
ranking member.
Last September, I had the privilege and honor to be part of
the delegation representing our great country at the funeral of
Shimon Peres. Several of our colleagues, as you have heard, on
our committee were also part of the delegation--Ranking Member
Engel, Ted Deutch, Lee Zeldin, Alan Lowenthal, and, of course,
David Cicilline, who is the author of one of the important
resolutions that we have before us today honoring the life of
this icon, Shimon Peres. Thank you, Mr. Cicilline, for your
bill.
I also fully support H.R. 672, the Combating European Anti-
Semitism Act. I am an original cosponsor of that bill authored
by my good friend, Nita Lowey. Nita and I, along with Ranking
Member Engel, Ted Deutch, and Chris Smith, are all founding
members and co-chairs of the Bipartisan Task Force for
Combating Anti-Semitism. We have seen a steady rise in anti-
Semitic incidents across Europe, with the Jewish community
increasingly targeted for physical and verbal abuse and,
alarmingly, targeted in terrorist attacks as well. This bill
will send a strong message that we and our European allies
stand together in promoting the shared values that bind us
together and that this form of hatred and intolerance has no
place in today's world.
I also want to speak in support of my good friend, Albio
Sires', resolution on reaffirming the U.S.-Argentina
partnership and I am a cosponsor of his bill. President Macri
has shown great leadership and a commitment to truth and
justice by announcing his intention to continue to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for the 1994 bombing of the
Argentina-Israeli Mutual Association, AMIA, in Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Earlier this month, we sadly marked the 25th
anniversary of the terrorist attack on the Israeli Embassy in
Buenos Aires, which was followed by the 1994 AMIA attack. It is
no secret that the Iranian-backed terrorist group Hezbollah was
responsible for these attacks, yet to this day, Iran and
Hezbollah have evaded justice. It is also commendable that
President Macri vowed to investigate the suspicious
circumstances involving the death of Special Prosecutor Alberto
Nisman. We have to help President Macri and the Argentinian
Government continue his work and legacy by bringing those
responsible for his death and the terrorist attacks to justice.
I will submit the rest of my statement for the record,
supporting the three North Korea measures before us today.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and ranking member for
the time.
Chairman Royce. Thank you Ms. Ros-Lehtinen.
I think Albio Sires was seeking time from New Jersey.
Mr. Sires. I would like to start by thanking Chairman
Royce, Ranking Member Engel, and their staffs for working with
me to bring House Resolution 54 to our committee's first markup
for the new Congress.
I would like to thank Chairman Duncan, who is in charge of
the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee and led a delegation to
Argentina last March to help restart relations with the Macri
administration.
House Resolution 54 reaffirms the strong U.S. partnership
with Argentina. It acknowledges their President, Mauricio
Macri, for his efforts to make the necessary changes and bring
Argentina back into the international economy.
President Macri has worked hard to stimulate growth and
bring Argentina back as a powerful player in the region after
years of isolationist views from the Kirchners.
I was pleased to visit Argentina last year and see
firsthand the changes the new government was making and it was
refreshing to see the progress already being made. Most
importantly, we received assurances from the Macri
administration that they will restart investigations into the
horrific 1994 bombing of the AMIA Jewish Center in Buenos
Aires, which left 85 dead and hundreds more injured, and the
untimely and suspicious death of prosecutor Alberto Nisman, who
was found dead under suspicious circumstances on the eve of
delivering his explosive report which outlined the connections
between the bombing, Iran, and former Argentina President
Cristina Kirchner's effort to cover up these links.
Unfortunately, the victims of these attacks and their
families don't have the answers to what really occurred and
troubling reports of Iran's role in the bombing deserve a
thorough investigation that finally brings the perpetrators to
justice.
Argentina is a great partner and friend and I believe we
must continue to support our friends and continue to grow this
critical relationship.
I would like to speak in support of Resolution 145 which
expresses support for Central America's fight against
corruption. The only way to make sure the money invested in
Central America leads to long-lasting change is to root out
corruption and improve the rule of law. The brave Attorney
General and the leaders of the CICIG and MACCHIH Commissions in
Guatemala and Honduras are leading the change.
Thelma Aldana, Oscar Chinchilla, Douglas Melendez, Ivan
Velasquez, and Juan Jimenez are just a few of the brave leaders
that, even after threats to their own lives, continue to fight
to hold corrupt officials accountable and reduce the level of
impunity. I have had the honor of meeting these individuals and
have seen the great work that they are doing, the challenges
they are up against, and their commitments to helping Central
America.
I commend Congresswoman Torres, who introduced this timely
and bipartisan piece of legislation. And I urge all my
colleagues to join in supporting our efforts to fight
corruption in Central America.
Once again, I thank my colleagues for their support and I
urge your support for H.R. 54 and H.R. 145.
Thank you.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Mr. Sires. I would like to----
Mr. Connolly. Yes, yield to me.
Mr. Sires [continuing]. Yield.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend, Mr. Sires and thank him
for his passionate H. Res. 145.
I want to thank the chairman and the ranking member for
this thoughtful markup. I am pleased to support all of the
bills. As co-chairman of the Korea Caucus, I am particularly
supportive of the three bills dealing with the growing threat
from North Korea. I think it is vital that this committee speak
out and that the Congress be heard and that a clear message
that is unified and bipartisan be sent to the Korean Peninsula,
particularly to those in Pyongyang.
I also thank the chair and ranking member for accepting my
amendment for a bit of a clarification on humanitarian aspects
of the sanctions.
I also want to join in commending the resolution on Shimon
Peres. I had the privilege of meeting with him for several
hours on my last trip to Israel and he was a statesman of
incomparable ability and, by the way, a stalwart supporter of a
two-state solution. And I was pleased, recently, to be the
coauthor of the letter reaffirming that as the basis for U.S.-
Middle East negotiations with Mr. David Price of North
Carolina, signed by 191 of our colleagues.
Finally, I want to reiterate what Mr. Engel indicated. It
is great to start this fresh markup on a bipartisan basis and I
hope we can continue that tradition but I also believe that
Russia represents an insidious threat to the electoral process
here in the United States. The sanctions legislation Mr.
Elliott and I have coauthored I think is a bill that is
properly to be scheduled for markup. I would urge the chairman
of the majority to do that. I think that this committee needs
to be heard from on this subject. We shouldn't just cede it to
the Intelligence Committees and I hope to have a dialogue with
the majority on that subject as we move forward.
And with that, I yield back to my friend, Mr. Sires.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr.
Connolly.
We now go to Mr. Joe Wilson--oh, Mr. Chris Smith was
seeking time.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I want to say I support all the bills and I
thank you and Eliot Engel for again bringing all of us together
in a very bipartisan way for a markup for a number of important
bills and resolutions.
H.R. 390, legislation that I have introduced, the Iraq and
Syria Genocide Emergency Relief and Accountability Act, is long
overdue. I have chaired nine hearings over the last 3 years on
the fact that Christians and the Yazidis have been subjected to
genocide and last December, right before Christmas, traveled to
Erbil, visited many of those who have or are now IDPs in Erbil,
and frankly, they are not getting aid. They were not getting
aid for the last several years. It was bewildering,
aggravating, and angering that so many people would be
bypassed.
This legislation directs the administration to really
provide assistance to these suffering individuals. They are
Christians; they are Yazidis. Seventy thousand Christians in
Erbil, IDPs. I went to one of the refugee camps, 6,000 people,
not a dime from the U.S. Government and that is a gross
oversight, indifference, or worse. This legislation seeks to
correct that.
Anna Eshoo is the prime cosponsor on the Democratic side
and I am very, very grateful for her leadership. We have 35
cosponsors, including 12 members of this committee.
The legislation also focuses on accountability. I have had
a series of hearings on the whole issue of hybrid courts, as
opposed to the ICC, although if that works, do it, but I don't
think it will. But the importance of collecting evidence that
is actionable so that people who commit these atrocities can be
held to account, this legislation does that as well and,
hopefully, will make a difference in holding perpetrators of
these crimes against humanity and these war crimes to account.
It is backed by 25 plus organizations. All of the U.S.
Ambassadors-at-Large for War Crimes have endorsed it. The
former prosecutor for Sierra Leone, who did an outstanding job
and prosecuted a number of people, including the former
President of Liberia. David Crane, the chief prosecutor, has
testified twice at hearings that I have held, he is onboard and
thinks this is a very important bill on accountability, so we
do have a good cross-section of support for this legislation.
Let me also say I am a strong supporter of the Bass
resolution. We had a hearing yesterday in my subcommittee on
the famine in eastern Africa in South Sudan, where almost 5
million people are at risk and the number is growing,
exacerbated by the conflict. I was there in Juba last August.
It is a fight primarily between the Nuer and the Dinka tribes.
It is outrageous that the ethnic conflict has resulted in
thousands, tens of thousands, of lives being lost through
gunfire and killings of various kinds, but it is made worse, a
famine because of the conflicts. The same can be said for
Somalia and other parts of east Africa, where this emerging
famine, and that was the gist of our hearing yesterday, puts at
least 24 million people at risk in eastern Africa. The response
must be robust.
We emphasized yesterday the importance of protecting
humanitarian aid workers. I pointed that out when I went to
Juba. One of those workers was from my district who almost got
raped in the Terrain complex in July of last year. Others were
raped. Others were beaten and one journalist was killed at that
compound. So we stressed with Salva Kiir, and I did it
personally when I met with him, the importance of a zero
tolerance policy on sexual assault. It has not happened. They
have talked about it. They have talked about it. It still
hasn't happened.
Again, this famine resolution I think is extremely
important.
And finally on the issue of the escalating problem of anti-
Semitism, I support the Nita Lowey bill. Last week I had
another hearing. It was about the 20th hearing on combating
anti-Semitism and we heard from experts in the field just how
bad it is in Europe. It is getting bad here as well but it has
become so widespread that even in Sweden there are a number of
cities where a man cannot even wear traditional garb,
particularly the yarmulke and it is a very serious problem. We
need to collaborate more closely with our European friends and
really friends everywhere, including in Argentina, where that
terrible devastation of 25 years ago remains unresolved. And
there is great evidence to suggest that it was the Iranians who
did it. And again, that has not been resolved.
But I think it is important that we work much closer with
our European friends to combat anti-Semitism. Last week at the
hearing, people like Rabbi Andy Baker, who is the Personal
Representative for the OSCE Chair-in-Office on Combating Anti-
Semitism, gave riveting testimony about how bad it is and
getting worse. We need to do more. This resolution helps in
that regard.
Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Congresswoman Norma Torres from California.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Chairman Royce, for putting this
resolution forward. And thank you Ranking Member Engel,
Chairman Duncan, and Ranking Member Sires for your support.
I would also like to recognize the cosponsors of this
resolution, in particular my friend from Michigan, Congressman
Moolenaar, who does not sit on this committee but whose
leadership on this resolution has been so important.
Corruption is one of the most serious and difficult
challenges facing Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador. In
recent years, the Attorney Generals in these countries have
made important progress in tackling corruption at the highest
levels. They have benefited from strong support from the United
States and from the International Commission against Impunity
in Guatemala, led by Ivan Velasquez, and the mission to support
the fight against corruption and impunity in Honduras, led by
Juan Jimenez.
As they have sought to pursue justice, the Attorney General
and the leadership of MACCIH and CICIG have faced retaliation
in the form of death threats, smear campaigns, and efforts to
remove them from their posts. That is why this resolution is
needed.
House Resolution 145 reaffirms that combating corruption in
the Northern Triangle is a policy priority for the United
States in Central America. It acknowledges that CICIG and
MACCIH are currently making important contributions to anti-
corruption efforts. It urges the Government of Guatemala to
continue to cooperate with CICIG and the Government of Honduras
to continue to cooperate with MACCIH. It encourages the
Governments of Honduras, Guatemala, and El Salvador to publicly
support efforts to fight corruption, to respect the
independence of the Judicial Branch and the Office of the
Attorney General, and to ensure that the Office of the Attorney
General in each Northern Triangle country receives sufficient
domestic budget allocations to carry out their core
responsibilities and that budgeted funds are delivered in a
timely manner.
Mr. Chairman, the countries of the Northern Triangle find
themselves at a crucial point. They have made significant
progress and cannot afford to turn back the progress that has
been made. This resolution will send a clear signal to the
region that the United States continues to stand firmly on the
side of the rule of law.
Thank you and I would also like to thank all of the members
that have put forward resolutions this morning. It is really
great to sit here in a committee where we are working in a
bipartisan way. Thank you all.
And I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congresswoman Torres.
We go now to Congressman Joe Wilson of South Carolina.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you Chairman Ed Royce for holding the
markup to consider House Resolution 92. I appreciate your
extraordinary leadership and also the extraordinary work of
Ranking Member Eliot Engel. It is encouraging, as was cited by
Congresswoman Torres, to see the bipartisan partnership that
each of you have on behalf of our country.
When I introduced this resolution in early February, it was
in response to North Korea's threat that they planned to test
an intercontinental ballistic missile. This was especially
disturbing because an ICBM has the capability of reaching the
West Coast of the United States.
My concern over the threat of North Korea was underscored
by a delegation visit with Ranking Member Eliot Engel to
Pyongyang, a very rare visit to the DPRK. We actually witnessed
a dictatorship obsessed with regime preservation as the
citizens suffer starvation and this is in contrast to South
Korea, which has become one of the world's wealthiest nations
and most successful.
Since I have introduced the resolution, North Korea has
appeared to successfully test an ICBM, launched a satellite
into orbit, four simultaneous ballistic missiles, three of
which landed in Japanese territorial waters, a failed missile
launch, and a test of a ballistic missile engine. The regime
also claims it is planning another nuclear test early next
month.
Even more startling and incredible, last week the regime in
North Korea released a propaganda video depicting a missile
striking a U.S. aircraft carrier and calling for the
destruction of the American people.
This rapid pace of North Korea's almost weekly aggression
is alarming and concerning to the United States and the
citizens of South Korea.
After 8 years of strategic patience, which only emboldened
the totalitarian dictatorship even more, I am grateful that
President Donald Trump is taking the regime and its threat
seriously. Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis and Secretary of
State Rex Tillerson recently visited our allies in Japan and
South Korea and the United States Ambassador to the United
Nations, Nikki Haley, has led the efforts to strengthening
international sanctions against North Korea.
The administration has also demonstrated peace through
strength by backing up their commitments to our allies with
action. We have begun deploying the THAAD missile defense
system, recently resumed our annual military training exercises
with South Korea, and deployed attack drones to protect our
servicemembers stationed in the region, along with the people
of South Korea.
As we attempt to check the growing influence and missile
capability of North Korea, Congress, too, has a vital role to
play, continuing by passing House Resolution 92 forcefully
condemning North Korea, put sanctions on the regime and the
individuals or businesses that sustain it. That is why I
appreciate that Chairman Ed Royce and Congressman Judge Ted Poe
have introduced complementary legislation that makes it clear
the United States must stand strong against North Korea and for
the extraordinary people of South Korea.
I am grateful that the committee is considering House
Resolution 92 and urge the committee to successfully report out
the resolution.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We now go to Mr. David Cicilline, Congressman from Rhode
Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Engel for holding this markup today. As always, I am pleased
that this committee has come together in the in the spirit of
bipartisanship to pass legislation that deals with a variety of
important issues. All of the measures being considered today
are worthy and help advance important causes of which this
committee has jurisdiction.
I am proud to be a cosponsor of many of these bills and the
lead sponsor of House Resolution 137, which honors the life of
Israeli leader, Shimon Peres. This resolution, which has the
support of 48 bipartisan cosponsors, including many members of
this committee, recognizes the important achievements of Shimon
Peres in building the State of Israel, leading it as its Prime
Minister and later President, and striving to achieve peace.
Shimon Peres was devoted to the cause of the Jewish State
and worked tirelessly to achieve a lasting peace in the Middle
East. He was a founding father to the State of Israel and
remained, throughout his life, one of its greatest champions.
He was a central architect of the Oslo Accords and was
respected around the world for his strong leadership as Prime
Minister and President of Israel. His example should be an
inspiration to us all.
Shimon Peres was an immigrant, who left Poland in the early
1920s to seek a better life of what was then the British-
controlled Palestinian Mandate.
After the recognition of the State of Israel by the
international community, Peres became one of its leading
political figures and helped guide the country through the hope
and turmoil of its early days.
Along with David Ben-Gurion, Peres helped establish the
Labor Party in 1968 and then went on to serve his country for
nearly 50 years in various capacities, including as defense
minister, a member of the Parliament, the Knesset Prime
Minister, and ultimately President.
Mr. Peres was instrumental in negotiating the Oslo Accords
which set the framework negotiating settlement and close
working relationships between Israel and the Palestinian
people.
Mr. Peres was a pillar of stability, as he led the Israeli
people as Prime Minister during the frightening and turbulent
period following the tragic murder of Yitzhak Rabin in 1995.
And in 1996, still resolved to achieve a lasting peace, he
founded the Peres Center for Peace dedicated to promoting
peace-building and cooperation between Israelis and
Palestinians.
Mr. Peres once said that life's purpose was ``to find a
cause that is larger than yourself and then to give your life
to it.'' And he truly embodied that sentiment.
I had the pleasure of meeting Shimon Peres numerous times
over the years and the last time we spoke in March 2015, we
discussed our mutual hopes for a peaceful future for Israel.
With this resolution, we honor the outstanding work that Shimon
Peres did over the course of his inspirational life and I urge
us all to live by his example, dedicating our lives to a cause
we believe in and hope that we may honor his memory by
assisting the Israelis and Palestinians in achieving a lasting
peace.
I want to thank the chairman and ranking member for
bringing this resolution before the committee today and thank
my colleagues for their bipartisan support for this measure.
And before I yield back, Mr. Chairman, I would ask
unanimous consent for the statement of the author of H.R. 672,
Nita M. Lowey, to be introduced in the record in support of her
legislation.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Cicilline. And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congressman Cicilline.
We go now to Mr. Mike McCaul from Texas.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the ranking member for holding this morning's markup on
these legislative measures, in particular those pertaining to
North Korea that I believe are critical to addressing the many
foreign policy challenges currently facing the United States.
I would like to express my support for the three bills that
focus on the current threats emanating out of the north of the
Korean Peninsula.
Mr. Chairman, for years the international community has
viewed North Korea's incessant temper tantrums and provocations
as little more than belligerent bluster. However, Jong Un's
continued ballistic missile tests, including another ballistic
missile engine test on Monday, the third in recent weeks, is
evidence of the regime's unrelenting quest to develop the
ability to launch a nuclear attack far beyond its own backyard.
Such a quest poses a real and direct threat to the national
security of the United States and our allies in the region. I
believe disregarding this threat as simply tough talk is
extremely dangerous.
Earlier this month, I authored an op-ed on the steps the
United States can take to bolster the security of the homeland
and our allies in the region to counter this growing threat.
Such steps included partnering with our allies in the region to
expand missile defense shields, building on the deployment of
the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense, or THAAD systems,
already deployed in South Korea, all the while enhancing our
defenses here at home by increasing the number of ground-based
interceptors on the West Coast, as well as improving
intelligence-gathering measures to get a clear picture of North
Korea's arsenal.
I believe the United States should also pursue more
aggressive sanctions on North Korea, such as secondary
sanctions to crack down on North Korean front companies, black
market exchanges, and coal experts, all of which allow the
radical regime to stay afloat, despite legislation signed into
law last year imposing stiff sanctions on North Korea's illicit
activities, such as counterfeiting of U.S. currency and
narcotics trafficking.
The United States should also place North Korea back on the
State Sponsor of Terrorism list, which it should never have
left in the first place. And lastly, we must work to counter
message the regime's propaganda and redouble U.S. efforts to
ensure the people of North Korea have access to information
from the outside world.
Grouped together, these pieces of legislation, I believe,
send a strong signal to the international community and North
Korean Dictator Kim Jong Un that the United States will not sit
idly by while its adversaries threaten the peace and security
of the region and the U.S. homeland.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to supporting the passage of
these bills and encourage my colleagues in the House. I commend
you for bringing this forward to send a message that North
Korea is a menace that cannot be ignored and must be tempered.
Thank you and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Congresswoman Karen Bass from California.
Ms. Bass. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I especially want to thank
you and your staff for your assistance in H. Res. 187 and I
also want to thank the ranking member and the chair of the
subcommittee, who I believe is not here. We had a very good
hearing yesterday and although this resolution is about South
Sudan, I am sorry to say that we will probably be coming back
again with additional resolutions because we know that the
famine is beyond South Sudan.
On February 20th, 2017, famine was declared formally in two
counties of Unity State, which is in the northern portion of
South Sudan. An estimated 100,000 plus people are currently
experiencing famine. International humanitarian agencies in
South Sudan express growing concern that the famine will
spread, affecting some 4.9 million men, women, and children,
effectively 40 percent of the embattled country's population.
These people are currently considered to be on the brink of
starvation.
The resolution calls on USAID to continue its leadership
role in providing robust assistance in response to the famine
in South Sudan. Also, the resolution calls on the Government of
South Sudan to stop ongoing hostilities and enable humanitarian
supplies and foods supplies to reach civilians. The resolution
specifically calls on the Government of South Sudan to allow
immediate and unrestricted humanitarian access to those areas
suffering from famine.
Equally important, it condemns threats against not only the
civilian population but humanitarian assistance workers. Today,
over 70 humanitarian workers, mostly of South Sudanese origin,
have been killed since the beginning of the internal conflict.
The resolution cites the attack on Americans at the Terrain
camp in July 2016.
This resolution is timely and necessary to stem the tide of
too many lost lives amongst the population of the world's
youngest state, South Sudan, calls for the U.S. Government to
work with partners in the international community, including
the African Union and European Union, and encourages greater
diplomatic pressure to get the parties to return to
negotiations.
I ask that my colleagues support this amendment in the
nature of a substitute to House Res. 187. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Congresswoman Bass.
Chairman Jeff Duncan from South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support all
the measures before the Foreign Affairs Committee this morning
but, most importantly, I want to talk about my support for H.
Res. 54 put forth by the ranking member of the Western
Hemisphere Subcommittee, my good friend, Albio Sires. I am a
proud cosponsor of that legislation.
This bill sends a strong message that the United States
values the relationship with Argentina. It urges the Department
of State to increase cooperation and commends President Macri
for his economic reforms and for resolving most of Argentina's
business disputes, the bondholder issues that many of us have
worked on for years, and encourages Argentina to continue to
investigate and prosecute those responsible for the 1994 AMIA
bombing.
Last year, as Ranking Member Sires said, I led a
congressional delegation to Argentina to see the differences in
this country under new leadership of President Macri and to re-
extend the hand of friendship from the United States. At that
time, it was clear to me that the new Macri administration was
intent on fixing the ruinous economic policies of the previous
government, reestablishing ties with friendly governments in
the region, including the United States, and reasserting
Argentina's role in the region as an important strategic
leader.
Many of you have traveled to Argentina in the past and I
can tell you that you could almost taste the optimism within
the Argentine people and in the air about the future of that
country.
Furthermore, at the OAS, the Organization of American
States, Argentina has been supportive of the actions of OAS
Secretary General Almagro, urging the Venezuelan Government to
respect democracy, human rights, and the rule of law. And I
applaud Argentina's role in that.
This was my second trip to the AMIA facility, the site of
the '94 AMIA bombing terrorist attack, the largest loss of life
from a terrorist attack in the Western Hemisphere prior to our
own attacks here in the United States on 9/11. So President
Macri is working to find justice for the 1994 AMIA bombing
terrorist attack and I want to commend him for continuing the
efforts of special prosecutor Alberto Nisman, who passed away 2
years ago this January--murdered right before he was scheduled
to testify and present before the Argentine Congress.
So it is my sincerest hope that President Macri and his
Government will find the perpetrators and hold them accountable
for these heinous crimes.
Our delegation laid flowers at the site of the AMIA
bombing. That was the second time I did that. The first time
was with Chairman McCaul several years ago. I urge my
colleagues, if you do travel the region, to visit AMIA and
remember what happened there, and remember the perpetrators are
still at large.
Mr. Chairman, thanks for your leadership on these issues. I
want to thank the ranking member for his leadership on these
issues as well.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
We go now to Mr. Gregory Meeks from New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling up, and Mr.
Ranking Member, H.R. 672 to markup today, bringing an important
House Foreign Affairs Committee position on anti-Semitism in
Europe.
As ranking member on the Subcommittee on Europe and a proud
New Yorker, the ties between my district and the Old Continent
sometimes reveal ugly parallels of contemporary life. Anti-
Semitism in Europe is, sadly, not a part of the past. It is not
merely words. And it is not becoming of any healthy society.
Unfortunately, as the resolution acknowledges, anti-Semitism is
very much alive and well not only in Europe but, unfortunately,
in the United States also and can be seen even in a great city
like my city, New York.
This, indeed, is a transatlantic problem and I applaud this
resolution's acknowledgment that this should be dealt with in
multilateral organizations such as the EU and OSCE, where we
are members. This work at the international level is for a
common human cause. Therefore, it is with a solemn pledge to do
more to fight this scourge and I will vote in support, of
course, of H.R. 672.
I also want to thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member, for calling up H. Res. 54. As Chairman Duncan has
indicated, I have had the opportunity, and I was very
impressed, to meet with the President, to meet and discuss our
shared priorities with President Macri of Argentina. I was very
impressed when I had lunch with him not too long ago.
He has been credited with reversing Argentina's course and
making engagement with the United States one of his priorities.
Last March, following an historic visit to Cuba, President
Obama made an additional historic visit to Argentina. His visit
was the first bilateral visit by a U.S. President in almost two
decades. While there, he announced that both our countries
would launch a high-level dialogue to strengthen our bilateral
relationship. These actions demonstrate our commitment to and
our prioritization for our relationship with Argentina.
As a senior member of the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee,
I am pleased to support a resolution that highlights the
importance of our relationship with Argentina, as well as the
steps taken by President Macri and his administration to reform
Argentina's economy.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Meeks.
Chairman Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member Engel for bringing before this committee
such important legislation and for working with me on my
amendment to H.R. 1644, the KIMS Act.
Last week, the Asia Subcommittee held a hearing evaluating
what options the United States has at its disposal to deal with
the growing North Korean threat. As I noted, Jong Un has
dramatically accelerated his belligerent behavior, conducting
two nuclear tests and two missile launches last year. Since
2015, Kim Jong Un has tested more missiles than Kim Jong Il and
Kim Il Sung combined, while making continued progress toward an
ICBM capable of targeting nearly the entire continental U.S.
Speculation is widespread that another nuclear test is
imminent.
But while we have seen over two decades of failed
approaches of North Korea, this committee has continued to
lead. We have before us a measure that further increased
pressure on the brutal and belligerent Kim regime by targeting
North Korea, North Korean slave labor, and expanding sanctions
to deter Kim's nuclear weapons program.
Again, I want to thank the chairman and ranking members for
working with me on my amendment to this important legislation,
which would help enforce a U.N. embargo on foreign countries
from buying weapons from North Korea.
We are also considering important legislation authored by
Judge Poe that rightly pressures the State Department to put
North Korea back on the State Sponsors of Terrorism List.
During last week's Asia Subcommittee hearing on North Korea, I
asked our panel directly whether the Kim regime should be
relisted. Every witness on that panel replied that North Korea
was a state sponsor of terror and North Korea belonged on that
list last Congress when this committee passed Judge Poe's
legislation. And it deserves to be relisted particularly in
light of the brazen murder of Kim Jong Nam in Malaysia in the
Malaysian airport, using VX nerve gas, a weapon of mass
destruction.
Finally, I want to offer my strong support for H. Res. 92,
which condemns North Korea's development of intercontinental
ballistic missiles and importantly welcomes the deployment of
the THAAD in South Korea.
I also would like to thank the chairman and Mr. Wilson for
accepting language I authored that urges the Chinese Government
to immediately cease its intimidation and retaliation against
South Korea in an attempt to block the THAAD system.
We need to be clear. The U.S.-South Korean alliance
decision to deploy the defense of THAAD system is to counter
the threat from the Kim regime and no one else, a threat that
China is not adequately helping the world community in
addressing. China's decision to punish South Korea is not only
regrettable, it is inappropriate. Frankly, China is sanctioning
the wrong Korea and Beijing needs to do more to crack down on
North Korea's ballistic weapon program to stabilize not just
the Korean Peninsula or the Asia-Pacific Region but the world.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Congressman Tom Suozzi of New York.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member Engel for your leadership of
this committee and bringing us together in a bipartisan
fashion. It is such a great honor for me to serve on this
committee and to be involved in these different issues and I am
happy to support each of these nine resolutions today.
When looking at each of these resolutions, it emphasizes
the idea that in the world today, we are facing this great
battle between stability and instability, places that have
control and places that are in chaos. And the old battles, when
the Soviets and the Americans were propping up countries that
were either incompetent, or corrupt, or lacked resources but
were able to keep them stable is a very different world today.
So many places in this world today are unstable. That is why we
have gone from 33 million refugees in the world 10 years ago to
65 million refugees today. And this committee has such an
important role to play in trying to encourage stability and
discourage instability.
These three bills today about North Korea are great
examples of trying to stop a nation that is trying to promote
instability in the world. The bill today about Iraq and the
Syrian genocide is the same concept of people that are trying
to create instability in the world.
This anti-Semitism that we see happening throughout Europe
and much of the world is the same concept. And the corruption
that we see in Central America is another example of the
instability.
And we are trying to promote stability by trying to address
the issues of famine in the South Sudan and trying to promote
stability in Argentina with a good partner there.
I just want to close up by talking about Shimon Peres. I
was fortunate, along with Adriano Espaillat, to meet Shimon
Peres back in 2002 when he explained the two-state solution
concept to us. And that idea is really in keeping with this
concept of stability versus instability. The idea of the two-
state solution is that we need to have another governed nation
that can hold its people accountable so that when there is an
effort to try and have peace, that people who try and violate
that peace can be held accountable by a police force or by an
army or by a national government that will hold those people
that want to purvey instability, hold them accountable and stop
them from that behavior.
So again, I want to just say thank you so much for the
opportunity to serve on this committee. It is a great honor.
And thank you for the good work that our leaders are doing. I
want to congratulate all of my colleagues for the good work
that they have done here today. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go now to Mr. Espaillat from New York. I believe he is
the last person requesting time.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
opportunity to speak on this markup. Certainly, there are many
worthy resolutions in this effort.
The Resolution 54, reaffirming the United States and
Argentina's partnership is a worthy one and particularly
because it also commits to investigating anti-Semitism and the
bombing of a synagogue there in Argentina.
In addition, there are three resolutions, including
Resolution 92, condemning North Korea. We must continue to keep
sanctions on that country and the threat that they pose to our
nation and the world.
Resolution 137, honoring the life of Shimon Peres, as
Congressman Suozzi stated, in 2002 we had the opportunity to
meet Shimon Peres, a great statesman who advocated for the two-
state solution and someone that we all look to for guidance, as
he left a tremendous legacy for peace in the region.
In addition, I commend Congresswoman Torres for her
Resolution 145, expressing a sense of the House of
Representatives regarding the fight against corruption in
Central America. We will be supportive of that resolution and I
hope that in the future, we will also be able to take up
similar resolutions for other Latin American and Caribbean
countries that are fighting corruption, one of the greatest
ills affecting governments in the region.
The resolutions for famine in Sudan, Iraq and Syria
genocide emergency relief, and combating European anti-Semitism
are all very good solutions that I will support.
I look forward to working in the upcoming markups and I
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your good work and your bipartisan
efforts to include members from both sides of the aisle.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Espaillat.
Hearing no further requests for recognition, the question
occurs on the items considered en bloc.
All those in favor say aye.
All those opposed, no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it. The measures
considered en bloc are agreed to. Without objection, the
measures considered en bloc are ordered favorably reported, as
amended.
Staff is directed to make any technical and conforming
changes. And the chair is authorized to seek House
consideration under suspension of the rules.
So, that concludes our business for today and I want to
thank Ranking Member Engel and all of our committee members for
their contributions, for your assistance with today's markup.
The committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT>

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Material submitted for the record by the Honorable David Cicilline, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Rhode Island

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
