- THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN SAUDI ARABIA AND LEBANON

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN SAUDI ARABIA AND LEBANON

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 29, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-95

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
27-660 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin                        ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
VACANT
As of 10/24/17 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa

ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida, Chairman
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Elliott Abrams, senior fellow for Middle Eastern
studies, Council on Foreign Relations..........................     7
Paul Salem, Ph.D., vice president for policy analysis, research,
and programs, Middle East Institute............................    21
Tamara Cofman Wittes, Ph.D., senior fellow, Center for Middle
East Policy, The Brookings Institution.........................    34

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Elliott Abrams: Prepared statement.................    10
Paul Salem, Ph.D.: Prepared statement............................    23
Tamara Cofman Wittes, Ph.D.: Prepared statement..................    36

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    68
Hearing minutes..................................................    69
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia:
Prepared statement.............................................    70
Material submitted for the record..............................    72

THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN SAUDI ARABIA AND LEBANON

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on the Middle East and North Africa,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ileana Ros-
Lehtinen (chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. The subcommittee will come to order.
After recognizing myself and Ranking Member Deutch for our
opening statements, I will then recognize other members seeking
recognition for 1 minute. We will then hear from our witnesses.
Thank you so much for being with us today, and without
objection, your prepared statements will be made a part of the
record and members may have 5 days to insert statements and
questions for the record subject to the length limitation in
the rules.
The chair now recognizes herself for as much time as she
may consume.
The one true constant in the Middle East has been the
uncertainty and the instability of Lebanon since it gained its
independence from France in the 1940s.
Sectarian divisions and decades of mistrust among the
predominant forces--Maronite Christians, Sunni Muslims, Shiite
Muslims, as well as outside actors exerting undue influence on
what should be internal matters--has ensured that Lebanon will
remain in a constant state of uncertainty and instability.
It was just 7 weeks ago today that this subcommittee
convened a hearing on U.S. policy toward Lebanon. I cautioned
then as I have for many years now that U.S. policy in Lebanon
must be calibrated to scale back Iran and its proxy,
Hezbollah's, influence while spurring much needed security,
stability, and prosperity to the country.
Then, on November 4th, Lebanon's prime minister departed
for Saudi Arabia, where he announced his resignation from
office.
It is probably no coincidence that this surprise
announcement came on the very day that Saudi Arabia had
intercepted a Houthi-fired missile outside of the international
airport in Riyadh.
The Saudis blamed Iran and Hezbollah directly for providing
the arms and support for the Houthis that allowed them to carry
out this attack, calling it an act of war on Tehran's part.
It should also be noted that Iran provided the missiles for
the Houthis that were fired directly at U.S. ships off the
coast of Yemen as well.
These events also happened to coincide with the crackdown
by Saudi's crown prince on that same day, which he says is an
anti-corruption campaign. Others say it is a power grab, and
the truth may be somewhere in the middle.
Hariri, a Saudi citizen himself, stated in his resignation
speech that Iran and Hezbollah had undermined Lebanon's
sovereignty and he said that his life was in danger.
And if anyone would know what Iran, Hezbollah, and other
outside actors are capable of in Lebanon, it is Hariri. As we
know, it was his father who was assassinated in 2005 in Beirut
with both Hezbollah and Syria's Assad linked to that act of
terror and it is no secret that Iran and Hezbollah's influence
undermine the sovereignty of Lebanon.
And, unfortunately, we are seeing an effort by Iran to
expand this influence and its presence across the region, which
has given its main rival, Saudi Arabia, justifiable reason for
concern.
Hariri has since returned to Lebanon this week, where he
has put his plans to resign on hold but has demanded that
Hezbollah cease its interference in regional conflicts.
I would take that a step further and say that Hezbollah and
Iran must not be legitimized nor allowed to interfere in
domestic issues as well.
I still believe the U.S. must remain cautious over ties
between the terror group and the Lebanese Armed Forces--LAF--
and we should not put all of our support behind the LAF until
those ties are severed completely.
And while this committee has focused on Hezbollah and
Iran's role in Lebanon, Syria, and Iraq, we haven't spent as
much time focusing on Iran's latest strategic position in
Yemen.
The new Saudi crown prince has taken a series of drastic
steps in recent weeks and has shown that he is perhaps more
willing to engage Iran directly and he is seeing what would be
a great cause for alarm in Saudi Arabia, for the Gulf and for
the United States.
Aside from Iran's continued support for the Houthis, there
is increasing concern of a Hezbollah presence in Yemen. Imagine
what that would mean for Iran's ability to interfere in
internal matters of other countries and to put the entire
region under threat.
There is simply no way that Saudi Arabia would allow for
Hezbollah to gain a presence in Yemen and then build up an
arsenal presence on the Saudi border.
Perhaps this is why we are seeing rumors of a willingness
for Saudi and Israel to work together. Saudi now understands
what it means to be living under constant and immediate threat
from Hezbollah and Iran.
But these recent developments should be a cause for concern
for the U.S. and our partners. Lebanon is already hosting 1.5
million or more Syrian refugees.
Millions more would flee, likely making their way to Europe
or elsewhere. It is also likely to spark yet another conflict
as Iran continues its malign behavior and threatens its
neighbors.
So how should the United States respond? We must make it
clear that Iran cannot continue its destabilizing activity and
we must continue to put pressure on it and its proxy,
Hezbollah.
We must make it clear that we support a stable Lebanon,
free from outside interference, free from Hezbollah's damaging
behavior.
We must also make it clear that Iran's support for the
Houthis and its buildup of Hezbollah presence in Yemen are red
lines that cannot be crossed. We must also continue to support
the people of Yemen and the people of Lebanon.
I believe that the U.S. and international partners need to
have unfettered access to help deliver humanitarian assistance
in Yemen.
I welcome the announcement from Saudi Arabia and the Saudi-
led coalition that it is reopening ports and the international
airport to allow the urgent flow of humanitarian aid to the
people of Yemen.
The Saudi-led coalition must play a role to allow
humanitarian assistance into Yemen but the Houthi leadership
must stop preventing the shipment and distribution of
lifesaving aid without manipulation or diversion to those
people in critical need, particularly in those residents in
areas controlled by the Houthis' militias.
I further call on all parties to work toward a cessation of
hostilities and I urge the Houthi leadership to return to the
peace process to halt any further escalation including cross-
border attacks in Saudi Arabia.
We need to find a way to hold all parties accountable while
working with those willing to work with us to curtail the
violence and to bring stability to both Yemen and Lebanon free
from outside interference.
I am now pleased to yield to my friend, the ranking member
of our subcommittee, Mr. Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks, Madam Chairman, for convening today's
important and timely hearing and thanks to our excellent panel
of witnesses for being with us today.
The past few weeks have been dizzying and today's hearing
offers an opportunity to help understand the implications of
the changes that we have seen in the region.
At the 30,000-foot view, we are clearly seeing a
continuation of the ongoing power struggle in the region
between the Sunni Arab kingdom of Saudi Arabia as they seek to
push back against the expansionism of the Persian Shiite
Republic of Iran.
But the Middle East is a complex region and simply painting
everything as Iran versus Saudi Arabia is an oversimplification
when there is a vast web of actors nations and interests at
stake.
I think it is worth reviewing a quick time line of the past
few months that have brought us to this moment. In May, the
United States reached a $110 billion arms deal with Saudi
Arabia, and President Trump flew to Riyadh for his first
foreign travel.
Shortly after that, Saudi Arabia and its Gulf neighbors
imposed a blockade on Qatar, presumably over its support for
Hamas, the Muslim Brotherhood, and ties to Iran.
Then Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Nayef was pushed in an
unusually public way in favor of Deputy Crown Prince Mohammed
Bin Salman--MBS--who will likely succeed the current King
Salman.
Now, the new crown prince then launched an unprecedented
crackdown on corruption, or a purge of political rivals, or
both, in which princes, government ministers, and scores of
officials were arrested including the commander of the Saudi
National Guard and Prince Al-Waleed Bin Talal, the
international investor worth $17 billion.
That same day, Lebanon's Prime Minister Saad Hariri, a
close ally of Saudi Arabia, resigned from Riyadh over Iranian
meddling in this country and now, 3 weeks later, Hariri is
actually back in Lebanon resuming his duties as prime minister.
So the question for our witnesses is what is going on. I
know we're all eager for you to help unpack this whirlwind of
activity. I would like to just touch on a few of the issues
that I see as crucial to today's discussion, though.
The first is stability in Lebanon. When I was young, the
capital of Lebanon, Beirut, was known as the Paris of the
Middle East. Tragically, a long civil war, sectarian strife,
and proxy conflicts have changed its image.
Lebanon remains and important country, though, and we
should work to maintain the delicate power sharing that exists
between Sunni Muslims, Shiite Muslims, and Maronite Christians,
particular at a time when Lebanon has accepted more refugees
per capita than any country in the world, due to the war in
neighboring Syria.
Sadly, Iran has taken advantage of the chaos in Lebanon to
exert its influence through its proxy, Shiite militia,
Hezbollah. Over the past several years, Hezbollah has built up
its military capacity and firmly entrenched itself in the
Lebanese Government.
In Hariri's resignation speech, he called Hezbollah the arm
of Iran that has, and I quote, ``managed to impose a fait
accompli in Lebanon using the force of its weapons.''
Hezbollah's capabilities now rival those of the national
army, the Lebanese Armed Forces. And it is worth repeating when
I said in this committee last month a legitimate Lebanese
Government cannot function effectively when it is in a constant
power struggle to govern with a nonstate actor.
Hezbollah is an Iranian-backed terrorist organization
responsible for attacks around the globe and we should all be
interested in marginalizing their influence.
The second issue is Saudi stability. Our relationship with
Saudi Arabia is vital to the Middle East as strategic partners
who share common interests.
But we have to be honest in assessing where those interests
diverge. While the new crown prince has stated his commitment
to reforms, progress on human rights has been slow and
unacceptable practices against minority groups and women remain
national policy.
And I am worried that the current administration's sole
focus on the strategic relationship while ignoring other
aspects does not help provide full American leadership on
issues vital to the United States like human rights in the
broader region.
This administration's perceived carte blanche support for
Saudi Arabia has empowered them to take additional steps like
the public split from Qatar.
And while Qatar's behavior has no doubt been problematic,
and we need to push back against harboring terrorists, Al
Jazeera's biased coverage, and their close ties to Iran.
I am concerned that this crisis is a distraction from
precisely those efforts needed to combat Iran and lead the
fight against terrorism.
Similarly, the war in Yemen is both a distraction from
larger challenges and a horrific human disaster. The war has
killed more than 10,000 civilians. Twenty million are in need
of humanitarian support.
Three million have fled their homes and the country is now
facing the fastest-growing cholera epidemic in history with
nearly 1 million cases recorded.
The third key issue is the need to push back against Iran,
and while this administration continues to talk tough against
Iran, I am concerned that our policies on the ground paint a
different picture, particularly in Syria where we are allowing
Iran, Iran's client Assad, and its proxy Hezbollah to assert
greater control over the future of the country.
The de-escalation zones that the administration negotiated
with Russia have allowed Iran and its proxies to essentially
set up permanent forward bases, operating across from Israel's
northern border.
This should be deeply troubling to anyone interested in
preventing another war between Israel and Hezbollah and
safeguarding Israel's and Lebanon's future.
So, clearly, a lot to discuss. I look forward to learning
and getting the answers to all these questions from our
witnesses, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Deutch, as
always.
And so pleased to yield to our members so they can make
their opening statements and we will start with Mr. Chabot of
Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and thank you
for holding this very important hearing here this morning.
We have a--clearly, a distinguished panel all looking
forward to hearing, especially Mr. Abrams. Unfortunately, I
have a markup which began at the same time as this hearing
started in Judiciary and I have to chair the Small Business
Committee starting at 11:00.
But I can guarantee all the witnesses that I will read
their testimony and thank you for giving it. I just,
unfortunately, won't be here for much of it.
Stability in the Middle East is in the best interests of
our nation, obviously, and the world. That is why today's
hearing is so timely.
Prime Minister Hariri's pending resignation and a too-
powerful Hezbollah in Lebanon threaten to bring more chaos to a
region that is already volatile.
Further, political developments in Saudi Arabia raise
questions about near and long-term stability in the Middle
East, and then, of course, there is Iran.
President Obama and his now famous deal with Iran and
infamous side deals have allowed Tehran to meddle even more
throughout the Middle East.
This committee has, of course, paid very close attention to
that as Tehran seizes opportunities to increase its influence,
to develop its military capacity, and to strengthen its
proxies, especially Hezbollah and Lebanon.
Nothing threatens our allies in the region more than an
unchecked Iran. So I, again, want to thank you, Madam Chair,
for holding this important hearing and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And we thank you very much for always
making the time to come to our hearings in spite of other
commitments. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Boyle is recognized.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you as well,
Ranking Member Deutch, for holding this hearing. I look forward
to this as an opportunity to learn specifically because the
last few weeks in the kingdom have been among the most dramatic
in decades.
And I am of two minds in terms of what MBS is doing. One
was forward in the New York Times piece by Friedman I think a
few days ago, which is a fairly generous view that this is a
modernization, a crackdown on corruption, a returning of Saudi
Arabia back to a more moderate practice of Islam.
However, that piece has also come in for some criticism
that that is a naive or overly generous view. So this is really
one of the most critical questions that we face, given the
Saudi role in funding Wahabbism for the last several decades.
If Saudi Arabia were to return to a pre-1979, more open
practice of Islam, that certainly would have a dramatic effect
not only on the kingdom but on the wider region in the world.
And so as we go through the witness testimony today, I
would be very interested in hearing your thoughts about what
you think is behind what MBS is doing and what direction you
see Saudi Arabia taking.
Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, my friend.
And now, I don't know if any of our Republican members
would like to be--we will go to Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. One of the issues I am interested in
hearing about today is Jared Kushner's role in U.S. policy
toward Saudi Arabia.
I am concerned that he has no idea what he is doing. He has
no foreign policy experience and zero foreign policy
credentials.
I am equally concerned he has a massive conflict of
interest. Earlier this year, media reports that Jared Kushner
companies--the Kushner companies sought a $500 million cash
infusion for the troubled 666 Building in New York.
From the ex Qatari prime minister that didn't work out and
then Saudi Arabia blockaded Qatar. Did Jared Kushner give them
the green light?
Last month, Jared Kushner took an unannounced trip to Saudi
Arabia. Did he ask those Saudi Arabia officials for a cash
infusion for the 666 Building?
We need to know if Jared Kushner is working on behalf of
the American people or is he working for himself and his
family?
I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Lieu.
Ms. Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for this
hearing to you and the ranking member.
I look forward to the testimony here. I know there are a
lot of scary things going on in the world, including right here
in the United States of America, where we are witnessing a
depletion of State Department personnel and resources, which in
the opinion of many is a threat to our own national security
because we are failing to use the tools of diplomacy and
development, and I am interested in your opinion on that
subject.
And I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, my friend.
Any other members wish to be recognized? Seeing no other
signs, I would like to introduce our panelists.
First, I am delighted to welcome back an old friend, Mr.
Elliott Abrams, senior fellow for Middle Eastern studies at the
Council on Foreign Relations.
Prior to holding this position, Mr. Abrams served in
various roles for previous U.S. administrations including
Deputy Assistant to the President, Deputy National Security
Advisor for Global Democracy Strategy, Assistant Secretary of
State for International Organization Affairs, and Assistant
Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs.
Wow.
Thank you for your service. We look forward to your
testimony.
And next, I am pleased to welcome Dr. Paul Salem--Salem?
What--Salem is good? Okay. I don't--I don't know which one is
correct, sorry--who serves as the senior vice president for
policy research and programs at the Middle East Institute.
Prior to joining the Middle East Institute, Dr. Salem was
the founding director of the Carnegie Middle East Center in
Beirut. He served in various other capacities, focusing on
Lebanon.
Thank you for being with us today. Thank you, sir.
And finally, we welcome back our good friend, Dr. Tamara
Cofman Wittes, senior fellow in the Center for Middle East
Policy at Brookings.
Previously, Dr. Wittes served as Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Near Eastern Affairs. She also served as a Middle
East specialist at the U.S. Institute of Peace and as director
of programs at the Middle East Institute.
We look forward to hearing your testimony. Welcome back.
And we will begin with you, Mr. Abrams.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE ELLIOTT ABRAMS, SENIOR FELLOW FOR
MIDDLE EASTERN STUDIES, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS

Mr. Abrams. Thank you, Madam Chairman and members of the
subcommittee. I've got material here for about five hearings.
Let me start with Saudi Arabia. I will try to answer some
of the questions--what's going on. I think that what the crown
prince is doing is reacting to several crises that face the
kingdom.
The first is economic--a very young and fast-growing
population, huge decline in oil prices, the old economic model
that is going to collapse. The state just couldn't throw off
enough revenue to support the population and the government.
So some way had to be found--has to be found to employ all
of these young people, men and women, and make the economy more
productive and less oil dependent and that is the goal of his
plan, Saudi 2030.
Second challenge is governance, moving from the old model
where you go from one very elderly brother to another. Any
event or passage of time is going to render that generation out
of the picture.
And the third challenge is the challenge of Iran, and as
the Saudis see it, there is a nightmare here, being sandwiched
between an Iranian-controlled Iraq and an Iranian-controlled
Yemen, with growing Iranian power in Lebanon, growing Iranian
power in Syria, and we now see some subversion in the Gulf
States as well.
So they've seen a decade of Iranian advances. They believe
they see American reluctance to halt those advances and thus, I
think, their more assertive foreign policy.
So I think if you ask the crown prince he would say he is
reacting rather than acting, and I think that basically we
should very much hope that these plans succeed.
But let me turn to Lebanon. Obviously, I'd be happy to go
back to that in the Q and A. We have seen in the last decade a
very significant increase in the power of Hezbollah in Lebanon
and outside Lebanon.
Their realm of operations now includes a lot of the Middle
East--thousands of fighters in Syria, trainers to Iraq, backing
the rebels in Yemen, organizing a battalion of militants from
Afghanistan.
So now Iran has a foreign legion. In addition to the Quds
Force, it has Hezbollah. And I say that in part because I have
heard people say the Saudis are creating a crisis in Lebanon
and I don't think that is right. I think Iran and Hezbollah
have created this crisis in Lebanon and, more broadly, in the
region, and it raises some real questions for us about our
policy toward Lebanon.
What the Saudis are asking for in Lebanon, which is for
Hezbollah to stop acting as if it were completely independent
of the state, acting on behalf of Iran, refusing to allow the
state to have sovereignty within the borders, these are
actually the demands of U.N. Security Council Resolution 1701
that ended the last war between Hezbollah and Israel.
It called for the extension of control of the Government of
Lebanon over all Lebanese territory, full sovereignty, no
weapons without the consent of the government, disarmament of
all armed groups in Lebanon.
That--that is 1701. So when--that Saudi policy that is also
American policy. That is also what the U.N. Security Council
called for.
Hezbollah is creating, I think, enormous dangers with these
actions including the increasing danger of another
confrontation with Israel.
In the remaining time I'd just like to raise the question
of aid to the LAF--Lebanese Armed Forces--because I wonder if--
you know, we have given them over $1 billion and the most
recent year's amount was I think FY 2017 $123 million--I wonder
what we are getting for that money.
It seems to me we are financing a model that we know is
failing, a model in which Iran is serving increasingly as
foreign--Hezbollah is serving as the Foreign Legion of Iran.
I am not suggesting today that we cut off all of that aid
but I do think it is worth asking. I believe it is the fourth
or fifth largest recipient of American military assistance.
If we are trying to strengthen Lebanon's independence we
are failing. If we are trying to limit Hezbollah's power, we
are failing. If we are trying to eliminate the degree to which
Hezbollah serves Iran, we are failing.
If we are trying to strengthen the Sunni or Druze or
Christian influence inside Lebanon against Hezbollah, we are
failing. So should we continue with this policy of significant
financial support for the LAF when it seems not at all to be
working?
That is why I think this committee and others need to
reassess those expenditures.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Abrams follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Abrams.
Dr. Salem.

STATEMENT OF PAUL SALEM, PH.D., VICE PRESIDENT FOR POLICY
ANALYSIS, RESEARCH, AND PROGRAMS, MIDDLE EAST INSTITUTE

Mr. Salem. Madam Chairman, Ranking Member Deutch----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Punch that button.
Mr. Salem. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Deutch,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify.
My opening statement will be mainly on Lebanon but I would
be happy to share my views on Saudi and Iran in the discussion.
Lebanon occupies a strategic position on the eastern
Mediterranean and as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
Michael Ratney said in this venue last month, a stable
pluralist prosperous Lebanon is in the U.S. national interest.
Lebanon has been an effective ally on the war on ISIS and
al-Qaeda, defeating and expelling both in August. The country
hosts over 1 million Syrian refugees.
It maintains a society of pluralism, openness, and
democracy in a troubled region, and the army, along with U.N.
multinational forces, have kept the peace across the critical
Lebanon-Israel border for the past 11 years.
But Lebanon has also been a very contested space between a
pro-Iranian pro-Assad coalition that now includes Russia and a
pro-Arab pro-Western coalition.
If allies give up on Lebanon, it will fall fully into Iran,
Syria, and Russia's sway, and if tensions are pushed too high,
we risk having another collapsed state in a region which
already has too many.
It is a long-term commitment, in my view, not one that can
be won overnight nor one that should be abandoned in
frustration. Many parties and leaders in Lebanon including Saad
Hariri have been struggling in this contest for many years.
Saad's father, Rafic, was assassinated in 2005 along with
numerous others for doing just that. But these leaders have not
and will not give up and they deserve support and encouragement
for struggling to rebuild national sovereignty under very
difficult conditions.
Both coalitions share power in Parliament and government.
Iran and Syria have built a massive armed nonstate actor in
Hezbollah, starting from the days when Lebanon was a failed
state.
But the Lebanese have also maintained an inclusive
democratic nation-state and with American help have built an
effective national army and internal security force.
Although successive governments have insisted on a policy
of noninterference in regional affairs, Hezbollah has violated
that principle since 2012 and become militarily engaged in
Syria as well as in Iraq and in Yemen.
Hezbollah's involvement in Yemen is what mainly sparked the
latest crisis with Saudi Arabia, particularly its apparent
assistance in delivering and helping militants launch missiles
into Saudi Arabia, including the capital, Riyadh.
Obviously, this is completely unacceptable to Saudi Arabia
and it is fully understandable that Riyadh could not
countenance that an ally of theirs would head a government that
includes a party lobbing missiles on their own capital.
Hariri's resignation was perhaps a necessary signal, a
positive shock, as he himself put it, that the Lebanese
Government could not continue with business as usual.
Hariri is now back in Lebanon. He has put his resignation
on hold until he receives guarantees that Hezbollah will cease
its activities against ``friendly Arab governments.''
If Hezbollah ceases its involvement in Yemen, this latest
Lebanon crisis might subside. Some signs from Beirut and
regional capitals indicate that that might be in the works.
But the challenge of Hezbollah is a large and long-term
one. It might be pulling back from limited engagements in Yemen
and Iraq. We don't know yet. But its sizeable presence in Syria
is part of the challenge of dealing with the tens of thousands
of Iranian proxies there.
Making sure all proxy forces leave Syria as part of a final
settlement should be a primary objective for the U.S. and other
regional partners in the next phase of contest and diplomacy
over Syria.
In Lebanon, as you know, Hezbollah has both a political and
military presence. Politically, it is a principal elected
representative of the Shiite population. Militarily, it has
been armed by Iran to go head to head with Israel.
An attempt to fight Hezbollah internally would likely lead
to a devastating and losing civil war and another Hezbollah-
Israel war would cause much harm in both countries and Iran
would be around to rearm Hezbollah immediately afterward.
In the short term, the goal should be to withdraw Hezbollah
from regional conflict zones, maintain peace across the
Lebanon-Israel border and seek to reduce Hezbollah's influence
on the Lebanese state.
The long-term resolution of the challenge of Hezbollah will
depend probably on wider regional developments such as a
reckoning militarily or diplomatically with Iran or a
breakthrough in Israeli-Palestinian or Israeli-Arab peace, an
issue that Hezbollah and other armed non-state actors thrive
on.
I address a number of other issues in my written testimony,
but I thank you for your attention and look forward to
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Salem follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, sir.
Dr. Wittes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF TAMARA COFMAN WITTES, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER
FOR MIDDLE EAST POLICY, THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Ms. Wittes. Thank you, Madam Chairman, Ranking Member
Deutch, members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the chance to
share my views with you.
ISIS is on the run militarily, and the JCPOA has, for now,
constrained and rolled back Iran's nuclear program, and it is
these gains that allow America and its partners to turn our
attention to Iran's relentless effort, directly and through
local proxies, to subvert other sovereign states in the region
and gain influence over their politics.
For Saudi Arabia, this has long been the dominant regional
security concern and it is now motivating dramatic moves in
Saudi foreign policy.
Constraining and reversing this expansion of Iranian
influence in the region is a worthy and important goal for the
U.S. and it is a goal that, for the moment, unites most of
America's regional partners.
It is one that could bring others in the international
community on board. Although our regional partners see a common
threat, they have different priorities and that means American
leadership is essential to bring them together.
Building this coalition will require persistence, trust
with our allies, resolution of regional conflicts, dialogue
with a wide range of international partners--in other words,
containing Iran will require adroit and assertive American
diplomacy.
Now, the swiftness and decisiveness of Saudi decision
making has surprised many and raised some alarm. Saudi tactics
and tone have changed from hedging bets between dialogue and
confrontation with Tehran to going all in in a face off
designed to unsettle Iran, raise its costs, and try to impose
some red lines on its behavior.
In certain areas, Saudis' policy has involved primarily
soft power and it has brought noticeable gains such as the
kingdom's concerted outreach to Shi'a politicians in Iraq.
In other areas, like Yemen and now Lebanon, the approach
has been more unilateral and more coercive and I think it
reveals some limits to the kingdom's leverage and its capacity
to shape events.
The bottom line is that Saudi Arabia is more effective in
regional affairs with carrots than with sticks, and this new
propensity for all-out confrontation has already complicated
some U.S. policy goals in the region.
Most notably, the Saudi intervention in Yemen is now, at
nearly 3 years old, both a military and humanitarian nightmare.
It has mired the kingdom in an expensive quagmire, it has
produced a horrific level of human suffering, and it has
strengthened both al-Qaeda of the Arabian Peninsula and Iran.
It is time for this war to end. Every day the war goes on,
the humanitarian costs mount with little real impact on the
outcome, which will inevitably involve intricate political
compromises and power sharing amongst Yemen's rival factions.
In the domestic arena, Mohammed Bin Salman, the crown
prince, is now dancing on the edge of a knife. Some of his
political and economic goals are very worthy. Some seem
contradictory.
For example, it is hard to inspire the confidence of
foreign investors while casting doubt on the rule of law by
arresting hundreds on vague charges with no public evidence or
judicial process.
My own view is that top-down reform without meaningful
improvements in government accountability, transparency and
respect for human rights will not ultimately succeed in winning
the support either of foreign investors or, more importantly,
the kingdom's citizens.
The missile attack on the Riyadh airport last month was a
wake-up call, but Saudi worries about the missile threat from
Yemen have been growing steadily.
The kingdom faces the possibility that Iran and Hezbollah
could create in northern Yemen a duplication of the challenge
Israel faces in southern Lebanon and that is an intolerable
prospect for the kingdom, one they are prepared to take
dramatic steps to forestall.
I think it is possible that Hezbollah will agree to some
concessions regarding its purported activities in Yemen in
order to keep Hariri as prime minister in Lebanon.
But an undeclared end to unacknowledged activity in Yemen
is hard to see and it is hard to enforce. So I think we should
expect to see continued tussles between Saudi Arabia and Iran
over Lebanese politics.
It is important to note that none of our regional allies
want to see Lebanon destabilized or to become a front in a
regional war, and American support for Lebanon is valuable in
maintaining that stability.
The U.S. should stay engaged to support democratic
development there, push for parliamentary elections that are
scheduled for next spring, and hope that one legacy of the
Saudi pressure on Hariri is increased support for his coalition
at the ballot box.
Now, the United States can successfully build an
international coalition to constrain and push back on Iran's
destabilizing influence.
Components of that effort would include diplomacy with
Iraq, with Russia over Syria, pressure on Iran in the U.N.
Security Council, intelligence cooperation with allies and
persuading European and--European nations and China that Middle
East stability is a public good that Iranian intervention
degrades.
But as with the effort that brought Iran to the nuclear
table, ramping up this international pressure to a level that
shifts Iranian behavior will require painstaking diplomatic
work.
The most important tool in the American policy toolbox to
contain Iran and restore stability in the region is the tool
that the current administration seems most committed to
degrading--our diplomacy.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wittes follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much to all of our
panelists.
Mr. Abrams, I will start with you. You have written that
successfully undermining Hezbollah's grip on Lebanon will
require diplomatic and economic pressure from the United States
and our allies, especially France.
European nations, as we have seen, have long been reluctant
to designate the totality of Hezbollah as a terrorist
organization.
So what is it going to take for France and all the members
of the EU to take a harder line on Hezbollah and what can the
U.S. do to push everyone in the right direction?
Mr. Abrams. As you know, Madam Chairman, the French have
had, for obvious historic reasons, a special interest in
Lebanon. There was a lot of cooperation between the U.S. and
the French at the time that the Cedar Revolution rose up and
the Syrians were finally forced to leave Lebanon.
So I think we could start a process of talking to the
French privately about exactly what you are proposing. How do
we move ahead here?
They would have to bring the Europeans along. But I think
there is a real good chance that--because the Europeans
recognize the special French role that this would happen.
I think Ms. Frankel is right in saying that we are, in many
ways, weakening our diplomatic instruments. But I think the
beginning of it is for us to adopt a policy that says we have a
goal of weakening Hezbollah.
Let us go to the French with that and say okay, what do we
do in terms of military aid, in terms of economic aid, to put
pressure on Lebanon not to say the current deal where Hezbollah
gets to do whatever it wants anywhere in the Middle East is
fine with us and we will keep paying.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much.
And to either Dr. Salem or Dr. Wittes--either one would
like to answer in the interest of time--Saudi Arabia has
accused Hezbollah of playing an increasing role in Yemen by
allegedly helping to train, equip, and finance the Houthis and
there are also concerns of a Hezbollah presence on the Saudi
border.
And in announcing his resignation, Hariri was particularly
grieved by the presence and participation of Hezbollah and the
IRGC in Yemen.
So what does a Hezbollah presence in Yemen mean for Saudi
Arabia? How does Hezbollah's assistance to the Houthis change
the current situation on the ground and how do the U.S., the
Saudis, and others work together to curb Iran's latest attempt
to expand its presence?
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Salem. I think what concerns the Saudis most about
Hezbollah and Iran's presence are the missiles that are being
launched on Saudi Arabia and as my colleague said, I think the
Saudis fear that there is a reproduction of the pattern that
happened in Lebanon vis-a-vis Israel and I think that is
probably accurate--that the Iranians have that ambition.
As far as anyone knows, the Hezbollah presence in Yemen is
limited to advisors, technicians, maybe missile experts and so
on--very different than the thousands of fighters that they
have in Syria, that they have rotated through Syria, and that
have fought there. So the presence is limited.
The Saudis are also concerned, as are many Lebanese, that
Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah, for many, many
months has championed the anti-Saudi cause publicly in all of
his speeches and his media, and that is something that is also
unacceptable to the Saudis.
There is, obviously, general rejection of Iran's presence
in Syria and Iraq, but for Saudi, Yemen is the urgent case; and
I think if there were some de-escalation or some commitments
whether public or behind the scenes--that could be something
that could resolve this temporary Lebanese crisis.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much.
Did you want to add anything, Dr. Wittes?
Ms. Wittes. Well, I will only add that although Hassan
Nasrallah has denied that Hezbollah is engaged in Yemen or in
supporting the Houthis, the U.S. military has intercepted
shipments of weapons that seem to come from Iran and are
destined for the Houthis in Yemen and there has been news
reporting of Hezbollah fighters boasting about their engagement
in Yemen.
So it is something that they formally deny but the evidence
is mounting.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much to all three of you.
Now I will yield to my friend, Mr. Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thanks very much, Madam Chairman.
Just to follow up, Dr. Salem, the last point about
Hezbollah's presence in Lebanon, what--what happens to all of
the now well-trained Hezbollah fighters after Syria?
And Mr. Abrams referred to them as Iran's Foreign Legion.
Where do they go and how disruptive will that be? Will they
return home to be disruptive there?
Mr. Salem. Well, Hezbollah has about 20,000 full time
fighters, and about 50,000, 60,000 reservists. It has been
rotating about 8,000 at any one time in the Syrian battlefield,
as far as we can tell.
They have lost from 1,000 to 2,000 people killed, 4,000 to
5,000 at least wounded. So it is a heavy toll in terms of the
fairly small community that they come from in Lebanon, but it
is a very massive force.
They have expanded: They have gained a lot of capacities
and fighting skills and so on through their engagement in
Syria.
They still are deployed in Syria in those ratios so there
isn't any massive sort of exit from there. Their presence
apparently in Iraq and Yemen, while it is there it is not in
massive numbers.
This is part of an Iranian expeditionary force which
probably numbers about 150,000, if you add Hezbollah numbers
plus some of the Popular Mobilization Units in Iraq, which are
very close to or answerable to the Quds forces and General
Qasem Soleimani as well as Afghan and Pakistani and other
fighters that have been brought to the fight, particularly in
Syria.
We are talking about an Iranian expeditionary force of
around 150,000. Indeed, they are already causing a lot of
trouble in the four arenas where they are.
But it is a very troubling question for countries in the
region, probably countries around the world: Where will Iran
deploy these people if things settle in Iraq or settle in
Syria?
Mr. Deutch. Dr. Wittes, you--at the end of your testimony
you said that the most important tool to contain Iran's ability
is the same tool the President seems committed to destroying
our diplomacy.
Many members of this committee expressed our deep concern
over the exodus of more than 100 senior Foreign Services
officers from the State Department since January.
It was particularly startling to learn that 60 percent of
our career Ambassadors have left the department since the
President took office.
When you say that we need our European allies, we need
others to understand the Middle East stability is a public
good, how can we convince them of that when in our own public
sphere--in our own Government we seem less inclined to want to
play any role in international diplomacy?
Ms. Wittes. I think that is a crucial question at the
moment and I would say as well that President Trump's approach
on U.S. involvement in implementation of the JCPOA has also
raised a lot of questions amongst those same international
partners that we would need to deal with the regional behavior
of Iran.
If they see the United States walking away from its JCPOA
commitments, they are--they will at the very least question
whether it is worthwhile cooperating with the U.S. on this
dimension of Iranian behavior.
But I think that the rhetoric about America first only
takes us so far. The widespread nature of Iranian subversion
and the variety of tools that they use are such that this is
not something the United States can do alone.
It is not something the United States and its regional
partners can do alone. We need maximum leverage over this
situation and that means that we need those who are
economically reengaging right now with Iran to reconsider the
consequences of those choices.
Mr. Deutch. Mr. Abrams, you have lots of experience in
government. Yesterday, when the Secretary of State defended--
attempted to defend the massive cuts to the State Department
budget by effectively suggesting we won't need the personnel
because the efforts of this administration will help to resolve
so many of these crises that we face around the world, and yet
here we are less than a day later and we are talking about
150,000 Iranian-trained militias, soldiers.
We don't know where they go next. It doesn't seem like the
conflicts are being resolved and how do we--first of all, is
there any--does that argument make any sense to you at all, and
assuming that it does not, how do we help everyone in the
administration understand that the challenges that we face
require more than--more than one conversation with world
leaders or one visit but actually ongoing diplomacy?
Mr. Abrams. Are you trying to get me in trouble here on
this? [Laughter.]
Mr. Deutch. Indeed I am, Mr. Abrams.
Mr. Abrams. Well, I didn't--I would have to say I think you
could always, in an organization as large as the State
Department cut 5 percent, maybe 10 percent, and there are
efficiencies in any large organization.
But the kind of cuts that we are hearing about--30
percent--have had a devastating impact on morale. I think that
is obvious and cannot be denied if you go over and visit the
State Department.
I don't know what to say except that I would think
influential Members of Congress such as yourself might try to
have these conversations with the Secretary of State and try to
persuade him that there is an enormous amount of diplomatic
work that needs to be done.
It is not a one-man job. It is going to require people at
the second and third and fourth and fifth level and Ambassadors
in the field.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that.
I would also suggest, Mr. Abrams, that important figures
like yourself with a relevant history might also have an
important voice in all this, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. That would be great. I am all for that.
Mr. Donovan of New York is recognized.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Many of you spoke in your statements about Hezbollah and
their activity. We know that it is a criminal enterprise, is
financed through a lot of drug trade. They use the proceeds of
that drug trade to buy weapons in Syria and a lot of the drugs
that are being traded are sold in Europe and here in the United
States.
Anyone have any ideas? I mean, this is a twofold problem--
one, the drug crisis, secondly, that they are using the
proceeds to buy weapons.
And if you have any ideas if there is activities that the
United States should be doing and aren't doing now that could
help quash this activity both in the drug trade and the
purchasing of weapons.
When everyone looks at one another I see nobody wants to
answer this question.
Mr. Abrams. I would just say I think a lot of this drug
trafficking takes place in Latin America--that is, Hezbollah
drug trafficking.
We are, I believe, doing a lot to try to stop it through
DEA and through other parts of the U.S. Government. Whether it
could be made much more effective, I don't know.
But we would have to say that they are getting an enormous
amount of money--in the hundreds of millions of dollars--from
Iran and part of the problem here is that it is likely that,
you know, if we turn off one spigot, the Iranians will just
open another spigot just that much more because they are
apparently so committed to the Hezbollah model.
Mr. Salem. Yes, if I may--I mean, I second that view that I
don't have much information about the drug activity and other
criminal activity but I am aware that the U.S. and others are
trying to interdict it.
But I would second that view that Hezbollah essentially is
an emanation of Iranian financial military ideological support.
It is part of their sort of defense and security deployment,
with a lot of support from the Assad regime in Syria. So I
don't think that stopping one source will end the problem. It
would just go in other directions.
But I do want to comment on the issue of diplomacy and say
effectively that, I mean, obviously, having less diplomats is a
serious problem.
I see the real problem is the lack of an overall strategy
to address the problems that military and diplomatic tools
could be used toward a broad strategy.
To my mind--and I will just mention a few things--one is
that the crisis that we are going through that includes
empowerment of Iran has to do with the collapse of states and
the outbreak of civil war.
That is where Iran as well as ISIS and other sort of
radical and terrorist groups can grow and thrive. We still have
four ongoing collapsed state civil wars in the region. Ending
those civil wars--and each one has very different conditions--
must be a very high priority for the U.S. and all regional
players.
We have talked about Yemen. We have talked about Syria.
Iraq might be moving in the right direction; and we still have
Libya lying out there.
Secondly, in the approach toward Iran, I think a
comprehensive strategy must have both more push back and more
diplomacy.
But the point is to get Iran to change its behavior, to
change its policy, and neither are the costs being made high
enough for Iran nor is there any sort of diplomatic or
political offer on the table to say, ``If you want us to reduce
the pressure, you have to abide by international law, do this,
do that.''
What we seem to be having now is sort of ``speak loudly and
carry a small stick'' rather than ``speak softly and carry a
big stick.''
And in effect, in terms of push back, this administration
has rolled back anti-Iranian support in Syria. It is basically,
you know, stopped support for the Syrian opposition, possibly
dropping support for the Kurds.
Handing over Syria to a Russian-managed situation--that is
not pushing back on Iran, nor is there any visible push back in
Iraq, and Lebanon alone won't do it. The big arenas need to be
addressed as well, and there needs to be engagement with Iran,
with a lot of pressure at the same time.
Mr. Donovan. Madam Chair--quickly, because my time is
running out, I know Saudi Arabia spoke about extracting uranium
recently as last month to promote or develop a nuclear power
system.
Is there any concern that at some point this will be
upgraded to weapon-capacity uranium?
Ms. Wittes. Congressman Donovan, I think that the question
of nuclear proliferation in the Middle East is one that the
U.S. Government and policy experts have focused on for a long
time.
I would say that if there were a risk of nuclear weapons in
Saudi Arabia, it probably would not come from that kind of
ground up program.
Saudi would probably look to relationships with other
nuclear powers, especially Pakistan, to get something off the
shelf rather than developing it indigenously.
So I think we do always have to pay attention to nuclear
programs that have the capacity to create proliferation
challenges.
But I think that in the case of the kingdom what this is
really about is a very swiftly escalating domestic energy
demand and their desire to use more of their petroleum for
world markets and revenue generation than for domestic
consumption.
Mr. Salem. But I would say that this concern about nuclear
proliferation in the Middle East relates directly also to the
nuclear deal with Iran--that despite its faults and
limitations, other than the risk of what Iran will do, if the
nuclear deal itself is dismantled or is no longer applicable,
that will immediately spur countries like Turkey, Saudi Arabia,
possibly Egypt and others, to acquire some kind of nuclear
option, whether it is off-the-shelf or to build it themselves.
So I think the whole nuclear deal is, obviously, a key
component of what we are talking about.
I think it is true that under the Obama administration the
nuclear deal had some maybe unforeseen consequences. One, it
gave Iran a sense of immunity that they could do things in
other parts of the Middle East and the Obama administration
wouldn't react.
Secondly, I think when they no longer had the nuclear
option as deterrent, that spurred them to do more in asymmetric
warfare.
It sort of created a bigger problem, that they wanted to
assure their security through other means, and it also probably
gave them some sense that they had more money to spend.
But I think the solution is not to drop the nuclear deal
but to engage in a wider push back and diplomacy with Iran,
which could then add some sunset issues or missile clauses as
well as pushing Iran to abide by international law.
Mr. Donovan. I thank you, Madam Chair. My time has expired.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, Mr. Donovan. Good questions.
Mr. Schneider of Illinois is recognized.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Madam Chairman, and thank you
again for having this hearing. Witnesses, thank you for your
insight and comments today.
Mr. Abrams, you noted you have enough material for five
hearings. I have enough questions for at least those five
hearings and so I will try to squeeze a little bit into these 5
minutes.
I am going to glance over these, but these are very
important issues, you know, you all talked about Iran's
regional goals and their multifaceted strategy within that
region but in particular Hezbollah and their use of Hezbollah--
how they are using them particularly in Lebanon and Syria, but
also around the region and we have talked a lot about that. I
think we need to address that.
I wish we could talk and maybe suggest for a future hearing
about United Nations Security Council 1701, and I can't even
use the word effectiveness on that but the fact that Hezbollah
has 150,000 rockets, give or take--it doesn't matter what that
margin of error is--threatening Israel and now Hezbollah and
Iran using the same strategies you highlighted in Yemen is of
grave concern.
But what I really want to focus on in the few minutes I
have is--Dr. Wittes, you used the term what's our maximum
leverage and I think you have to think of the image of a lever.
There are four aspects to that lever.
There is the load--what are we trying to effect, what are
we trying to move, what are our goals specifically. There is
the beam, and by analogy the beam is what resources do we bring
to this with U.S. resources but also our allies. The fulcrum--
where do you put the fulcrum, what opportunities there are to
place and get the leverage we need to have.
And the last piece--and this may be the most concerning in
the context we have talked about the cuts at the State
Department--is the effort. This isn't going to be one push and
we are done.
We are going to have to work the levers to get that maximum
leverage over a period of time and how do we do that--how do we
maintain that attention.
So that is a brief introduction, using 2 minutes. I
apologize. I will open it up to the panel and say help, where
do we go from here.
Ms. Wittes. Well, if I may--sorry, guys--Congressman
Schneider, thank you. I think that is a wonderfully drawn out
picture for us and I think part of the challenge that we face
in getting grips on this problem is that we and our partners in
the region share a sense of threat but we--but there are very
divergent priorities amongst our partners.
So for the Saudis, as we have discussed the missile threat
from Yemen and Hezbollah's role there, is priority number one.
For the Israelis, the threat that Hezbollah or the IRGC
would be able to set up permanent bases near its border or to
establish weapons factories that would further exacerbate the
precision missile threat from Hezbollah onto Israel's civilian
population, that is priority number one.
But, you know, if you are--if you are talking about Egypt
or Jordan or other American partners, you're going to have
different priorities as well.
This is where American leadership comes in is looking
across the region, seeing how these pieces fit together and
saying where--where do we begin to have the maximum effect.
Now, we haven't talked a lot about Iraq or the slow wind
down of the war in Syria so far in this hearing but it seems to
me that Iraq and Syria are the place where we actually have
maximum leverage.
Not only because we still have forces on the ground--as
Paul said, forces are not a strategy. We need a strategy that
combines our tools, and I think that one of the--one of the
most troubling signals that the current administration has sent
with respect to the war in ISIS is its consistent message that
it wants to get the military job done of taking territory back
from ISIS and then he wants to get out and go home--where what
we need to do is stay engaged in Syria in order to have
leverage on a political settlement with the Russians and the
Iranians.
We need to not betray our allies who fought beside us so
that our other allies stay on side and we need to look ahead in
Iraq where yes, we have made a lot of progress. The Saudi
outreach to Iraq is helpful there as well and they have
elections next year and that matters very much.
So, you know, I don't think of push back and diplomacy as
opposing means. I think that diplomacy is actually a very
important part of pushing back and I think that we need to
start in Syria and Iraq.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Abrams?
Mr. Abrams. I think we are all agreeing on this. To put it
a different way, we are never going to win at the negotiating
table what we have not won on the ground in Syria.
This has been the problem, I think, in the years of
Secretary Kerry's negotiations in Geneva. So push back is part
of this but, you know, I am struck--we are talking about Iran's
rise over the last 5 years. We are talking about what Hezbollah
has been doing over the last few years.
They pay no price, and one way of thinking about this is
how and where could we impose a price on Iran and its proxies.
Mr. Schneider. Right. I think that is a good point. There
has been a lot of evidence of big gains for little loss for
Iran in the area.
Dr. Salem, anything you want to add?
Mr. Salem. Well, no. I mean, I agree with my colleagues.
Maybe I will say a couple things. On the question of what you
gain from diplomacy if you haven't won on the ground, that is
true; although in some cases you might be imposing a cost in
one arena and you're trying to get a concession in something
else.
I think the end point that we would like to get to and we
are not going to get to anytime soon--is an Iran that abides by
international law. Now, that is extremely long term.
If we get more practical, I think we do have a path forward
in Iraq. It has been a rocky road but I think the defeat of
ISIS by the central government, the rebuilding of much of the
army, and the outreach by the Saudis as well creates conditions
for a reasonable way forward. Iran will have influence but it
won't dominate and won't dictate.
In Yemen there is an Iran presence, it is quite minor
still, and I think efforts to end the Yemeni civil war almost
succeeded in Kuwait a few months ago. There is a lot going on
behind the scenes.
It is not an impossible conflict to negotiate an end to,
and the Iranians don't dominate as they do in other arenas. So
I think there is a way forward in Yemen. And there is certainly
a way forward in Libya where Iran doesn't have a major
presence.
The real ``Chernobyl'' of the region is Syria. That is
where Hezbollah reemerged from Lebanon to have a major
deployment and from there to Iraq and Yemen, and that is a sort
of a meltdown that is in a very bad place and that is going in
the wrong direction, particularly with U.S. policy effectively
leaning toward the Russian option and so on.
The fight against ISIS went very well but there doesn't
seem to be any long-term plan. So a practical approach might be
to focus our efforts on finding a better resolution for Syria
that would involve a settlement that doesn't include Assad but
is workable and that leads to a pathway where Iranian influence
can be reduced.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you.
I have far exceeded my time. If we had five before the
questions, we are now at 10 hearings, going forward.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Schneider.
And I am very proud to yield to our good friend from
Florida, Mr. Mast.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Chairwoman. I appreciate that.
My line of questioning is certainly in the aim of
historical understanding. I think Iran has done a very good job
of being tactical and strategic in working toward long-term
goals, and so I'd love to hear a few responses from you on
where historical context might lead us.
How long has Hezbollah been operating in Lebanon? Mr.
Abrams, if you want to answer--Doctor, anyone.
Mr. Abrams. I think the real turning point comes when the
Syrian troops leave Lebanon because Syria dominated Lebanon and
held in check a number of domestic forces, some democratic but
also Hezbollah.
Once the Syrian army was out, fairly quickly, I would say,
Hezbollah became the dominant military force and they used that
power to increasingly dominate the political structures of the
country as well.
So I would say, roughly, the first half of the previous
decade.
Mr. Salem. I would give you a bit more context. To go back
to the 1980s when Hezbollah first started, obviously emanating
from the Iranian Revolution, particularly in the aftermath in
Lebanon of the '82 invasion and the removal of the PLO from
Lebanon.
The PLO used to dominate south Lebanon. And a key turning
point there that is often missed is the 1983 withdrawal
agreement, which the Lebanese and Israelis, under American
auspices, negotiated and in which Israeli troops were to
withdraw from Lebanon.
This is something that the Syrians opposed extremely--you
know, the Syrians opposed it effectively because they wanted
any negotiations with Israel to be in tandem--Lebanon and Syria
on one side and Israel on the other--so that they could get the
occupied Golan back.
They opposed the agreement. They scuttled the agreement
and, moving forward, as the PLO had been removed, they backed
Iran to arm and grow Hezbollah in Lebanon partly to serve
Syrian interests.
Syria controlled Lebanon all the way up to 2005 and I mean
completely governed Lebanon effectively. And for them--for
Syria--Hezbollah was a main tool to pressure Israel over issues
relating to the Golan.
For Iran, obviously, it was, first, an ideological issue,
it was the first place they could export their Islamic
revolution to and show what they could do; but on national
security issues, since they considered themselves to be at war
both with Israel and the United States, they created a kind of
``aircraft carrier,'' which they parked north of Israel, which
is Hezbollah, as an attack force or a deterrent.
So over 25 years Syria helped Iran build this massive army
at a time when there was no Lebanese say in any of it. The
important turning point of 2005 is very significant and I would
say a couple of things.
I agree with Mr. Abrams that when Syria withdrew, Hezbollah
stepped up and did its own dirty work itself rather than the
Syrians doing the dirty work.
But after 2005, it is fair to say that about half of the
Lebanese parties, voters, leaders, its political system was now
free.
Not free not to be assassinated, but they were no longer
under Syrian diktat or Hezbollah. They struggled. And that is
what we have now.
We have a semi-free country and a semi-occupied country
struggling with a problem that was created by Syria and Iran
and which, you know, regional countries and the U.S. were okay
with, until the shift in the Bush era in 2004 and the aftermath
of the Iraq invasion changed those calculations.
Mr. Mast. The word model and tool has been used by several
on this panel to describe Hezbollah. Would you say that this is
a model in the historical context that you just gave?
Would we say that that is something that is being layered
upon Yemen? Would you say that this is a model that they are
looking to play out over another 25 to 30 years--that is a
long-term goal for Yemen so they would be on now, you know,
multiple directions of Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Salem. Yes, it is a model that they sort of apply in
Iran itself. The Revolutionary Guards is not the national army.
It is an ideological force. That model ``succeeded'' for them
in Lebanon.
They are certainly trying to reproduce it in Iraq but the
central government, I think, is trying to fight back. They
are--have already or trying to make it a part of the future in
Syria, although Russia might not be terribly comfortable with
that.
Certainly, we shouldn't be comfortable with that. And they
would--the Houthis are asking, effectively, to be like--in the
negotiations the Houthis are saying, ``Okay, we will agree, but
we need to be able to maintain our own private army.''
So yes, they are trying to create that model. It must not
be allowed to be recreated.
Mr. Mast. My time has expired. Do you mind if I ask one
last question?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Please, go right ahead.
Mr. Mast. You know, you used the term ``an ideological
force.'' Do you see them whatsoever as a colonizing force?
[Laughter.]
Ms. Wittes. Thank you. I don't know that I would say
colonizing. I think that the Revolutionary--the aim of the
Islamic Republic has been to export revolution and to gain
influence.
What we have seen with Hezbollah is that it wants to
exercise veto power. It doesn't want to exercise absolute
control. It is certainly not colonizing in the sense that it is
extracting resources and bringing them back to the metropol.
So I wouldn't say colonization is the model. I think it is
really about a power that understands--Iran understands that in
the majority Sunni region of the Middle East there are some
natural limits on its ideological reach and its political
reach. But it is trying to maximize its ability to shape events
by exercising vetoes where it can.
Mr. Salem. But if I may, I think there is a little element
of it in their sort of sectarianization and looking at the
region in sectarian terms and finding ways that that links to
their projection of power--that in Iraq look at Shiites and
Lebanon look at Shiites.
In Syria, with the Assad regime they are actually trying to
do ethnic cleansing and rejiggering the sort of sectarian
geography of the country so that they have a solid core.
In Yemen as well, the group there didn't consider
themselves Shiites in the same way that the Iranians do but
they are being moved in that direction and that is where the
link to the collapse of nation states and civil war is the real
problem--that once the state collapses people revert to their
sectarian or communal identities and Iran steps in, says,
``Okay, your state isn't working--I can help you.''
So that is why I emphasize ending civil wars and standing
up states even if they are rickety and imperfect and what not
but they are very significant--that is a very important goal.
Secondly, I am extremely heartened that Saudi Arabia,
hopefully--I mean, since 1979, as was mentioned, Saudi Arabia
fell into that game--that ``oh, the Iranians are backing
Shiites--maybe we should back Sunnis and maybe that is a good
way to do it.''
I think the new leadership in Saudi Arabia is realizing
that is bad for them, it is bad for their own societies, and it
is bad for the region. It is not good domestic policy. It is
not good foreign policy.
And I think if MBS succeeds in some of the things that he's
doing, particularly to reverse that decision that was made in
1979 to finance and export a pretty virulent form of sort of
Wahabbi Islam I think that is being recognized, that is of
historic importance for the kingdom, for the Middle East, and
for the world in ratcheting back that and helping reinforce
nation-state identities.
And I would also say that what he is doing in Saudi Arabia
in terms of pushing back against radical Islam, empowering
women, trying to build an open society, is something that many
Iranians want and that their government is not delivering.
So I think progress in Saudi Arabia might even cause some
worries for the Iranians domestically whose population wants
something quite similar to that.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Mast.
Mr. Lieu of California is recognized.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Madam Chair, for calling this hearing
on Saudi Arabia and Lebanon. I want to thank the witnesses for
your expertise and coming here today.
As you know, the President has put Jared Kushner in charge
of Middle East policy. So I have some questions for Dr. Wittes.
Am I pronouncing that correctly?
Are you aware if Jared Kushner has any foreign policy
credentials?
Ms. Wittes. He has no formal academic credentials in that
regard, although I think some of us--yes, no formal academic
credentials, no previous professional experience.
Mr. Lieu. When you served in the Obama administration, did
the President ever put someone in charge of Middle East policy
that had no foreign policy experience or foreign policy
credentials?
Ms. Wittes. Not to my recollection, no, and I think that as
all of us have been describing the intricacies of the
relationships and history in this region, our essential
background for effective American diplomacy, which is why it is
so valuable to have professional diplomats with that long
experience in the region engaged in the policy.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
Now, as you know, there are reports--actually, it is not
even disputed by Kushner companies--that they own 666 Building
in Manhattan and that they have a $1.2 billion debt on it, of
which they own over half of.
Kushner companies also does not dispute that they have been
trying to seek cash infusions. So I am going to read you the
first paragraph from this Bloomberg article earlier this year.
It says, ``A few months before President Donald Trump
encouraged Saudi Arabia and others to blockade Qatar, the real
estate business owned by the family of his son-in-law, Jared
Kushner, sought a substantial investment from one of the Gulf
State countries' wealthiest and most politically influential
figures, according to a spokesman for Kushner companies.''
Is it your view that the Trump administration gave Saudi
Arabia the green light to impose the economic blockade on
Qatar?
Ms. Wittes. I don't have any specific information on that,
Congressman Lieu, and, frankly, I--in my experience, it would
be surprising for the kingdom to explicitly, you know, ask for
a green light or seek approval.
I think what I would say is that President Trump's visit
there in which he made crystal clear that he's not interested
in local disputes or criticism.
He is interested in an uncritical embrace. That sent a
strong signal that I think affected decision-making and
calculations across the region.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
As you know, last month Jared Kushner took an unannounced
trip to Saudi Arabia. Is that unusual for a senior White House
official to make an unannounced trip like that?
Ms. Wittes. I wouldn't say it is at all unprecedented
actually and in the context of the significant reporting around
preparation of a U.S. proposal on Middle East peace, it would
be a reasonable step to take.
Mr. Lieu. So shortly after that, media reports that Chief
of Staff Kelly was none too happy with that trip, partly
because Saudi Arabia then started engaging in actions such as
rounding up various folks in Saudi Arabia, recalling the prime
minister of Lebanon, and so on.
Again, do you have any sense of whether Jared Kushner or
the Trump administration gave a green light or sent signals to
Saudi Arabia to say that that was okay?
Ms. Wittes. I have no specific information on that.
Mr. Lieu. Do you have any knowledge of whether Jared
Kushner asked anyone in Saudi Arabia for financing for the 666
Building?
Ms. Wittes. I certainly have no information on that, no.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
I would like to now move to Yemen. As you know, in Yemen
the Saudi-led coalition has engaged in a number of air strikes.
Reporting from Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch,
and other organizations suggest that a number of these air
strikes struck civilians nowhere near military targets. When I
served on active duty in the Air Force one of my duties was to
teach the law on conflict.
These look like war crimes to me. Do you have any
indication of whether there have been less war crime like
strikes in Yemen or has the situation remained the same?
Ms. Wittes. The question of Saudi targeting is not one I
have followed closely. The civilian casualties from bombings
have been significant.
The greater threat to civilian life in Yemen today is
starvation and disease, which is the result of the conflicts--
the inability to end this conflict.
What I would say about the air campaign is that as far as I
can tell it is unlikely that the Saudis are going to achieve
much more territorially through an aerial campaign. The targets
that they are bombing today are targets that they have bombed
before.
And so to achieve more gains on the ground would require
very bloody ground warfare that I don't think the Saudis or
their coalition partners are interested in right now.
The way to solve this conflict is at the negotiating table.
It is not going to be done militarily.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you very much, Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Suozzi. Did I do it right now?
Mr. Suozzi. You did it right. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Suozzi. One of my colleagues earlier made reference
to--thank you so much for being here today. We appreciate all
your expertise and your contributions to our country.
The--one of my colleagues earlier today referenced Thomas
Friedman's column in the New York Times on November 3rd and it
talked about, you know, this--this version of the Arab Spring
going on under the Saudi Arabian prince and the actions he's
taking with the detainments and the women driving in their cars
and everything else that is going on.
What is your opinion of what's going on and did you--did
you read the article--the op-ed piece by Thomas Friedman? What
is your opinion?
Is he--is he accurate? Is he--or is he being Pollyannaish?
Do you have as positive a view as he does of what's going on in
Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Abrams. Well, I don't have as positive a view as he
does. That situation--I thought he missed a critical point,
which is that the Arab Spring came from the bottom up. The Arab
Spring was in--you know, in places like Tunisia and Egypt--the
people overthrowing----
Mr. Suozzi. Syria also.
Mr. Abrams. Yes. Rising up against a tyrant. That is not
what is happening in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia is top down.
It may get substantial popular support but I think--I think
it was Dr. Wittes who said a few minutes ago that's a question.
This is not going to be a 1- or 2-year program.
The crown prince calls it Saudi 2030. We are talking about
decades here. I think they are going to need popular support
and I think that is something that Friedman really missed. How
do they get that popular support and maintain it over time?
Mr. Salem. Yes, I wouldn't compare it. As Mr. Abrams said,
the Arab Spring gets into different models of how things
happened or succeeded or failed.
My reading of what is happening in Saudi Arabia is that it
is a very, very profound change. It is a top-down attempt at
revolution--social revolution, cultural revolution, and
economic revolution and, in a sense, political revolution as
well.
I think the economic side as, I think, Mr. Abrams said in
his opening statement, had to be done and was way overdue.
The numbers in the economy would not add up because of oil
prices and consumption and so on. So Vision 2030 was the heart
of trying to sort of privatize and get away from energy.
I think on the issue of corruption that the Crown Prince is
absolutely right in having to tackle it in a major way.
Corruption--it would be even hard to have called it corruption
was sort of a way of life--that money sort of flows up and is
shared among royals in all kinds of deals. That was the way
business was done, and his attempt to go from that to an
economy where that is no longer the norm is absolutely
necessary.
Now, how he did it and in what ways, can be debated. In the
cultural side, his stand against extremists or politicized
Islam is incredibly necessary and incredibly important for
Saudi Arabia and for the entire region and the world, and I
think he has taken an incredibly bold position on that and
extremely valuable.
On the empowerment of women, it is not just driving--that
is a big move and other things as well--it is that that
direction is at least the right direction to be going in.
And I think if this succeeds he might, at the end of the
day, have a problem of how to empower these people he's
empowered politically. We haven't figured that out yet.
But I think we should be hoping that a lot of what he does
succeeds--that yes, it is done in a regularized way and is not
that--in a way that could eventually also encourage growth and
investment and so on. But I think what is going on is very
historic.
Ms. Wittes. I will just add two quick points. One is I
don't think that revolutionary is the appropriate word to
apply. This is about consolidating and sustaining the Saudi
kingdom, and in fact, the transformation that is underway is
shifting the political base of the monarchy from this patronage
network of royals and elites to a more populist base in the
younger generation.
This swift decision making, these bold moves, are popular
and the fact that the crown prince is of this generation is
popular. But he is--he is doing this by centralizing power in
his own hands.
He is doing this by marginalizing and discrediting rival
members of the royal family and he is doing this by making a
lot of promises to that young Saudi population that it is not
clear he is going to be able to deliver economically, socially,
and certainly, as Mr. Abrams pointed out, politically.
So this is a very risky play that is about consolidation of
power. I also think, as Dr. Salem said, it is about
strengthening the nation-state in the face of these
transnational forces in the region.
The second point I'd make is about the cultural
liberalization and the empowerment of women, and I understand
that the driving issue is extremely symbolic and there are
dozens of Saudi women who worked for years demanding their
right to drive.
But at the end of the day, the ability to drive a car has
economic consequences. It cannot--it has important personal
consequences but it is not transformational.
This is a country with guardianship laws that allow Saudi
males to treat their wives, daughters, and sisters as
subordinate property, and until the guardianship system is
tackled in this reform process, I, for one, am going to remain
a bit skeptical about the reach of this liberalization.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you.
So I am more than used up my time. I have a lot more to ask
you but I enjoyed your answers and your perspective on this. I
mean, I think it is a very positive development. There is just
always more to be done, obviously.
Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Very good questions and thank you for
your answers.
And now my good friend, Ms. Frankel from Florida. Go get
them, tiger.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you.
Doctor--well, you know, I know it will be that--it will be
the two of us here. First off, thank you all so much for being
here.
Well, we will see. I don't know if Mr. Suozzi is going to
stay. Oh, Mr.--oh, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Suozzi. I know--I am----
Ms. Frankel. That's right. Mr. Connolly, welcome. Thank you
for being here. Usually I am the last one here. That's due to
seniority or lack--there lack of.
So thank you. You know, it is interesting because I know we
are trying to have a very sincere intellectually discussion
here this morning and, you know, we don't always agree but we
do have serious discussions.
But, you know, my chairlady and I, we are from Florida and,
you know, there is this expression--NASA, we have a problem.
Guess what? DC, we have a problem, and I think it is in the
White House, I think. I think a lot of people agree. I mean, we
have our own Cabinet members reportedly calling our President--
one called him, allegedly, a moron.
One allegedly called him an idiot. I have seen reports on
TV by mental health experts who think that the President has a
serious mental health problem. In my opinion, he is a looney
tune. I don't know. I have never--it is hard--it is hard to
keep track.
But I bring this--and I want to add one other thing, which
is not apt to this conversation, but what his policies are
doing to the women of the world are disgraceful. In cutting off
the health to the women of the world, that is going to come
back, I think, in so many negative ways. But I am going to not
ruminate on that.
One of you said today that, you know, lack of policy, a
lack of strategy, a lack of personnel is part of the problem in
trying to develop this Mideast or try to deal with this chaos
that is going on.
So I have--I do have questions from this. Today, I think it
is, the President tweeted or retweeted the most bigoted anti-
Muslim--how do I say it politely?
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Video.
Ms. Frankel. Video venom--I was going to call it fake
video--which has been apparently--I don't even think I should
say what it is.
But it supposedly emanates from Great Britain, where even
their leaders there--one of them just said the President of the
United States is promoting a fascist racist extremist hate
group whose leaders have been arrested and convicted and he's
no ally or friend of ours.
I mean, so one question is, is the President's own behavior
and his bullying tweets and crazy things he says, do you--do
you think it has any effect at all in terms of trying to have
some rational policy or strategy or whatever.
That's number one. Number two, now, give me some hope. Is
there anyone behind the scenes that is doing anything
meaningful and rational that can overcome this President?
And then my third question, which is a little bit off
subject but I am really--since it is us girls and Gerry over
here and Tom, you know, there has been a lot of chatter about
this ``forced peace agreement'' between Israel and the
Palestinians and Jared Kushner going to Saudi Arabia and Saudi
Arabia getting the Palestinian leader Abbas and threatening him
to accept the peace agreement.
And I am just wondering if you have an opinion on any of
that, whether it is real or possible. So those are my
questions. Who wants to give it a shot?
Ms. Wittes. Well----
Ms. Frankel. Start with the tweets. [Laughter.]
Ms. Wittes. Congresswoman Frankel, maybe I will start, if I
may, with a question about the Middle East peace process and I
suspect that my colleagues will have some things to say on that
as well.
But I think that in--as our partners in the region have
confronted this common threats from Iran we have seen a lot of
tentative outreach in different directions and the possibility
for some new rapprochement. And so that offers hope for
cooperation on Middle East peace.
I would say that the agreements on Gaza to return the
Palestinian Authority and particularly to return PA personnel
to the borders of Gaza is an extremely significant development
if in fact it is implemented as agreed.
What I worry about, as I said earlier, is that our partners
in the region have different priorities that pull them in
different directions and so when push comes to shove, I am not
sure we have the ingredients we need for a big Middle East
peace deal that would enable this kind of open Arab-Israeli
rapprochement.
The Egyptians, who have been crucial to brokering the
agreement on Gaza are, as you know, struggling with a fierce
insurgency in Sinai.
This massive terrorist attack I think will compel them to
rethink what an open border from Gaza means for them and,
certainly, it takes their attention away from this broader
Middle East peace effort.
The Jordanians and the Palestinians have their own concerns
about preference--the Gulf's preferences with regard to Middle
East peace and the future of the--of leadership in the
Palestinian Authority.
So I think that all of these tensions are coming into play
before we even get to the question of Iran and Hamas and that
kind of thing.
So I just don't think that our expectations should be too
high. I don't think that this package is an easy thing to put
together.
Mr. Abrams. I agree with that. I am a pessimist about the
chances for a comprehensive peace deal. I don't appear today as
an administration spokesman. I have done that many times in
hearings that the chairman has held over the years.
But I would say I think if you ask a number of governments
in the region--Saudi, Emirati, Israeli, Egyptian--they are
actually happier with American foreign policy than 1, 2, 3
years ago--the previous 8 years. So I think that has to be part
of record as well.
Mr. Salem. Yes, I think I would agree with that, that they
had other serious disagreements with the Obama administration,
particularly, obviously, over Iran, but also over Egypt and
some other things as well.
I think, again, dealing with governments in the region,
gauging the effects of this administration, I don't think it is
so much the President's personality--whatever you want to
describe it, as in a tweet here and a tweet there. I think
there are two more structural things. One, I think they are
happy with a lot of the elements that they have seen: Strong
position against Iran, strong position against extremist Islam
and so on.
But a year into the administration I don't think they see
the clarity of a full strategy--a lot of talk on Iran but no
real teeth; not clear about Russia--is Russia partner of the
Trump administration or not? A few fundamentals that are not
clear as well: An administration where it is not clear who is
in charge and who do you talk to.
Secretary Tillerson doesn't seem to be on the same page
with the President or his son-in-law on many issues. I find
when I go to the region there is a problem of personnel--should
we talk to Jared Kushner, should we talk to the Secretary of
State, the Secretary of Defense?
There is confusion about who is managing America's foreign
policy in the Middle East and that can't be good.
Ms. Frankel. Madam Chair, just one follow-up. On the
question of Russia, we had a hearing I think maybe a couple
weeks ago on some of the issues related to Russia and one of
the experts I remember--I forget who it was--said make sure you
just--so be cautious that you differentiate between cooperation
and, what was it, sharing? Wait. A staff question. Between
cooperation and coordination.
And, basically, they said to us, you know, don't tell them
any secrets. Don't give them anything that they might use
against us but that--that doesn't mean you shouldn't try in the
right times to have some cooperation.
So I wanted to ask you this in regards to Russia. Do you
see a role of Russia at all in how in this whole Middle East
chaos what should--what do you think their involvement or our
involvement should be with them, given, obviously, what's going
on with the interference with the elections and so forth?
Mr. Salem. Well, when it comes to the Middle East, the area
we are talking about today, I think there are two modes of
thinking about this.
Some think that maybe we could work with the Russians and
that will be separate from Iran and what Iran wants to do and
try to create some space between Russia and Iran. In Syria, for
example, the idea that if Russia is empowered in Syria they
might remove Assad. They might build the army rather than the
militias. They might help us get the Iranian proxy forces out.
But on the other hand, the pattern that I see developing is
that Russia has jumped on an opportunity to ally effectively
with Iran. Both of them are anti-American forces.
They have different colors, different ideologies, but on
that they agree. On those, you know, they agree on that in a
strategic way and Iran has secured dominance in the Levant.
I mean, a lot of influence in Iraq, victory in Syria, a lot
of influence in Lebanon, and that is a core area. And Russia
has jumped into that in Syria, providing air cover there and
support in the Security Council.
So what I fear is happening is not necessarily that Russia
is a problem for the U.S. in the Middle East because they could
be partners in the Middle East peace and other things, but they
have chosen to enter the Middle East with this alliance with
Iran.
They can't really separate from Iran. They would lose what
they gained in Syria. So that is where our problem lies and
hence, yes, it is really a big problem to think that the U.S.
can work with Russia blindly in Syria or the Middle East.
We have to be tough with them but also diplomatic and, you
know, use all the levers to get a result that we want.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Ms. Frankel.
And now I am so pleased to yield to one of my favorite
Members of Congress, Mr. Connolly of Virginia. Many people
don't know that--weren't you part of the Senate staff of this
equivalent committee on the----
Mr. Connolly. I am impressed you know that----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes, I know that.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. And remember that. Thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And he is recognized for such time as he
may consume.
Mr. Connolly. Well, the feelings are mutual, Madam
Chairman, and I wish you would change your mind about leaving.
Anyway, I can't help but observe, since Mr. Abrams decided
to opine about unpopular Trump--I mean, Obama is with certain
countries and how much more popular Trump is.
Well, of course they are, because we are not pressing human
rights. We are not holding them to account. We have seen
authoritarian regimes rise in Egypt and in other parts of the
region and they now know that no one's going to hold them to
account.
And, of course, you know, our policies with the Netanyahu
government in Israel remain the subject of great debate and
controversy about what's in U.S. interest and Netanyahu, of
course, would prefer Trump over Obama.
We will see. There is an old expression--be careful what
you wish for. We will see how that plays out.
But if I were those countries, as I think, Dr. Salem, you
were just indicating, I would be worried a little bit about
some of the policies of this administration.
Ceding, frankly, Syria to Russia and letting the Russians
lead the negotiations for what comes next--you're worried about
Iranian influence? You are worried about the role of Hezbollah?
I don't think that is a positive step for Iran or for Egypt
and, of course, the administration compounds its problem by--
well, some senior diplomats have called dismantling the Foreign
Service and, I think, Dr. Wittes, you talked about that in your
testimony as well.
Madam Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record the op-ed piece by Ryan Crocker and Nicholas Burns.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
Mr. Abrams, you and I go back a long way. Let me ask, I
hope, a nonpolitical question. How serious do you think it is
that we are, as some have said, dismantling or hollowing out?
And, for the record, Secretary Tillerson takes great exception
to that.
But when I look at, you know, some data, so he proposes to
cut the Foreign Service 8,000 officers by 8 percent. He has--
well, the President has proposed a budget cut at State and
USAID of 31 percent.
We know that one of the results of all of that this year is
that the number of Americans who have applied for Foreign
Service has declined by one third--33 percent.
We also know lots of people are headed for the exits who
can retire. We are losing a lot of senior diplomats--a lot of
collective wisdom about various and sundry regions of the
world.
Is this, from your point of view, something that is just a
downsizing that will make us leaner and meaner and more
effective or is this something that actually we ought to be
concerned about in terms of our capability to project ourselves
diplomatically, especially in this region?
Mr. Abrams. I think it is a great concern. I would just
take 10 seconds to say I do think there was no American human
rights pressure on Saudi Arabia and the UAE and their
preference for Trump over Obama does not have to do with
American human rights pressure, and in Israel the preference is
not just Netanyahu's. Obama had lost the confidence of the
people of Israel left, right, and center.
So I don't think--I don't think the--I would not associate
myself with your opening remarks. But I would associate myself
on these remarks.
Mr. Connolly. I did not assume you would----
Mr. Abrams. Yes.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Because since I took direct
issue with you, and I don't think that is true that we never
talked about human rights with Saudi Arabia.
I take your point, though. Perhaps what they really
objected to was the agreement with Iran and I happen to think
Obama has been proved right in that regard, not wrong. But----
Mr. Abrams. On the State Department, I think, of course,
Secretary Tillerson objects if you, you know, say to him, you
are destroying the Foreign Service--you are deliberately
undermining the ability to conduct diplomacy.
But I think top-down is the wrong way to look at it. It
should be looked at in a sense, from the point of view of the
Department, of the Foreign Service, of the morale of the
building because the morale of the building can be judged, not
by the intention of those on the top but rather what is
actually happening.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Abrams. And you have described, I think, what's
actually happening. I have played the game almost of saying
with a number of friends, okay, who would you choose for
Ambassador here or Ambassador there or Assistant Secretary for
this.
Very often the answer is, well, so and so, but she is
gone--so and so, but he just retired. So you are getting a
depletion of the top ranks and we are not starting to refill at
the bottom because of these decisions not to have entering
classes.
Sure, the impact of that next year is not great. But we
need to plan for the future. We need an absolutely first rate
global power foreign ministry 10 years from now and 25 years
from now when those entering classes are going to be assuming
position of responsibility.
So I think it is--it is happening if you ask people in the
Foreign Service, and I think it is very unfortunate.
Mr. Connolly. Yes. If the chair would allow--Dr. Wittes,
you looked like you were chomping at the bit to comment as
well, and I know--I know you actually said the most important
tool in the American policy toolbox--to contain Iran and
restore stability in a disordered region is the tool the Trump
administration seems most committed to destroying--our
diplomacy. Do you want to elaborate?
Ms. Wittes. Thank you, Congressman.
First, I will associate myself with Elliott's comments in
that regard entirely, and I will note that I think it is now
more than half of our posts--our Embassies in the Middle East
do not have a permanent Ambassador in place.
It is--including Saudi Arabia, by the way--and although we
have a very able team and very able charges and deputies in
those places, it is impossible to substitute for somebody who
is given the charge by the President of being his
representative.
And so in addition to the long-term institutional damage to
our foreign ministry that Elliott was describing, I think we
have to look at the near term problem of empty chairs and
nobody on the other end of the phone.
And so it is almost impossible to imagine even if the White
House could construct a comprehensive strategy to contain Iran
and push back this influence that we would be able to implement
on that strategy effectively, given the range and breadth of
vacancies that we see.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, and I think one of the things that those
empty chairs and phones not answered creates a vacuum that our
adversaries know how to fill.
The Iranians are quite aggressive. The Chinese are quite
aggressive. The Russians, we know, are quite aggressive. And
this is just the wrong time to have a whole bunch of empty
chairs and phones not answered.
But I thank you all for being here. I wish we had a little
more time. Madam Chair, thank you so much for having the
hearing and, Ms. Frankel, thanking--thank you for letting a guy
ask some questions. [Laughter.]
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Connolly.
Thank you to our excellent witnesses and thank you for the
audience as well for being with us, and members of the press.
And with that, the subcommittee is adjourned as we fly out.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
