- THE FUTURE OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 12, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-90

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
27-810PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin                        ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
As of
12:44 pm 11/29/17 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade

TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida               BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Eric Farnsworth, vice president, Council of the Americas.....     8
Mr. Daniel Allford, president, ARC Specialties...................    17
The Honorable John D. Negroponte, vice chairman, McLarty
Associates (former Deputy Secretary of State and Former
Director of National Intelligence).............................    23
Ms. Celeste Drake, Trade and Globalization Policy specialist, The
American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations..................................................    29

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and chairman, Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade: Prepared statement................     4
Mr. Eric Farnsworth: Prepared statement..........................    11
Mr. Daniel Allford: Prepared statement...........................    19
The Honorable John D. Negroponte: Prepared statement.............    25
Ms. Celeste Drake: Prepared statement............................    31

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    58
Hearing minutes..................................................    59
The Honorable Darrell E. Issa, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California:
Prepared statement.............................................    60
Material submitted for the record..............................    61

THE FUTURE OF THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT

----------

TUESDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Poe
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Poe. The subcommittee will come to order.
Without objection, all members may have 5 days to submit
statements, questions, extraneous materials for the record,
subject to the length limitation in the rules.
I will now make my opening statement.
Twenty-three years ago, the North American Free Trade
Agreement revolutionized trade and investment between the U.S.,
Canada, and Mexico. We share thousands of miles of border with
Canada and Mexico. They are our neighbors and our natural
partners in trade and security.
And I want to emphasize the word ``neighbors.'' Sometimes
the United States seems to be more concerned about some country
far, far away than they are about our neighbors, Mexico and
Canada. I think that is a mistake.
This partnership has been shaped by NAFTA and our mutual
histories. I am a strong supporter of free trade. America's
strength is closely connected to its economic well-being. When
we break down trade barriers, American trade and American jobs
increase.
Trade is the lifeblood of my home State of Texas. Last year
in Texas, almost 1 million jobs were supported by some form of
trade. Texas has been the top exporting State in the United
States for 14 consecutive years. The overwhelming majority of
Texas exporters are not big corporations but 93 percent of the
Texas exporters are small and medium-size businesses.
In my district of Houston, over half of the economy depends
on trade. Houston has one of the largest ports in the world and
is the oil and gas capital of the world. And guess where our
Texas exporters export the most? Mexico and Canada, our NAFTA
partners. Mexico is Texas' number-one exporting partner. Over
10,000 trucks a day pass the Texas-Mexico border, all involved
in trade.
Texas is just one of the many States that rely on NAFTA to
fuel the economy. Study after study have shown that increased
trade leads to increased jobs for all Americans. More jobs mean
more wealth for Americans. NAFTA supports 14 million jobs in
the United States, and, thanks to NAFTA, trade between the
U.S., Mexico, and Canada has tripled. Nearly every industry is
affected in one way or another by NAFTA. The U.S. economy
relies on NAFTA.
Free trade agreements like NAFTA do more than just grow our
economy. Trade is one of our best tools for foreign policy and
political policy. We have seen the connection between free
trade and freedom, opportunity, and prosperity. When we signed
the NAFTA agreement, Mexico was considered a developing
country. Its economy was one of the most closed in the world.
Now, thanks in part to NAFTA, Mexico has an open economy valued
at $2.2 trillion. The growth has made Mexico a stable neighbor.
The increased trade between our countries has also deepened
the ties between Mexico and Canada, allowing us to work
together on many critical issues. Today, we cooperate with the
Mexican Government on numerous issues, surprisingly to some
Americans, including border security, immigration, and the
fight against organized crime and drug trafficking. Our
southern border security depends on our joint effort with
Mexico.
Cooperation with Canada has improved due to NAFTA. Our
forces train and work together to defend North America. We
fight side-by-side against national security threats like ISIS,
and we are NATO partners. These are some of the most critical
issues to our national security and to the security of our
world.
That brings me to the reason we are having this hearing
today, to address the renegotiation of this critical free trade
agreement. This negotiation, or renegotiation, is going on as
we speak.
A lot has changed in 23 years. The internet has transformed
the way companies do business. Reforms in Mexico have created
new opportunities for U.S. businesses. The renegotiation
presents an opportunity to update the agreement in areas like
energy, e-commerce, customs and trade facilitation, and many
others to strengthen and promote trade.
While there is a lot of opportunity to strengthen the
agreement, there is also the risk of hurting U.S. businesses
and workers. Hundreds of thousands of jobs across North America
could be at risk if we suddenly pulled out of NAFTA or weakened
the agreement. We could also do damage to our partnerships with
Mexico and Canada that have made North America so strong.
There has been some criticism, maybe harsh criticism, by
others of NAFTA for decades, but we must separate the rhetoric
from the facts and the criticism from people that don't have
anything to do with trade. The fact is that NAFTA has benefited
all three of our nations.
I encourage the administration to strengthen and modernize
NAFTA. There is always room to improve it to make it better for
all three countries. And we have the rare opportunity at this
very time to rewrite the rules of North American trade, to make
it free trade and fair trade. We must take the opportunity to
write them for the better.
I believe it is important to the U.S. economy and national
security that, throughout the renegotiations, the
administration focuses on reaching an agreement that promotes
free trade as well. We are sending a message to our current and
future trading partners throughout this renegotiation. The U.S.
should send a strong signal to support not only the NAFTA free
trade agreement but free trade with other countries, as well,
that want to trade with the U.S.
A strong U.S. economy depends on a strong framework of free
trade, and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on how
the administration can strengthen NAFTA and make it better.
I will now yield to the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Keating, former prosecutor--maybe still a prosecutor--for his
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Poe follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Chairman
Poe, and thank you for having this hearing today.
We are here in the Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade, and, as anyone who watches the
news knows, there are many threats facing us today in these
areas: ISIS, lone-wolf attacks, escalating tensions with North
Korea, and the threat, again, of nuclear war. We must be
vigilant in addressing every threat here at home and in the
globalized world.
The threats that cross borders and affect all of us are
important. Threats from terrorism and proliferation of nuclear
weapons are sobering. We must do everything in our power to
keep Americans safe. But, additionally, we cannot afford to
lose sight of trade. It doesn't command as much attention in
the news as some of these issues I have just mentioned, but it
affects every single American.
Trade has the power to affect where jobs are located, to
affect wages, to affect the cost of goods and services we rely
on every day without even thinking about trade policies that
affect them when they are in front of us. Trade is an
incredible economic and foreign policy tool if it is wielded
effectively and responsibly. It is the duty of U.S. Government
to take full advantage of every tool at our disposal to make
life better and easier for everyday, hardworking Americans.
In order to do that in trade, we must be extremely careful
in examining who wins and who loses. There has been a similar
debate raging in this country over winners and losers recently,
and that is over taxes. There are a lot of numbers and
mathematical formulas and technical terms being thrown around
with these issues, but, at the end of the day, how sure are we
that it is the student, the assembly-line worker, the farmer,
the mother of three, how sure are we that they are seeing the
benefits of these policies?
The good news is that there are things we can do in trade
so that all boats rise, because our economies, our security,
our institutions are all stronger when the people at the
receiving end of trade and tax and any policy, for that matter,
are stronger.
However, we also have to be honest about what that means,
because in trade this is not the norm. It is going to take real
work to renegotiate NAFTA so that Americans, Mexicans, and
Canadians see the benefits of what an effective, responsible
trade policy should look like.
Unfortunately, on this issue, which will have a significant
impact on each and every American's bottom line every month, I
remain unconvinced that this President has approached this
issue with the seriousness it demands.
For starters, the unrealistic timing parameters placed on
these negotiations only suggest that the administration is
willing to accept more of the same. I hope I am wrong about
that, but negotiating wholesale changes in trade policy that
break with longstanding trade practices takes time, no matter
how quickly we might want to change that to happen and how
willing we are to make sure it works toward that end.
This applies to tax, trade; it applies to anything. We
should be very careful about anything that moves quickly in
this city. And with very little oversight from Congress or
engagement from the affected stakeholders and their
representatives, this is an area of concern.
To our role in Congress, I am glad we are having this
hearing in our subcommittee today, because it is a critical
issue for our country and our foreign policy. We are fortunate
to have our expert panel of witnesses here to inform us and
inform this discussion right here in Congress on the NAFTA
negotiations and what we should be paying close attention to so
that we are serving the interests of the hardworking Americans
in our own districts.
While I am pleased with our witnesses here today, they are
not government witnesses. Our panel, they are really not the
ones that are going to be in the room negotiating this when it
happens. They are not negotiating in terms of the trade policy
that might have the single greatest impact on our constituents
during our time serving here in Congress. They are not serving
at the State Department, the Office of U.S. Trade
Representative, USAID, Department of Labor. They are not
working in our Federal agencies tasked with taking a new NAFTA
and making it function properly at all levels of
implementation, down to the workers in the fields or the
assembly line or the parents buying groceries.
With something of this significance, we owe it to our
constituents to be fully informed on the terms that are being
written into the new NAFTA, on the economic effects those terms
will have on our communities back home, on what we need to do
as the United States Government to make sure that everything is
in place if and when a new NAFTA is signed. Because there are
always risks and uncertainties when new policy is put into
place, and we should work together to make sure people are not
harmed in the process.
For today, with this opportunity before us, in what I hope
will be the first effort at taking up the issue of NAFTA
negotiations, I hope we can use this time today to learn more
about what a successful renegotiation looks like. Trade is just
like any other issue--tax, healthcare, financial regulation. We
have learned a lot from how past practices have gone, and we
have learned about who the winners and losers were under those
policies. We are better not to be repeating those same
mistakes. Our communities back home deserve better.
I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
Without objection, all of the witnesses' prepared
statements will be made part of the record.
I ask that each witness keep your presentation to no more
than 5 minutes. And there is an easy way to know how long 5
minutes has passed because a red button will blink in front of
you. But we do have all of your testimony, all members have
your testimony, and your bios as well.
I will introduce briefly each witness and let them make
their testimony.
Eric Farnsworth is the vice president of the Council of the
Americas. He previously worked at the State Department, Office
of the U.S. Trade Representative, and was a senior adviser to
the White House Special Envoy for the Americas.
Thank you, Mr. Farnsworth, for being here.
Mr. Daniel Allford has been the president and owner of ARC
Specialties of Houston, Texas, for 35 years. ARC Specialties
began as a one-man operation and has grown into an
internationally recognized automation company that employs 65
engineers and craftsmen.
Mr. Allford, thank you for being here and taking time away
from your business.
Ambassador John Negroponte is the vice chairman of McLarty
Associates. He was previously the Deputy National Security
Advisor under President Reagan and was the first Director of
National Intelligence under President George W. Bush. In
addition, he served as the Ambassador to Honduras, Mexico,
Philippines, the U.N., and Iraq.
Ms. Celeste Drake is a trade and globalization policy
specialist for the American Federation of Labor and Congress of
Industrial Organizations. Previously, Ms. Drake worked for
Congresswoman Sanchez and Congressman Doggett, in addition to
serving on the Advisory Committee for the U.S. Export-Import
Bank from 2013 to 2016.
Mr. Farnsworth, we will start with you. You have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MR. ERIC FARNSWORTH, VICE PRESIDENT, COUNCIL OF
THE AMERICAS

Mr. Farnsworth. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And good
afternoon to you, Mr. Ranking Member, and members of the
subcommittee. It is a real privilege to have the opportunity to
appear before all of you to discuss the future of NAFTA.
If I may, let me give you the bottom line first. NAFTA was
a true innovation in economic relations. It was designed to
increase trade and investment among its three parties, promote
North American economic integration, and support a vision of
open-market democracy for Mexico, providing that nation with a
clear path toward political and economic development. It has
succeeded on all three metrics, promoting our strategic,
economic, and foreign policy interests as well as our values.
Ending NAFTA would be a significant, lasting, and wholly
unnecessary strategic mistake. At the same time, it is
inevitable that after a quarter-century NAFTA has become dated
and can usefully be modernized. And there is a landing zone, if
the parties would like to achieve it.
Since 1993, U.S. trade in goods and services with Canada
and Mexico increased from $307 billion to well over $1 trillion
by 2016. Annual trade between the United States and Canada has
more than doubled. With Mexico, trade has quadrupled. Canada is
the top trading partner of the United States, and Mexico is our
second-largest export market and third-largest trading partner.
More than 40 U.S. States count either Canada or Mexico as their
top export destination.
NAFTA has expanded trade and investment while organizing
the majority of North American economic relations under a
rules-based framework. As China continues its inexorable march
up the development ladder and becomes increasingly economically
assertive, our ability to compete economically will be further
enhanced from a North America platform rather than the United
States alone.
Perhaps more importantly, NAFTA institutionalized a vision
for North America that would have been impossible absent
significant political and economic reforms in Mexico, both
catalyzing such reforms and also benefiting from them. NAFTA
has directly supported Mexico's democratic transformation while
also establishing a framework of trust, supporting close U.S.
cooperation across a range of security issues, including
counternarcotics, counterterrorism, and migration. Such
cooperation is at risk if the United States continues on its
current path.
Negotiations to revise NAFTA are now well underway. Press
reports indicate that the most difficult issues remain to be
addressed. Unless they are soon resolved, the possibility is
increasing that talks may break down altogether and that the
U.S. might consider giving notice of withdrawal.
According to The Wall Street Journal, some 80 percent of
economists surveyed anticipate withdrawing from NAFTA would
depress U.S. growth, even as Congress is right now pushing
forward on a tax package designed to kickstart growth.
Withdrawal would also reduce growth in both Canada and Mexico,
perhaps leading to a recession and creating economic conditions
that traditionally cause migration, especially from Mexico to
the United States.
Much depends on the outcome of discussions surrounding
rules of origin as a means to address the trade balance,
although other significant issues also remain, including a
sunset provision proposal and disagreements on intellectual
property, government procurement, and dispute settlement
procedures. Backward steps on these issues would cause
irreparable damage to fully integrated supply chains and the
workers whose jobs depend on them, in part because companies
would find it difficult, if not impossible, to meet the
required rules of origin currently under discussion.
Were NAFTA to be eliminated, the parties to the agreement
would then return to previous bound tariff rates, Mexico's
being far higher than ours. Agriculture exports would suffer
immediately, giving up the significant advantage that has
turned Mexico into the U.S.' second-largest--$18 billion--
market, after only Canada.
Meanwhile, to escape tariff barriers raised by Mexico,
those seeking to supply Mexico's growing market and
increasingly middle-class population, may, in fact, seek to
move production to Mexico. This is exactly the opposite of the
intended result.
Having said all of this, the uncertainty that has been
caused by the negotiations has already had negative
consequences. Doubts will linger about whether the word of the
United States, even one that is confirmed on a bipartisan basis
by both houses of Congress, can be fully trusted again. Were we
intentionally to seek ways to undermine our own global
strategic interest, we might not find a better means of doing
so than this.
The challenges that face the United States at this moment
are significant and they are real, but NAFTA is not the
culprit. Rather, the relaunch of an updated and modernized
NAFTA, fully acknowledging the rapid technological advances
that continue to be made, informed by a vision of a more
economically integrated North America to compete effectively on
a global stage, is part of the solution.
And, in the meantime, the strong, public, timely assertion
by Congress of institutional prerogatives on trade and NAFTA,
in particular, would be a welcome and, in my view, appropriate
step.
So I want to thank you again, Judge Poe and the ranking
minority member, for the opportunity to be with you today, and
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Farnsworth follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Farnsworth.
Mr. Allford?

STATEMENT OF MR. DANIEL ALLFORD, PRESIDENT, ARC SPECIALTIES

Mr. Allford. Mr. Poe and members of the Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade Subcommittee of the Committee on
Foreign Affairs, thank you for inviting me today to talk on
NAFTA.
I am Dan Allford, president of ARC Specialties in Houston,
Texas. We design, program, and build automated machines and
robots used around the world.
I started in 1983 in Houston when I built a hot tap welding
machine for a plutonium processing plant in Idaho. I have
always suspected that if the customer had known it was a young
man in his garage building this they might have been a little
bit worried. However, it worked so well, we built another one
in the 1990s.
The business grew out of the garage around 1990, and, over
the last 35 years, we have engineered and built hundreds of
machines that are operating in 25 countries on 6 continents. We
now occupy over 100,000 square feet of engineering and
manufacturing space and employ 65 engineers and craftsmen.
I have personally worked in and observed the market systems
in 15 different countries. This experience has made me an
enthusiastic free-market capitalist.
ARC Specialties has always built machinery used for the
manufacture of equipment used in the exploration and refining
operations in the energy industry. In 2015, when oil prices
crashed and the Houston economy slowed, we needed new markets.
We found that the solutions we had developed to solve oil
industry problems worked equally well in other industries
around the world.
Since the beginning of 2015, we have designed, built, and
shipped machines to Canada, Mexico, Romania, Singapore, Oman,
Saudi Arabia, China, India, France, and the U.K. exports have
account for 30 percent of our revenues. Canada and Mexico
accounted for half of our exports. In the process, we have
learned to deal with trade barriers ranging from red tape to
tariffs.
Most of my knowledge of NAFTA comes from personal
experience doing business across the globe. My experience is
that NAFTA has helped us sell machines in Mexico and Canada. I
sincerely believe that the free-market system used here in the
United States is a major contributor to the success and
productivity of our country. Tariffs and subsidies distort
markets and degrade efficiency. A free market and a level
playing field bring out the best in people by rewarding their
efforts. I firmly agree with the adage that competition breeds
excellence.
In 1960, one transistor cost $4. Now, $4 will purchase 1
billion transistors. This is the result of the free market
encouraging technological improvements through automation. The
whole process is driven by fair competition. I don't fear
competition. I relish the challenge.
I can beat the competition, but I can't beat the tariff.
The United States innovates, others duplicate, and the cycle
starts over, and everyone benefits from increased productivity.
Better products are made available to consumers at lower
prices.
What I do fear is an unfair environment. Tariffs and red
tape on one side tend to create reciprocal tariffs and red tape
on the other. Technical problems can be solved using
engineering and ingenuity, while tariffs create political and
administrative cost barriers that restrict trade.
I export machines to Brazil, where Brazilian tariffs can
add as much as 40 percent to the cost of my equipment. This is
counterproductive for all parties. These machines are used to
apply welded internal coatings to valves and pipes used in the
oil industry. These coatings create a corrosion-resistant
barrier to the hydrogen sulfide or sour gas present in
Brazilian crude and help prevent catastrophic failures and oil
spills. Brazilian tariffs make my machines unaffordable for
most companies. These tariffs cost my company revenues and cost
the U.S. jobs. I fear the same thing will occur in Mexico and
Canada if changes are made to NAFTA that distort the free-
market system.
I believe that everyone should have an opportunity to work
and provide for their family. This is a great stabilizer in the
world. In a free-market system, prices for goods and services
are determined by the open market and consumers. A free market
works when the laws and forces of supply and demands are
unhindered by government intervention.
I am proud to be involved in manufacturing because it is
one of the few segments of our economy that creates wealth. Our
robots and machines help U.S. companies compete in a global
economy, and our exports of equipment help the balance of
trade.
I am honored to be here today, and I ask you to help me to
continue to create jobs in the United States of America by
encouraging international free trade.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Allford follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Allford. Well said.
Ambassador?

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN D. NEGROPONTE, VICE CHAIRMAN,
MCLARTY ASSOCIATES (FORMER DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE AND FORMER
DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE)

Mr. Negroponte. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Poe----
Mr. Poe. Your microphone.
Mr. Negroponte. Oh, sorry. I should have remembered at
least that. I haven't been out of government that long.
Thank you to Chairman Poe and Ranking Member Keating and
other members of this subcommittee for inviting me to testify
at this hearing on NAFTA, a topic that has long been of
personal and professional interest and that is highly relevant
for Congress at this critical juncture. NAFTA's modernization
is both necessary and important.
For my part, I am proud to say that I have been an advocate
for transforming North America into a more competitive economic
force for decades. During my time as United States Ambassador
to Mexico, I had the privilege to be involved in NAFTA's
conception and negotiation. When I went down to Mexico, our
trade relationship was modest and the United States-Mexico
political relationship was frequently fraught. ``Distant
Neighbors'' was the title of the book that best described our
bilateral interaction.
Through NAFTA, we hoped to be able to integrate our
economies in a way that would benefit all three countries and
allow us to better compete, including with Asia and with the
countries of Eastern Europe that were emerging after the fall
of the Soviet Union.
I will never forget my meeting with President George H.W.
Bush and Secretary of State James Baker where I walked through
the pros and cons of having a NAFTA, an idea that they green-
lighted, seeing the economic and security benefits in such a
strategic alliance.
While the economic and social pressures of an increasingly
globalized world have made NAFTA a controversial subject, I am
of the view that NAFTA has been beneficial to our country. Its
renegotiation should recognize the strategic importance of our
North American partnership from both a geopolitical and
economic perspective. Our work with our neighbors on law
enforcement, counternarcotics, and counterterrorism are key
components to keeping America safe. We simply do not have the
luxury of putting this collaboration at risk.
And, economically, trade with Canada and Mexico supports
millions of jobs, and our North American partners buy more U.S.
manufactured goods every year than the next 10 largest markets
combined. Rather than offshoring to Asia, critical supply
chains have been able to remain in North America, enhancing our
ability to compete.
NAFTA created unprecedented export opportunities for U.S.
manufacturers, farmers, energy and service providers, small-
and medium-size enterprises, and, yes, even workers, building
the foundation of a closer strategic trilateral partnership.
At the same time, NAFTA has long been a punching bag, as
our country has failed to effectively address the needs of
communities hit by shifting market demand, enhanced
globalization, and technology. These are pressing matters that
we must take head-on. But withdrawing from NAFTA to attempt to
address these issues is like putting a splint on your arm to
try to heal a broken leg. It is not likely to work. The
uncertainty created by withdrawal benefits no one, least of all
the United States.
Do we need to modernize this agreement? Absolutely. The
world has moved on since NAFTA's entry into force. Do we need
to threaten withdrawal to do so? Absolutely not.
So what can we do? First and foremost, I think it is
important that Congress exercise its prerogatives in matters
concerning trade and commerce. Hopefully this hearing will be a
piece of that. And my hope is that local communities threatened
by a dissolution of NAFTA will help to build a national
consensus for the status quo, ideally for NAFTA modernization
as well.
Most importantly, I think we must rebuild a consensus not
on trade necessarily but on competitiveness, on the need to
ensure that the United States remains one of the most
competitive economies in the world. This will mean engaging in
real policy debates about the causes of economic struggle in
certain parts of the country rather than turning to NAFTA as a
convenient scapegoat.
Wouldn't it be ironic if it were the United States' actions
that harmed the bilateral relationship with Mexico, returning
us once again to being distant neighbors?
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I
look forward to your questions, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Negroponte follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you, Ambassador.
Ms. Drake?

STATEMENT OF MS. CELESTE DRAKE, TRADE AND GLOBALIZATION POLICY
SPECIALIST, THE AMERICAN FEDERATION OF LABOR AND CONGRESS OF
INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATIONS

Ms. Drake. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Poe, Ranking
Member Keating, members of the committee.
I am pleased to testify about NAFTA on behalf of the
American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial
Organizations, representing 12\1/2\ million working people in
every sector of our economy, including mining, retail,
manufacturing, transportation, public service, and
construction.
While CEOs and global corporations have generally benefited
from NAFTA, it has failed the working people of North America.
While it has increased the amount of trade between Mexico,
Canada, and the United States, it has also cost jobs, depressed
wages, weakened worker negotiating power, and destabilized
communities across all three countries.
Trade will always be disruptive, both creating and
destroying jobs, but NAFTA's rules redistributed income
upwards, providing rewards to the wealthiest and most powerful,
while making it tougher to succeed for the rest of us. Trade
does not inevitably have to redistribute income in this manner.
So if we change the rules, we can change the outcomes.
That is why today's hearing is so important. The
renegotiation process that began in August is continuing even
as we meet today here in Washington, DC. Unfortunately, due to
the secrecy of the talks, we cannot discuss at this open
hearing the specifics of the texts that each party is
proposing.
But we do know some of the general outlines. Canada has
been very transparent about its ambition to protect its workers
from being undercut by U.S. and Mexican policies that suppress
wages by limiting the negotiating power of working people. And
the U.S. has been equally transparent about its proposal to
limit NAFTA's special legal privileges for foreign investors,
which act as a subsidy for U.S. employers who outsource to
Mexico.
The AFL-CIO believes these proposals represent positive
steps toward the transformation of NAFTA that is necessary to
reverse its race-to-the-bottom model. We also commend
Ambassador Lighthizer and his team for their willingness to
consult with Labor.
But initial steps and respectful consultations are not
sufficient to provide confidence that the future of NAFTA will
vary from its past. To truly set up a fair and level playing
field, NAFTA, in renegotiation, must address labor issues that
were basically swept under the rug the first time around.
NAFTA's labor and environment side deals must be replaced with
clear, effective, binding rules in the core text.
Put simply, NAFTA's side agreements don't work. Over 23
years, they have done nothing to ensure that NAFTA's labor
rules are monitored or enforced, including in the case of
Mexico, where the government cooperates with employers and
employer-dominated unions to keep wages low and workers from
having an independent voice in the workplace. Indeed, just last
week, two senators from Mexico's ruling party introduced a bill
that would undermine constitutional amendments as well as
commitments already made to the U.S.
This failure to address longstanding denials of worker
rights and freedoms in Mexico is a key reason that NAFTA has
not raised wages, benefits, or freedoms for North American
families. If effectively addressing Mexico's entrenched system
of labor repression is not part of the NAFTA renegotiation,
there is little chance that it will stop hurting North American
families.
For this committee, this issue is critical. Working people,
not just in the United States but around the globe, have been
expressing more and more doubt about the current model of
globalization--not about trade, but about global economic rules
that reward exploitation and pollution, that fail to protect
migrant workers, that deny working families open access to
global rulemaking, that provide special privileges to Wall
Street banks and brand-name pharmaceutical companies, and that
make the American Dream harder to reach, particularly for the
two-thirds of working Americans who lack a bachelor's degree.
Congress should demand that NAFTA negotiators think bigger.
Negotiators must consider how to incorporate rules that allow
the U.S. to develop manufacturing policy to bring new family-
wage jobs to our industrial heartland. The new NAFTA should
also include rules to combat tax avoidance and promote
infrastructure investments. Without such rules, disinvestment
in the U.S. economy will continue to undermine productivity and
the middle class.
For NAFTA to have a bright future, it must incorporate
lessons learned from mistakes of the past, including the failed
9-year case against Guatemala. A new NAFTA that addresses these
issues should be viewed as the first of a new line of trade
deals that have the confidence of the people making the
products and providing the services that are traded.
I will stop here, and I am happy to answer any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Drake follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Poe. Thank you.
Thank all of you.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Just answer this question ``yes'' or ``no''; it is easy.
Has NAFTA benefited the United States?
Mr. Farnsworth?
Mr. Farnsworth. Yes.
Mr. Poe. Mr. Allford?
Mr. Allford. Yes.
Mr. Poe. And Ambassador?
Mr. Negroponte. Yes.
Mr. Poe. Ms. Drake?
Ms. Drake. No.
Mr. Poe. Three to one.
Mr. Allford, you heard the testimony of Ms. Drake. And you
started out as a single owner, inventor, businessperson,
worker. You were all of the above when you started. You said
NAFTA has helped you. You have 65 employees. Is that correct?
Mr. Allford. That is correct.
Mr. Poe. How much of your trade--how much do you trade with
Mexico? Can you give us a percentage?
Mr. Allford. Over the last 3 years, it has been 15 percent
of our revenues, but it fluctuates year to year.
Mr. Poe. Okay. How about Canada?
Mr. Allford. Again, the same, 15 percent.
Mr. Poe. What would happen to your business if the United
States hit the road with NAFTA?
Mr. Allford. We would probably lay off 15 people.
Mr. Poe. Ambassador, the renegotiation with NAFTA is taking
place now. What should we do, the United States do, to make it
better, specifically?
Mr. Negroponte. Well, I think some of the changes, the new
concepts that were introduced to the Trans-Pacific Partnership,
which, of course, we have not entered into--we have withdrawn
from that agreement. But in that TPP negotiation, things like
intellectual property protection, e-commerce, updating the
labor and environmental provisions, those kinds of features are
things that I believe ought to also be introduced into a
bilateral--or into the NAFTA discussion.
And my understanding is that they have been, although, like
Ms. Drake, I haven't seen the specific language being
discussed, but----
Mr. Poe. So you agree with her that we need to update the
labor provisions in NAFTA?
Mr. Negroponte. Yes. And I----
Mr. Poe. For the United States. That would benefit the
United States.
Mr. Negroponte. Right. And just as a reminder of the
history of this, I think we have to remember that in 1993 and
1994 the labor and environmental provisions were sort of an
afterthought. In other words, Mr. Bush signed the agreement,
and then Mr. Clinton, as a condition, when he came into office,
for actually going through with the agreement, insisted on
negotiating these environmental and labor accords. And so it
really was an afterthought. I think now it is less so.
Mr. Poe. Mr. Farnsworth, I mentioned in my opening
statement that United States policy, economic policy, foreign
policy, whatever you want to call it, we seem to get involved
in working with countries across the seas and trying to help
their economy, but we seem to ignore our neighbors,
specifically helping the economy of Mexico, which I think not
only helps Mexico, it helps us.
Do you agree with that statement?
Mr. Farnsworth. Judge Poe, I strongly agree with that
statement, and I thank you for raising that as a priority of
this hearing.
Mexico also has politics, and Mexicans will go to the polls
in July for a Presidential election. It is too early, at this
point, to declare who is going to be the winner in Mexico, but
simply to say that, to the extent they feel that the United
States is being a partner that is looking to distance the
relationship rather than make it closer, that could very well
encourage folks to vote for candidates in the Mexican process
who may take a view of the United States that is less
charitable.
And the last thing we would want, in my view, would be to
have a Mexico that views the United States in the way that we
had in terms of the relationship back before NAFTA was
finalized.
We have to remember that the recent relationship over the
last 23, 24 years is actually not the traditional relationship
that Mexico and the United States have had. That relationship
tended to be more acrimonious at times, but, at the best of
times, benign.
Now, over the last 23, 24 years, we have had the
opportunity for real, intensive, and mutually supportive
cooperation across a range of issues, yes, on the economy but
also on the security side and on the migration side, and that
would be put immediately at risk. Mexico has its own interests;
they might view some of these issues differently. And I think
we have to remember that.
Mr. Poe. Historically, the relationship between Mexico and
the United States, especially Mexico and Texas, has been tense,
in my opinion, and has changed for the better but slowly. I
think we need to work with our next-door neighbors and look at
them closer than we start--people across the seas.
And one last question. Does Mexico and Canada want to
renegotiate NAFTA? Anybody can weigh on this. Just ``yes'' or
``no.''
Mr. Farnsworth. Yes, they have indicated a willingness to
do so.
Mr. Poe. Ambassador, I think you wanted to say something?
Mr. Negroponte. Yes, sir. I think they do, but within
limits. I think there are some provisions that have been
suggested that I think they probably would not be willing to
accept. For example, a sunset provision, a 5-year sunset
provision, would be one, I think, rather significant example
of----
Mr. Poe. A sunset provision is bad for business, wouldn't
you think?
Mr. Negroponte. Well, it is hard to make an investment----
Mr. Poe. That is right.
Mr. Negroponte [continuing]. If you only have 5 years.
Mr. Poe. I will yield to the ranking member, Mr. Keating
from Massachusetts.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, indeed, a lot has happened over the last decades since
the NAFTA agreement was negotiated. One of those areas is
really--and I mentioned the growth of Mr. Allford's business is
indicating that--the growth of artificial intelligence and
robotics and the new industries there.
So I would like to ask you all, you know, given that, you
know, what importance in retraining workers and preparing them
for new industries should be part of this agreement in terms of
promoting this? You know, can we use this opportunity to deal
with, you know, the dislocation that comes from these new
industries? Can we use this to make sure that American workers
have the option of retraining and have the resources to do it,
in preparing them for these new industries?
Ms. Drake?
Ms. Drake. Thank you.
I think not only can we but we must do that.
The problem is that all the training and education in the
world doesn't create one single job. So, while we are investing
in training and education to get U.S. workers up to a world-
class level, we also have to make the investments that will
help create the jobs, so promoting innovation, investing in
infrastructure, making the U.S. a more attractive place to
invest.
Right now, it takes as long for a freight train to get from
Los Angeles to Chicago as to just get through Chicago. And
compare that to the investments, for example, that China is
making in its infrastructure that makes it an attractive place
to invest.
So we need to combine training and education to prepare
workers and to retrain workers who have lost their jobs, but we
also need to do the homework to make sure that we are creating
those jobs for the trained workers to go into.
Mr. Keating. I think, incidentally, as I have talked to
business leaders and I asked them to prioritize their needs,
enhancing our infrastructure is either one or two in everyone's
comments. And that is one reason I am concerned, quite frankly,
about this tax plan, because there is going to be no money left
for that. And I believe infrastructure should be, if it is not
parallel, incorporated with our plans.
You mentioned the Guatemalan case. Is there anything--and
this is open to all our panelists--is there anything that we
should learn from that case in terms of reshaping this
agreement?
Ms. Drake. I will start, that the Guatemalan case, it
lasted for more than 9 years. So one thing is just in terms of
timeliness and delay.
But, secondly, there is no question on the world stage that
Guatemala is not enforcing its laws, any laws--labor laws,
criminal laws of any kind. The U.N. High Commissioner on Human
Rights has an office there to deal specifically with rule-of-
law issues and, in particular, freedom of association and human
rights in the economic sphere. That is exactly what we are
talking about.
But because the CAFTA, the Central American Free Trade
Agreement, limited the way that we could enforce labor
obligations--it had to be in a manner affecting trade and a
sustained or recurring course of action, or inaction--the panel
said the U.S. had failed to prove its case.
So what we have to do is make sure that these additional
hurdles to labor enforcement aren't repeated in the NAFTA.
Labor obligations should be as enforceable as every other
obligation, and right now, with that language, they are not.
Mr. Keating. Yeah.
I think a final question--and the panel can answer the
previous question or this, as they see fit. But looking at
changes that have occurred over this time and what we should
take into consideration, do you think there should be
commitments about climate change as part of the NAFTA or trade
agreement negotiations? And why or why not?
Ms. Drake. I would say absolutely. And the reason why is we
would not want to lose high-value manufacturing, in particular,
to a trading partner that says, ``Pollute all you want.
Contribute to global warming all you want. You can produce
here, and it will be cheaper.'' And the problem is that
everyone has to live with the effects of putting that high
carbon output into the global environment.
Mr. Keating. Ambassador?
Mr. Negroponte. Yeah, I think that--I took a look at the
TPP language, and I would say it is good in terms of
encouraging proper environmental behavior, but I don't think it
goes so far as to impose enforcement within the agreement
itself. I think it allows for domestic enforcement in each of
the cases. But I think it goes farther than the agreement we
had back in 1993, in terms of encouraging the right kind of
environmental policies.
And having dealt with both Canada and Mexico on
environment, I think they both want to make the environment
better. I don't think there is any doubt about it. When I got
to Mexico, you could barely see in front of your nose, there
was so much particulate matter in the air. There was leaded
gas; they hadn't gotten rid of leaded gas yet.
Mr. Keating. I am encouraged, myself. I think that is one
area where we have the three countries sharing some of these
values together. And together, if we move forward on this, it
will be a strong example for other agreements as we go forward.
So it is great to have some common areas where we can agree.
And I want to thank you. This is a fascinating area. I am
so pleased you are here.
And I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Massachusetts.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mast.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that.
You know, I only have 5 minutes, so I don't want to
necessarily hear from everybody on each one of these questions,
but I do generally open this up to each and every one of you,
whoever champs at the bit first.
But I want to start by asking a little bit about e-commerce
and some of the provisions that we should be looking at to
strengthen what is going on with NAFTA and e-commerce in
benefiting the United States of America.
I mean, obviously, that is always a fair thing to say. We
can assume that Canada will be looking at any NAFTA 2.0 to
strengthen provisions for Canada. Mexico would be looking to do
the same. I think they rightfully fear any intrusion of
products coming in from Asia, which is probably the way most
Americans feel about products that have come in from other
places, even throughout our own region.
But what do you see as things that we can do to strengthen
e-commerce through any NAFTA 2.0 for the United States of
America?
Don't all start at once.
Mr. Farnsworth. There is one thing that we could do. We
have tried already in multiple fora, and it resides with the
Government of Mexico to make this decision, but we could change
the de minimus levels for package delivery from the United
States to Mexico. From an e-commerce perspective, that would
have a potentially dramatic impact.
Mr. Mast. Do you see the other players, Canada and Mexico,
being willing participants for compromise in this region?
Mr. Farnsworth. As I say, this has been a perennial issue
between the United States and Mexico. They have indicated that
they are not ready to entertain those proposals, but I think we
need to continue pushing forward on that.
And this is an entire industry that really didn't even
exist when NAFTA was first negotiated. And I think the broader
point here is something that bears focus. You know, if you
think back to, for example, the automobile that you were
driving in 1993, mine had a tape deck in it and that was about
it. Now, the automobiles are literally driving themselves.
I mean, the world has changed so fundamentally, and NAFTA,
the provisions in the auto sector and every other sector that
are included, actually still maintain the provisions, in large
measure, of the world as it existed in 1994, when NAFTA went
into effect.
This is something that, from the updating perspective, we
really need to have a hard look at. And it can actually help
the innovation agenda for all three economies. But there are
some sand in the gears, like the one that you have just
referred to. I think that would be a good place to start.
Mr. Mast. Are you pointing, to some degree, in terms of the
origin of parts and the percentage that we need in, say, a U.S.
automobile, 62 percent of it being made in the region,
something like that?
Mr. Farnsworth. Certainly, rules of origin plays into that,
absolutely. And this is a very complicated issue, there is no
question about it. We have to be careful here. With the right
intentions, if we try to manage rules of origin in a way that
is ultimately counterproductive from a commercial perspective,
we could actually decrease production in the North American
zone and force that production overseas in a way that is
unhelpful to job creation in the United States.
So this is something that is currently being negotiated
among the three parties right now. It is something the U.S.
administration has made a very high priority, and it is
something that we have to watch very carefully.
Mr. Mast. Yes, Ambassador? By all means.
Mr. Negroponte. I think that, in part, what Mr. Farnsworth
is referring to is the fact that our negotiators are asking for
an explicit U.S. content of--I believe they are asking for 50
percent with respect to automobiles, as opposed to a North
America-wide content of the 62.5 percent that you referred to.
And I think there is real concern amongst people who look
at this that, if we were to insist on that, it would damage the
competitiveness of vehicles made in North America. And it
wouldn't have the effect, necessarily, of driving production
back to the United States. I think it might be taken offshore
to places like Asia and Europe.
Mr. Mast. And that is what we are looking for, is
production here, jobs here. This is something that we want to
see. I heard a little jab over there on taxes. I think one of
the most important points we can make, even--it came from a
Democrat President. John F. Kennedy talked about how
paradoxical it is, the relationship between lowering taxes and
increasing revenue. One of my favorite quotes that exists out
there.
But in the aim of talking a little bit more about jobs, I
have one more question, and that is, do you see anything within
NAFTA that we could be renegotiating specifically to actually
put Asia a little bit more on its heels and not have to worry
about, necessarily, the loss there but actually put them on
their heels and put them on the defensive?
Ms. Drake. I would say one of the recommendations that the
AFL-CIO made was this commitment to work together as a three-
party bloc to make sure that we are addressing tax avoidance so
the taxes that are due are collected and able to be invested in
infrastructure; commitments to invest by all three countries in
infrastructure so that we can build that back up and make this
an attractive place.
And, finally, something that is very important is to have
all three countries work together to cooperate on enforcement
when there are non-NAFTA parties doing trade cheating, dumping,
subsidizing, whatever it is, to work together to cooperate on
enforcement. And that would make the U.S. enforcement a lot
stronger.
Mr. Mast. Very fair. Thank you.
Thank you for your time. Thank you for your answers.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Titus.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Negroponte, you and Mr. Farnsworth both referenced in
your comments concern that if this negotiation goes awry or if
the U.S. pulls out of NAFTA that we will return to being
distant neighbors with Mexico. I think you said the
relationship in the past wasn't quite as copacetic as it is
today.
I wonder what you both think the President's anti-Mexico
rhetoric and call to build a wall and have them pay for it is
doing for our relationship with Mexico and the potential
negotiations. And if this fails, do you think a wall will be
able to stop the millions who will suffer as a result of the
economic consequences?
Mr. Negroponte. Well, I think in atmospheric terms, I don't
think that kind of rhetoric goes down particularly well in
Mexico, and I think it contributes to a sense that the
President may not regard Mexico and the Mexican people as
highly as they would like.
But if you go to the core of it and talk to them about it
in depth, what they really care about is the NAFTA and the
trading relationship, and they want to see that renewed. And I
think they are prepared to tolerate a certain amount of
rhetoric provided the practical results are beneficial to them.
Ms. Titus. And what about in this election that is coming
up? You mentioned that perhaps someone less favorable to the
U.S. would get elected because of some of this rhetoric.
Would you weigh in, Mr. Farnsworth?
Mr. Farnsworth. Yes, ma'am. And thank you for the question.
And I agree with Ambassador Negroponte. It is not particularly
helpful, and it stigmatizes, in some way, the relationship. And
people don't necessarily appreciate that.
The one thing about--in reference to your question about
the border wall, Ms. Drake referenced infrastructure within the
United States, which I think is absolutely correct. I am
actually from Chicago, and I can verify that traffic there is
complicated. But to the extent that we are also building
additional obstructions or obstacles with our border with
Mexico, that is only going to make the commercial relationship
that much more complicated, particularly in sectors that final
production is not in one country or the other but that
production actually crosses the border multiple times--for
example, in the auto sector. And each time, if the border is
congested or complicated, that reduces the efficiency of
production, raises the cost of production, and ultimately make
U.S. manufacturing less competitive.
And we have to remember that final goods that are exported
from Mexico, according to the National Bureau of Economic
Research, actually include some 40 percent of U.S. content.
So, as we are making that border more complicated to cross,
we are actually impacting the commercial relationship in a way
that I think is very, very compelling, and something we need to
think hard before we do it.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
I would also like to ask you about tourism. I represent Las
Vegas, and I co-chair the Travel and Tourism Caucus. And our
greatest source of tourists are Mexico and Canada. I think half
of all international visits came from those two countries--18.7
million last year from Mexico, 19.3 million from Canada. But we
have seen a decrease, according to the Department of Commerce's
National Travel and Tourism Office, from Mexico this past year,
and some of that is tied to that same rhetoric that I
mentioned.
Could you discuss how a poor renegotiation or withdrawing
from NAFTA would address tourism as part of our economic
interaction with these two countries? Anybody.
Mr. Negroponte. Well, I think maybe in the broader sense.
If the NAFTA fails and then it has negative, adverse economic
consequences on Canada and Mexico--I could see a devaluation of
their currency, for example, and then there would be all sorts
of knock-on effects which might, over time, affect the ability
of Mexicans to travel to the United States.
But visiting the U.S. is near and dear to their hearts. You
know, a lot of visa applicants in those visa lines in Mexico
are wanting to take their children to Disneyland, right? I
mean, that is what they want to do, or go to Las Vegas or visit
the other tourist highlights in the country.
Ms. Titus. Mr. Farnsworth?
Mr. Farnsworth. Well, again, I think that, in the broadest
sense, things that would indicate that the United States is a
less welcoming environment to anybody coming to visit would, I
think, depress the interest from Mexicans and others, frankly,
in visiting the United States as tourists.
Ms. Titus. Big difference in a wall and a welcome mat.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Poe. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
bringing us together to talk about such an important issue
between North American countries.
I was recently in Mexico. I travel as part of the U.S.-
Mexico Interparliamentary Group. It is heartbreaking to hear
how offended--or how much our administration, our current
President has offended our Mexican nationals and how he has
negatively impacted our relationship with our closest neighbors
to the south, neighbors who we depend on for our national
security and great partner on this issue.
Ms. Drake, I agree with you on the labor and environmental
issues. I think it is unfortunate that it was a second thought,
it wasn't negotiated. And I think that this is an opportunity
for us to really bring about labor issues, wages, and climate
change issues, although we don't want to call it ``climate
change issues'' anymore. I get that. ``Weather pattern
changes,'' as I refer to them.
Friday night, I had some gifts for my little grandbaby, and
I was wrapping them. The toy was made here, the wrapping was
made in China, but the ribbon--and I took a picture of it. It
is on my social media. And I am happy for you if you follow me.
The ribbon says it is made in Mexico from materials
manufactured in the USA, Rancho Cucamonga, California, 91730.
That is my neighboring city. And I was so proud of that that I
had to tweet out that photo, because that is NAFTA.
I traveled through my district and visited 17 manufacturers
that say they are dependent on NAFTA to trade with--you know,
within businesses across. That means that those California
workers, those California companies that are a part of the
Paris Agreement, that are committed to ensuring that we have
air quality that we can all be proud of for our future
generations, will be denied those jobs. So, rather than
abandoning, you know, an agreement that might have not
benefited all of our communities in all of our States in the
U.S.--as a matter of fact, some parts of Mexico are just as
angry as some parts of the U.S. Southern Mexico, for example,
has not benefited a single job, you know, from the NAFTA
agreement. And they would say, just like some of our States
would say in rural counties, it has negatively impacted them.
So how do we focus on those areas and ensure that, whether
it is infrastructure--what are some of the ways that we can
bring about this dialogue to an administration that is so much
opposed to it?
Ms. Drake?
Ms. Drake. I would start by abandoning the us-versus-them
rhetoric. It really isn't the United States versus Mexico
versus China. And, in fact, the firms that are competing, the
firms are global; the profits are global; the places where
profits are booked and taxes are avoided are global. The only
thing that is not global are the workers themselves and the
worker rights.
So it really takes a change of our frame of how are we
looking at this and how do we give businesses the right
incentives to create jobs, not just in the U.S. but--of course
in the U.S., but also in Mexico and in Canada, and to make sure
that those are good jobs, family-wage jobs.
You know, there are millions more living in poverty in
Mexico now than before NAFTA. It is not all attributable to
NAFTA, but there are certain things that all three countries
can do to try to make a more progressive economy and to create
not just any job, not just a job that has no security, but
really say, ``We are going to work on this together.''
And then what we are doing, if we are able to do that, in
the context of NAFTA, to say we are going to also continue to
trade and continue to grow the trade relationship, as Chairman
Poe referenced earlier, it is good for the U.S. not just
because you are raising wages there so we get a better labor
market here, but you are creating new customers for U.S.
exports. There are so many in Mexico right now that aren't
really participating in the global economy and can't afford to
buy American goods.
So how can we do all of that? And there are lots of ways,
and it starts with labor rights, but there are many other
investments we can make.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair recognizes Ms. Frankel from Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you, Mr. Poe.
Thank you to our witnesses.
So I want to pick up where my colleague Mrs. Torres left
off and just say I agree that we have to--when we rework this
agreement, we have to improve the labor standards and also
environmental standards.
I want to look at this from a little different angle, maybe
more from the aspect of this committee on terrorism. That is, I
have very mixed emotions when I think about this, because I
want to do everything possible to improve America's economy; we
also have to be concerned about our security.
And so I think when--Ms. Drake, I like your approach. It is
not us against them. Because my big concern is, if we allow
Mexico to go downhill, to have more economic losses, well,
things are going to start to happen that we don't want to
happen, which will be probably more illegal immigration, more
violent drug trading, more border issues.
And so I would like to hear some comment on that from
whoever would like to.
Mr. Negroponte. If I could, Mr. Chairman, I would just like
to say I think the cooperation on the security front with
Mexico has been at an unprecedented level. I mean, some
examples would of course be the fact that we have been
cooperating on immigration issues, not only on our common
border but also down on Mexico's border with Central America.
So I think that is important. We have been, lately, doing a lot
of good work on transnational crime and that kind of activity.
And perhaps one that is really politically very significant
for Mexico, when I was Ambassador down there 25 years ago,
Mexico wouldn't extradite criminals to the United States, and
now they do it, and they do it without any difficulty
whatsoever. And, to my mind, that really represents a major
shift in their approach toward cooperation with our country.
Ms. Frankel. And I assume, from what you are saying, that
if we just really walked away from NAFTA, that the border
cooperation and the other cooperation might fail.
Mr. Negroponte. Well, I certainly wouldn't want to wish
that, nor would anybody, I don't suppose. But it might make it
a little harder for them and give them a little less room for
maneuver, politically, if they were working in the context of a
failed NAFTA.
Ms. Frankel. Mr. Farnsworth, I see you--and Mr. Allford,
you have both been shaking your head--and Ms. Drake. Who wants
to----
Mr. Farnsworth. I have nothing in particular to add, other
than to associate myself with Ambassador Negroponte's comments.
I think that is exactly right.
And we also have to remember Mexico is not doing this
cooperation necessarily to please the United States. It is
doing it because it is in its own interests. And those
interests will continue no matter what happens on the north
side of the border.
So there will be, in my view, some continued level of
cooperation. The question will be how easy it will be, how
politically possible it will be, and what extent it will be.
And you could paint a scenario, I think, quite easily that the
next President of Mexico, whoever he or she may be, could not
have the same level of political room to maneuver to cooperate
with the United States. So I think that is a real risk. I
wouldn't think that the cooperation would end, but I think
perhaps it would become much more fraught.
Ms. Frankel. Ms. Drake, did you want to add to that?
Ms. Drake. Yes. Thank you.
I would just add that NAFTA has not been a magic bullet on
this front. The noted economist and author Jeff Faux has done
some really good work about how some of the campesinos who were
pushed off the land after NAFTA ended up in the
narcotrafficking regime.
And we also must note that rule of law continues to be a
problem. A couple of years ago, 43 student teachers were
kidnapped in Mexico. We still don't have a resolution of that.
And just within the past couple of weeks, we had two labor
activists who were assassinated in a worker strike in a mine.
So we have lots of work to do. And the U.S. could do a much
better job of pushing Mexico to make sure that it protects
workers and women as part of its rule-of-law issues.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you.
Mr. Allford?
Mr. Allford. As you can tell, I believe that trade creates
jobs. I ship machines overseas that allow people to build high-
value-added products, not just wrapping ribbons. If everybody
has a job, they are able to feed their family, the world is a
more tranquil place.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you.
Thank you all for your response.
I yield back.
Mr. Poe. I thank the gentlelady.
I want to thank all of you all, or all y'all, as we say as
a plural to ``y'all'' in Texas, for being here today. The
testimony has been excellent, and we appreciate your time and
your information.
There may be questions that members of the panel may have.
They will submit that through the Chair to you in writing. And
then we would like a timely response, preferably before the
NAFTA agreement is reached.
And, with that, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
