- DEVELOPMENT FINANCE IN ASIA: U.S. ECONOMIC STRATEGY AMID CHINA'S BELT AND ROAD

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEVELOPMENT FINANCE IN ASIA: U.S. ECONOMIC STRATEGY AMID CHINA'S BELT
AND ROAD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-101

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-552PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin                        ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
VACANT

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

TED S. YOHO, Florida, Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DINA TITUS, Nevada
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
ANN WAGNER, Missouri

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Mr. Daniel F. Runde, William A. Schreyer Chair and director of
the Project on Prosperity and Development, Center for Strategic
and International Studies......................................     6
Mr. Roy Kamphausen, senior vice president for research, The
National Bureau of Asian Research..............................    21
The Honorable Jonathan N. Stivers, commissioner, U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission (former Assistant
Administrator, Bureau for Asia, U.S. Agency for International
Development)...................................................    34

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Ted S. Yoho, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific: Prepared statement....................................     4
Mr. Daniel F. Runde: Prepared statement..........................     9
Mr. Roy Kamphausen: Prepared statement...........................    24
The Honorable Jonathan N. Stivers: Prepared statement............    37

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    62
Hearing minutes..................................................    63
Mr. Daniel F. Runde: Material submitted for the record...........    64
Written responses from the witnesses to questions submitted for
the record by the Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California..........................    65

DEVELOPMENT FINANCE IN ASIA:
U.S. ECONOMIC STRATEGY AMID
CHINA'S BELT AND ROAD

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 15, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:45 p.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Yoho
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Yoho. Hello, everybody. The subcommittee will come to
order.
Members present will be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for
5 calendar days to allow statements, questions, and extraneous
material for the record, subject to length limitations in the
rules.
Good afternoon, and thank you to my colleagues on the
subcommittee and the panel for coming together to discuss the
future of U.S. economic engagement. And I have to give a shout
out to Mr. Engel, the ranking member. He is in Financial
Services, and they have 15 votes teed up, ready to go, so he
will be here as soon as he can.
President Trump has just returned from his first trip to
the Asia-Pacific, a region the White House has taken to calling
the Indo-Pacific region. The long trip, which began on November
3, is the longest trip to Asia by an American President in more
than 25 years and a fitting reminder of the importance of the
region to American interests.
Going forward, the trip will surely be an inflection point
for the U.S. policies toward the region. One of the most
important aspects of this policy will be our economic
engagement, which is what we have gathered to discuss here
today.
The discussion about U.S. economic engagement in Asia
frequently centers on trade, but the Asia-Pacific is still a
developing region, and too often the discussion does not give
sufficient attention to what the United States must do before
the important development and trade promotion work that is a
precursor to robust trading relationships.
The United States already has the tools needed for this
important work. U.S. development finance institutions--OPIC,
the Overseas Private Investment Corporation; the USTDA, which
is the U.S. Trade and Development Agency; and others--leverage
private investment to promote development and economic activity
abroad.
These institutions are increasingly important because their
work is in line with a larger tectonic shift in how capital
moves in the developing world. Over the last few decades,
private capital has outstripped assistance from donor
governments to constitute 90 percent of financial flows into
developing countries. Deepening U.S. development finance
authorities will make foreign assistance more effective by
working with this trend rather than against it.
A model focused on public-private partnerships would also
be more sustainable in times of budgetary constraints.
Development finance institutions frequently operate at little
or no cost. OPIC remitted $239 million to the U.S. Treasury in
fiscal year 2016.
And, finally, a development-finance-based approach is
rooted in U.S. national interests as well, promoting U.S.
business abroad and opening up new export opportunities for
U.S. industries.
Despite these advantages, development finance is
consistently undervalued as a part of overall development
assistance strategy. To begin to remedy this, I have introduced
the Economic Growth and Development Act, which would create a
one-stop shop for private-sector participation in overseas
development, and I am currently working on more expansive
legislation that would consolidate, reform, and improve U.S.
development finance mechanisms.
I hope that the panel will share with us today their own
recommendations for improving our development finance efforts.
While U.S. economic engagement in Asia adjusts, China's
economic engagement strategy, known as ``One Belt, One Road,''
or, more recently, the ``Belt and Road Initiative,'' is well
underway. The Belt and Road Initiative itself is a development
finance undertaking--a multitrillion-dollar response to the
substantial unmet infrastructure needs of the Asia-Pacific
region, designed to build roads, bridges, ports, and other
infrastructure across Eurasia and the Pacific and Indian Oceans
to increase China's economic connectivity with the nations who
have joined.
While infrastructure investment is desperately needed
across the region, there is more to the Belt and Road
Initiative than meets the eye. Though China has promoted the
program as generous ``win-win'' assistance to its fellow
developing nations, the Belt and Road seems motivated primarily
by self-interest.
Belt and Road projects are financed by Chinese institutions
at high rates not typically found in the development context,
conducted by Chinese corporations that are often state-owned
enterprises, utilize Chinese labor and material, and seem to
add little to local economies and can bring unsustainable debt
burdens.
The program also seems too closely aligned with China's
strategic and military interests to be more than just mere
coincidence. In one illustrative example, China built an
economically unviable port in the hometown of Sri Lanka's
corrupt former leader, converted its interest to equity when
Sri Lanka could not service the resulting debt, and now owns a
port along its maritime energy supply route through the Indian
Ocean.
In contrast, U.S. development finance efforts can offer an
alternative that is healthier for the region while furthering
our own interests. U.S. programs have the high standards and
transparency that Belt and Road projects often lack and are
demand-driven by market forces, not state-owned corporations
and military strategists.
So, as we discuss U.S. development finance in Asia today,
it will be helpful to do so in the context of China's Belt and
Road Initiative. And I hope the panel can discuss how U.S.
Efforts can counter the potential negative aspects of the Belt
and Road Initiative.
Without objection, the witnesses' written statements will
be entered into the hearing record.
And I now turn to the ranking member, Mr. Deutch. Do you
have a comment you want to say?
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yoho follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Deutch. I do not.
Mr. Yoho. Okay.
And, with that, we are thankful to be joined today by Mr.
Daniel F. Runde, the Schreyer chair and director of the Project
on Prosperity and Development at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies; Mr. Roy Kamphausen, senior vice
president for research at the National Bureau of Asian
Research; and the Honorable Jonathan N. Stivers, a Commissioner
of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission and
former Assistant Administrator to the USAID bureau for Asia.
And, with that, we are going to start with your
testimonies. You guys know how the buttons work and the timers
and all that? That is good.
Mr. Runde, if you will, let's hear your testimony. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF MR. DANIEL F. RUNDE, WILLIAM A. SCHREYER CHAIR AND
DIRECTOR OF THE PROJECT ON PROSPERITY AND DEVELOPMENT, CENTER
FOR STRATEGIC AND INTERNATIONAL STUDIES

Mr. Runde. Thank you, Chairman Yoho, Ranking Member
Sherman, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for inviting me to testify before you today.
I hope to use my time to talk about two things: First, the
changed world in which we find ourselves, especially in Asia.
Simply put, China is eating our economic and diplomatic lunch
in Asia. Second, the critical role that enhanced U.S.
development finance capabilities can play in countering Chinese
economic influence as part of a larger U.S. economic strategy
for Asia. We need to take a series of concrete steps, as the
American Government, so that we can continue to lead and have
an ability to shape the future.
My bottom line is that the Congress can take a series of
steps to strengthen OPIC and other bilateral and multilateral
instruments of American power. Congress should spend its
limited political and policy time on strengthening and
reforming the institutions we already have, including
multilateral institutions, and take USAID's Power Africa model
and apply it to different sectors in Asia, including power and
infrastructure. I believe the United States will get much more
benefit out of a reformed and strengthened OPIC compared to a
merger of government offices and agencies.
Let me talk about change to Asia. While recognizing the
great diversity across the continent, it is safe to say this is
not your grandparents' Asia. Asia is much freer, is more
interested in trade and foreign direct investment, is rapidly
urbanizing and aging, needs to close a massive infrastructure
deficit, and wants a deeper partnership with the United States
around science, technology, and innovation. We need different
approaches in Asia.
We also need to understand what China is doing, because
China is a full-fledged soft-power competitor to the United
States. China has over 3 million young people joining its
workforce every year. Employing so many young people every year
is a real issue for China. China's need for jobs and access to
alternate trade routes has necessitated the creation of a new
model on different terms, one built on quick, one-stop-shop
financing and one that leverages its state-owned enterprises.
China also has displayed a willingness to periodically
overlook human rights, environmental or social standards in the
way that it approaches these things.
The One Belt, One Road initiative is a prime example of a
Chinese effort that leverages all aspects of this model
described above. It is also, frankly, a good idea. Recreating
the old Silk Road land roads, cutting transit times for goods
and services, would be an economic boon. We cannot stop One
Belt, One Road, nor should we. The United States and its allies
should instead seek to influence the soft infrastructure of One
Belt, One Road. And I have submitted some documents for the
record about that.
Let me move to development finance. Let me first define
``development finance institutions.'' Development finance
institutions are government or quasi-government institutions
that provide equity, loans, or other financial support for
private-sector projects in low- and middle-income countries.
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation is the United
States' DFI. DFIs are not a solution to all of our challenges
in Asia, but they must be part of a larger economic and
political strategy for Asia and the developing world.
DFIs are powerful and precise development tools, and DFIs
are one reason that there has been a massive expansion of cell
phones, for example, in Africa and Asia. In the late 1990s, no
normal investor believed that there was a mass consumer market
for cell phones. DFIs provided the capital and provided a
demonstration effect that others could make money in the
African cell phone sector.
As I said, though, DFIs are not a solution for every
problem, and they cannot do things that grants or technical
advice or diplomacy can do. DFIs usually need a private-sector
sponsor, a business partner. They provide money in the form of
a loan. They sometimes take a minority ownership position or
provide highly specialized advice.
DFIs need clear rules of the game. They need some level of
security and a functioning state. There are things that USAID
and MCC provide that DFIs can't, and there are things that USTD
and export credit agencies like U.S. Ex-Im Bank provide that
DFIs cannot.
So what are we to do about all this? Well, I think there
are several things this Congress should be doing. The first is
that the Congress should ask the administration to produce a
U.S. economic strategy to go with our national security
strategy.
Second, I would recommend that the Congress work with the
administration to provide the following enhanced instruments
for OPIC: OPIC is not permanently authorized. It ought to go to
a 10-year authorization. Congress needs to raise OPIC's ceiling
of total investments that it can make. It is currently $29
billion; it should go to $58 billion. OPIC ought to be able to
keep some of its profits.
OPIC ought to create a funding stream for early-stage
financing for innovators and entrepreneurs in developing
countries. We should dilute or remove the U.S.-content
requirement, especially in U.S. national-security-priority
countries. OPIC needs a limited amount of what is called equity
authority--basically, the ability to make minority ownership
stakes in a small number of projects.
And OPIC should dilute or even remove its so-called carbon
cap. This carbon cap puts a limit on carbon emissions related
to the totality of the projects financed by OPIC. President
Trump was just in Vietnam and talked about doing more projects
in Vietnam with OPIC. The carbon cap will hold back OPIC's
ability to work in Vietnam and other countries that are not the
poorest of the poor.
Development finance capabilities will only get us so far;
we need to do a lot more in trade. I know this is important to
you, Chairman. We need to make sure that the trade facilitation
agreement gets done in Asia. We need to provide the money for
it in the 150 account and then that AID and our diplomats at
the State Department follow through on that. That is a win-win
for the United States and for developing countries.
Fourth, regarding AID--and I know I am running out of
time--that we should take lessons from the Obama-era's Power
Africa and apply it to Asia. We also need a strategy for
exiting middle-income countries. And I would encourage AID to
return to the use of enterprise funds.
Regarding TDA, it is one of the best and most efficient
agencies in the U.S. Government. It does a series of things,
highly leverages its money. But I would seek a larger
congressional appropriation for TDA. I would not merge it with
OPIC for a series of reasons, in that they don't overlap almost
at all. I can answer questions about that.
Six, regarding the U.S. Ex-Im Bank, we need a fully
functioning Ex-Im Bank. It is completely absurd that we don't
have a functioning Ex-Im Bank. Currently, you can only approve
deals of only $10 million. There is currently $30 billion in
U.S. Ex-Im Bank applications waiting right now. This is crazy.
Seventh, our bilateral agencies and our multilateral
agencies need to move much more quickly and in a coordinated
way. Japan's aid agency and its DFI have reduced their door-to-
door approval of infrastructure projects to 11 months in
response to AIIB and the Chinese, and so should we.
Eighth--and I will stop here--with regard to multilateral
development banks, we need to rethink about how we use the
Asian Development Bank and the World Bank. The Asian
Development Bank is a great asset to the United States. If they
were to come to us for a special capital increase, I think we
should consider it. I believe this committee ought to consider
doing hearings about the United States and the Asian
Development Bank.
I will stop there.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Runde follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Yoho. No, I appreciate your input on that, and those
are all great points, and I look forward to hearing more about
that.
Mr. Kamphausen? Is that correct?
Mr. Kamphausen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Yoho. Good.

STATEMENT OF MR. ROY KAMPHAUSEN, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
RESEARCH, THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF ASIAN RESEARCH

Mr. Kamphausen. Chairman Yoho, Ranking Member Sherman, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today.
I am a China guy, and so my role is to talk about the Belt
and Road. And I am basing my comments largely on a recent
monograph that we published at NBR, and glad to provide a copy
to you, Mr. Chairman.
Since the establishment of the People's Republic of China
in 1949, the Chinese leadership has had two overwhelming
foreign policy goals: One, the restoration of what China
considers as its national domain and boundaries; and, two, the
restoration of China's historical position at the center of
Asia as the preponderant power in the region.
These two restorations are really the heart of what
President Xi Jinping in China has called his ``China dream''
for the rejuvenation of the great Chinese nation, which he
hopes to fulfill by the 100th anniversary of the founding of
the PRC in 2049.
And so, understood in the light of China's longstanding
foreign policy goals, the Belt and Road Initiative is, I
believe, an early test case which offers us a glimpse of the
sort of integration under Chinese-led norms that Beijing would
like to see emerge in Eurasia.
The Belt and Road Initiative is very important to the
Chinese leadership. As mentioned by the chairman in his opening
statement, more than $1 trillion has been dedicated, at least
in principle, to funding projects. President Xi Jinping is
personally engaged, including making an appearance at the
multinational Belt and Road Forum in May of this year in
Beijing. And the Belt and Road has been written into the
Chinese Communist Party charter in the most recent 19th Party
Congress. It tells us how important this initiative is to
leadership.
As an overview, the Belt and Road Initiative sets the
general long-term direction for China and seeks to mobilize and
coordinate the use of all available national resources--
political, economic, diplomatic, military, and ideological--to
pursue both internal, in terms of economic development, and
external, both strategic and national security objectives, in
an integrated way.
And so I would like to focus on how those three areas--
economic, security, and strategic--really come together from
Beijing's perspective.
On the economic side, one way to think of Belt and Road is
as a new Chinese stimulus package, similar to that introduced
after the 2008 global financial crisis. And it is intended to
sustain Chinese economic growth, the development goals
notwithstanding. The crucial difference is that, this time, the
activity will take place outside of Chinese territory, and, in
effect, the plan is to export some of the overcapacity that
developed as part of the response to the 2008 global financial
crisis.
From a security angle, in the near term, Belt and Road has
significant potential to increase China's military footprint in
the region, Central Asia, and beyond in an effort to secure
China's periphery, a central goal of the Chinese leadership.
The geographic scope of BRI extends over regions that,
together, form an arc of instability, where the security
situation can be volatile due to a variety of factors,
including ethnic and religious violence, territorial disputes,
and destabilizing spillovers.
And, finally, on the strategic side, the Belt and Road
Initiative is a way to secure China's periphery, address
internal security challenges, those which have international
linkages--and I am thinking primarily of terrorism here--and to
respond to the Chinese perception of a challenge from the
United States. Chinese authorities believe that, by providing
economic development, they will help secure China's most
restive provinces in the west of China, which have connections
to international terrorism originally in Central Asia.
More broadly, at a strategic level, Belt and Road reflects
Beijing's regional and global ambitions. It is an instrument to
consolidate China's position at the heart of Eurasia, in a
space where U.S. influence is rather limited. The initiative is
intended to counter what Beijing perceives as the U.S.'s
unacceptable containment of China off of its eastern seaboard.
So how does the Belt and Road actually expand Chinese
influence? Very briefly, China portrays itself as the
magnanimous provider of public goods through development
projects and proposes a list of possible areas for cooperation
under the umbrella of Belt and Road and then urges other
countries to get on board China's train of development. It
offers material incentives in the form of investment,
infrastructure projects, and general economic and security
benefits to members that choose to take advantage. But, in
return, it expects that recipient countries will tacitly agree
not to challenge China's core interests, criticize its posture,
or seek to change its political system.
But there are some predatory aspects of Belt and Road, and
I will end with these, just by ticking them off.
First, the bidding process. It is not at all clear that
there is any evidence of a competitive bidding process for
projects.
State subsidies. China's loans are, in reality, state
subsidies for China's companies to build infrastructure with
Chinese materials, using Chinese workers.
Third, it is not really a development effort. Only 23
percent of the Chinese aid funding falls under the OECD's
definition of aid, mostly given to projects without a
development intent and that have a grant element of under 25
percent.
Debt burden for host states. And the chairman referred to
this in his opening statement. Loans can be financially
unsustainable for poor countries--over 6 percent, in many
cases. Sri Lanka, for example, owes 10 percent of its debt to
China.
Who gets the jobs? Xi Jinping has said, since Belt and Road
was launched, more than 180,000 local jobs have been created,
but there is no transparent record of that.
Who gets the revenue? Revenue generation formulas from
infrastructure projects are completely unclear. For instance,
Pakistan will reportedly receive only about 9 percent of the
revenues from the terminal marine operations at the new Gwadar
Port.
And then there is the endemic corruption, environmental
impacts, economic leverage that China poses on countries that
fall under the program, and so forth.
So, in conclusion, I would submit that just because we in
the West may not have fully grasped what Belt and Road is all
about, it does not make the initiative foolish, unimportant, or
doomed to fail. For now, China has the initiative, and its
projects under Belt and Road have gained an undeniable
momentum.
But Beijing's plan to reshape the economic and political
map of Eurasia is still in its early stages, and there will be
many obstacles on the road ahead. The United States can and
must come up with a comprehensive strategy to better defend our
existing order in ways that serve our own national interests.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kamphausen follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Yoho. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Stivers, if you would.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JONATHAN N. STIVERS, COMMISSIONER,
U.S.-CHINA ECONOMIC AND SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION (FORMER
ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR, BUREAU FOR ASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT)

Mr. Stivers. Thank you.
Chairman, distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the invitation to testify today. It is an honor to be
back before this subcommittee, especially alongside such
distinguished colleagues.
Before I begin, I would like to make clear that the views I
express today are my own and not necessarily to be attributed
to the U.S.-China Commission.
This morning, the bipartisan U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission, on which I serve as a Commissioner,
submitted to Congress its 2017 annual report. The Commission is
tasked by Congress to examine the national security and foreign
policy implications of the U.S. trade and economic relationship
with China.
This year, we spent some time analyzing the One Belt, One
Road Initiative. We conclude that China is expanding its
presence on the world stage through both coercion and a charm
offensive, thereby creating pockets of influence, leverage, and
control. The charm offensive is typified by One Belt, One Road,
which seeks to bring more than 60 countries into China's
economic and strategic orbit.
It is time for a new U.S. economic and development strategy
for the Asia-Pacific region in order to effectively compete
with China's growing influence and investment. In my view, the
discussion about U.S. economic engagement in Asia has been
overly focused on trade policy. This new strategy should
prioritize development financing and our foreign assistance
tools, some of our greatest strengths, in a strategic way,
coordinated with our allies and partners, in order to advance
our national interest in a stable, prosperous, and democratic
Asia-Pacific region.
The Asia-Pacific region, which I include India in that, is
absolutely vital to the security and prosperity of the American
people. It is the most dynamic and one of the youngest and
fastest-growing regions of the world. U.S. companies invest
more in ASEAN and its members than our investment in China,
Japan, and India combined, and they are responsible for over
\1/2\ million U.S. jobs and has tremendous potential for future
U.S. exports.
In the coming years, the countries of this region will play
an increasingly pivotal role in world affairs. The question
isn't whether but how the Asia-Pacific region develops, and the
type of development will make all the difference. And there are
different competing models out there.
While the U.S. is consumed by a lot of other issues, China
is not only investing in becoming a high-tech powerhouse, which
our annual report describes in much detail, but it is also
placing itself at the center, strategically and economically,
of the fastest-growing region of the world.
China's One Belt, One Road Initiative includes about $900
billion worth of projects, mostly financed by the China
Development Bank. The state implicitly guarantees its debt, and
its assets dwarf those of the World Bank and other multilateral
development banks.
Key aspects of China's development model include: First,
relieving China's overcapacity in its slowing industrial and
construction sectors of its state-owned enterprises. In short,
as has been said earlier, China builds the infrastructure with
its own materials, its own workers, and sends the recipient
country the bill for it later. Less planning is devoted to the
impact or the sustainability of these projects for the country
and its impact on the people.
Second, expanding China's access to strategically important
maritime and overland trade routes. Page 3 of my written
testimony shows these routes in a nice map.
Third, gaining influence and using its new economic
leverage to coerce other countries.
Fourth, taking advantage of low standards on transparency,
leading to a higher debt burden for developing countries. And
while the international community and this Congress pursued
debt relief for poor countries two decades ago, China is now
reburdening these countries with predatory loans that create
dependence on China.
China often uses the term ``win-win'' to describe its
economic activities, but Asian officials sometimes joke that
``win-win'' usually means China wins two times.
While Asian governments generally want Chinese investment,
they would prefer more competition and higher-quality options.
In many cases, Chinese investment has sparked backlash because
its development model is exclusively focused on helping China,
and it often facilitates corruption, displaces communities, and
harms the environment.
It would be expensive for the U.S. to compete with China
dollar for dollar on building infrastructure in Asia. But due
to the limitations of China's development approach, it isn't
necessary. The U.S. Can compete with China for fewer dollars
and greater effectiveness if our resources are used in a
strategic way.
And so I would submit the following recommendations. I have
seven of them in my written testimony, but I will mention a few
here.
First, economic and development assistance to the East
Asia-Pacific region should be significantly increased.
Currently, the region only receives 3 percent of all
nonmilitary U.S. foreign assistance. These low levels ensure
that efforts to compete with China and Asia are vastly
underfunded. And making matters worse, the Trump administration
budget request included a 46-percent cut to development
assistance in the region.
The best way to compete with Chinese investment is to
provide the needed resources to increase our competitive
advantage in what we do the best: Global health, fighting
pandemics and infectious diseases, humanitarian assistance,
disaster relief, food security, environment protection,
governance and rule-of-law initiatives that promote stable
economies and democracies. These development initiatives are
tremendously successful, but, without the resources, we simply
can't adequately help shape this all-important region.
Second, the U.S. should provide stronger support for
institutions that are best positioned to compete with China on
infrastructure. Last week, in Asia, President Trump stated he
would support additional infrastructure development in Asia.
Unfortunately, these announcements are not consistent with his
budget request, which zeroed out OPIC, reduced funding for the
World Bank, and cut the U.S. contribution to the Japan-led
Asian Development Bank in half.
It is my understanding that the Trump administration is
considering some sort of larger development financing reform,
and I would be happy to have a discussion about that in more
depth with my colleagues and with the Members. But, in short, I
would say bringing our development institutions together under
one agency that improves coordination is a lot better than
creating yet another development agency bureaucracy with an
independent commission.
And then, third, as opposed to China, the U.S. has strong
allies and partners in the Asia-Pacific, and we should double
our development efforts to empower those counterweights, namely
India and ASEAN. We should assist India with gaining membership
to the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum, support Prime
Minister Modi's Act East policy, and help India with its own
domestic development challenges. And, in addition, a strong and
unified ASEAN has the potential to push back on China. And the
U.S. can help the ASEAN Secretariat become more effective.
And, also, on Taiwan, Taiwan has a new southbound policy as
it seeks to diversify its economy. And Taiwan has a lot to
bring to the table, with good development practices and a
democratic model. We should be finding ways, consistent with
the Taiwan Relations Act, to coordinate and utilize those
resources for both Taiwan and the U.S.'s larger goals.
So, in conclusion, Beijing's main advantage has been that,
for the last two decades, the U.S. has diverted its focus from
Asia while pursuing other challenges. The U.S. can no longer
ignore the strategic competition that is underway in the Asia-
Pacific region. And the challenge now is for the administration
and Congress to develop a more effective strategy to compete
with China and make sure it has the resources to be successful.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stivers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Yoho. I appreciate everybody's testimony. Great. You
guys are spot-on. And I look forward to this, because it is so
important, as you brought up.
Mr. Stivers, you brought up how we have kind of pivoted
from the Asia-Pacific over the last decade or so. The last
administration had a strategic patience, where we were kind of
just spectators on the sideline, and we can't afford to do
that. And China has run with the One Belt, One Road Initiative.
My records show that they have invested over $4 trillion to $5
trillion in the last decade. And it is an investment in the
future. You know, it is an investment in the future of their
development and trade and things like that. We need to make
sure that we are at the table.
And, you know, the thing that concerns me is, after the
19th Party Congress in China with Xi Jinping, he was quoted as
saying, ``China should take center stage in the world,'' adding
that ``no one should expect China to swallow anything that
undermines its interests.''
And we just did a codel, and we were in Vietnam, Singapore,
and Hong Kong, and while in Hong Kong, I reiterated these
words. And I brought up: These words sound threatening toward
America's interests, proposing China wants to supplant
America's leadership and knock us off the world stage. This
will not be tolerated. If China cares to share the world stage
with us or any other world powers, we would be willing to do
so. And then I asked them to please convey that message to
Beijing, which I am sure it was.
The important thing is, their initiative, like you brought
up and the members of the panel brought up, they are investing
in hard assets; they haven't learned the soft power. And all
you have to do is look at their past history, how they treated
Hong Kong, with the 50-year transition, the agreement, they are
not living up to that; how they treated South Korea. When South
Korea asked to have a THAAD system for their own security,
China retaliates against South Korea instead of North Korea and
does economic damage to South Korea.
The bottom line is it makes these countries--if America's
presence is not there economically, in trade, or in military
support, these countries are looking and they are not wanting
to but they are going to pivot closer to China. And it is not
just South Korea; it is the ASEAN nations.
And we have had the privilege of meeting with all the
Ambassadors from those nations. And it was interesting, because
we just had our 50th year anniversary of ASEAN, our 40th year
for involvement with that. And I asked them, why has ASEAN been
such a successful pact? And they said it was because of
America's leadership. And so, when coming back from this trip,
from that region, everybody said they want us back, it is
important that we are back, and they want to focus on trade and
the initiatives.
So my question is, how should the significant capital
infusions brought to Asia by the Belt/Road Initiative affect
our decisions in the future?
The one thing that we can do, that I don't think China has
quite gotten there yet, is the relationships that we build,
that we, as we invest in the country, we want the best for that
country, you know. And I think it has been brought up by the
panel that, you know, it is a win-win.
A double win for China, that was pretty good.
But about the allocations of our development assistance,
which would you recommend?
And you brought up about combining these agencies. We have
a bill that is looking at that. Mr. Kamphausen, you were
talking about streamlining it, and our bill will streamline
that whole process. And we will share that with you in due
time.
But, Mr. Stivers, what would you do different as far as our
aid?
Mr. Stivers. Well, in terms of a reorganization, I am not
sure that the different development agencies need to be
combined into one. My worry, from my standpoint and also having
worked at USAID, is that it is so difficult to coordinate
across agencies. Even for the State Department and USAID, it is
a challenge to coordinate and make sure we are working from the
same page.
And so, when you have 10, 12, more than that, development
agencies, it is very hard for the administration, it is very
hard for our country, to compete with China, which is a top-
down, authoritarian model, which can just decide which path
they want to go and everyone goes in that direction.
So creating more agencies and more bureaucracies, I don't
think anyone wants to do that. But, unfortunately, that has
been done in the past, because it is so difficult to try to do
any kind of serious foreign aid reform. And I know this
committee has worked on that issue and hasn't been able to get
there because it is so difficult. And so, again, my fear is
that we would create another one that would make it more
difficult.
And so you can streamline or combine certain agencies at
one point, but there does need to be, I believe, more
centralization in terms of our foreign assistance.
Mr. Yoho. I agree.
Mr. Kamphausen?
Mr. Kamphausen. Very quickly, I think we want to make sure
that we don't convey to countries that desperately need
development aid that the U.S. is opposed to aid for them
because it comes from China.
I will share an example.
Mr. Yoho. Agreed.
Mr. Kamphausen. Each year, I have the privilege of briefing
a delegation of Pakistani generals that comes to our National
Defense University, twice this past year. And on both
occasions, we have talked about the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor, which is an important part of the Belt and Road, $42
billion worth of planned investment in four types of projects,
mostly energy. And Pakistan is desperately in need of more
energy.
And it came out in the course of the discussion, one of the
generals finally said, it sounds to me like your problem with
CPEC--and I don't have a problem with CPEC, but--your problem,
America's problem with CPEC is that it is Chinese in origin.
And so your strategic competition with China is making us a
bill payer if you oppose it too strenuously.
And so we need to be very clear that the penalty is not
paid by countries that desperately need the development aid.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate that. And, you know, the thing is it
is not against China, you know, because I wish them the best of
luck, but it is not at our expense.
And I am going to go to Mr. Ted Deutch from Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to the witnesses for being here.
Mr. Stivers, you said that President Xi is expanding
China's presence on the world stage through coercion and a
charm offensive.
So I would like the three of you to talk about that, One
Belt, One Road and how it works, how the investments lure
countries in--they welcome the investments, obviously--and how
that turns into coercion. How does that actually play out?
Please, Mr. Runde.
Mr. Runde. Thank you.
Let me just first say that every country I visit in Asia,
they want more America, not less America, to your point.
I would just make one other point, and then I will respond
to your question, Mr. Deutch, in that I think there are fewer
and fewer poor countries in Asia. If I think about this
subcommittee's footprint and when you think about countries, as
I said, this is not your grandparents' Asia. And so, over the
next 10 years, you are only going to go have one or two or a
handful of countries eligible for IDA, meaning the softest
loans from the World Bank.
And so what that means is that the kinds of things that
they want from the United States and from the rest of the world
aren't going to be traditional foreign aid. There are going to
be pockets of poverty in those countries, but, in many ways,
those countries ought to be able to fund and finance much of
the basic human needs.
And I think that is one of the reasons you have seen the
uptake of things like the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank.
Every Member of Congress I have ever met knows what the Asia
Infrastructure Investment Bank is. They all know what it is,
and they don't like it. I don't necessarily like it either. But
it reflects, I think, the fact that--what I say is that, if we
don't meet the hopes and aspirations of countries, they will
take their business to the Chinese. And I think the hopes and
aspirations of countries in Asia are changing and evolving, and
we need to change with their hopes and aspirations. And we
should really----
Mr. Deutch. I am sorry. Since you brought it up--we will
get back to this if we have time. But since you brought it up,
let's talk about the Asia Infrastructure Bank.
Mr. Runde. Yes.
Mr. Deutch. So there is this investment bank that has been
created. Most of our allies, our European allies----
Mr. Runde. Have joined.
Mr. Deutch [continuing]. Have joined. We have not. So I
understand that people tell you they don't like it, but was
that a wise choice, does it continue to be a wise choice, for
us to not be a part of that?
Because when you talk to the Chinese, they will tell you
all they are trying to do is make these investments to help
develop the area.
Mr. Runde. I think that we ought to be strengthening the
institutions that we built as a result of--in the rule-based
international order of things like the Asian Development Bank.
My view is that we ought to be strengthening the Asian
Development Bank and strengthening our bilateral instruments
first.
I have a very hard time imagining that any administration
would come to the U.S. Congress and ask for several hundred
million dollars to put into a Chinese-led initiative. I have a
very hard time imagining that it would even be politically
feasible. I am not necessarily sure I would want to do that
either. I would rather work on a whole series of other things
first before even contemplating that.
And regarding your question regarding One Belt, One Road, I
think that it goes to my point about meeting the hopes and
aspirations. It is actually a good idea. If you actually can
cut the travel time across the Eurasian land mass, this is a
great accomplishment. It is a good thing to do.
I don't think we can stop the One Belt, One Road, nor
should we try to. But what we should be trying to do is
influence the soft infrastructure around the One Belt, One
Road. I have written a report that I am submitting for the
record about the soft infrastructure of the One Belt, One Road,
things like, how do we use the European Bank for reconstruction
and development, how do we use the Asian Development Bank, the
two regional development banks that will most--we should have
them be financing infrastructure projects along the One Belt,
One Road.
We should work to have--there was a discussion about--we
didn't talk a lot about this, but there is an obscure topic
but, I think, an important topic around the issue of government
procurement. Most of the decisions about buying railroads or
building bridges or building airports or power are often in the
hands of government procurement officers in developing
countries. And I know this seems like an obscure topic, but it
relates to American jobs and American business. Just bear with
me. I know it is a little obscure. But, in essence, we have
told developing countries for 50 years to use one rule book
that has go with the lowest bid and lowest bid procurement. And
if we go with lowest bid procurement, because they are the
cheapest, the Chinese are winning on low-bid procurement.
In the last 5 years, we have been able to change the rule
book at the World Bank, which is the de facto set of standards
for procurement in the developing world, to use a concept
called lifecycle cost. It is the kind of thing you use when you
buy----
Mr. Deutch. Right. And I appreciate that, but I don't have
a whole lot of time. But I appreciate that.
But I want to ask, the soft infrastructure and changing the
rules, we are way into the weeds. Big picture? Big picture,
China is making massive infrastructure investments, and the way
you describe it, it looks like we are trying to sort of pick up
the scraps.
I mean, Mr. Stivers, what do the Chinese think that they
are getting from it? And how do they turn those investments
into political power?
Mr. Stivers. China is using--again, they are using their
charm offensive with OBOR, with these projects, but they are
also using economic coercion after that. You see this in all
places in Asia. Some of the democratic openings that have
happened in the region, whether it is in Burma or Sri Lanka,
there has been a direct China component to that, where
countries have responded negatively and there has been backlash
to certain projects.
We have talked about Sri Lanka. I think the chairman
mentioned it in his statement. In Burma, the Myitsone Dam was a
huge dam that was built as--I think it is part of OBOR now, and
I think China puts everything as part of OBOR in terms of its
projects. But they didn't do any kind of environmental or
social assessments. It is deeply unpopular in the country. This
a country and a people, a proud people, that don't want to be
dependent on China.
And so you have countries where there is significant
popular backlash, if not the governments, all over the region.
Just real quick on AIIB, I really don't think the U.S.
should be joining it, first of all, because we don't have a
couple hundred million to contribute to it. And, second of all,
we don't know if AIIB is going to be an instrument of Chinese
foreign policy yet. We don't know if they are going to have
high standards of development yet. And I think being on the
outside and holding our membership as a possibility while other
countries are inside of it trying to maneuver is a better place
for the United States to be in regards to AIIB.
And just, third of all, about that, AIIB has only lent $2
billion, which is a small number compared to as much financing
is going on. And China still retains 26-percent voting power in
AIIB, and I am not sure we want to be a part of that yet.
Mr. Chabot [presiding]. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
The Chair will recognize himself, the acting Chair, at this
time for 5 minutes.
The President just got back from an almost-2-week trip to
the region of the world that we are discussing here this
afternoon. And he once again used a term that I wouldn't
necessarily use, but I am not President, so he gets to say what
he wants, but this, kind of, ``America first.'' And he said,
well, all countries consider themselves first.
And, clearly, China's attitude is really ``China first.''
And you gentlemen testified to that earlier when you talked
about what you get when you enter into one of these mega-
projects or even a smaller project with the Chinese. You do get
Chinese money, but you get Chinese workers and you get a
Chinese asset and, overall, Chinese profits. And they are
pretty much there probably forever, for the most part.
Do the other countries, by now, do they realize, you know,
what they are getting when they jump into bed with China on one
of these mega-projects?
Mr. Stivers, do you want to----
Mr. Stivers. I think some do, some don't. And we talk about
this a little bit in the U.S.-China Commission, our annual
report.
Some countries, like Thailand, are more economically
advanced. It is a strong middle-income country, and they are
able to push back on China on a lot of these projects. But you
have a country like Burma, who doesn't have the expertise to
analyze a lot of the details of these very complicated
infrastructure deals. They don't know what they are signing up
for, in terms of these loans that they are getting. And I think
that certain countries know what they are getting into, and
they negotiate in a very tough way with the Chinese. Others
don't have the leverage to push back, in many cases.
And so I think that some of the work that USAID does to
help these countries improve their governance, improve their
capacity to analyze economic deals--a lot of this, I guess we
call it soft power, but it is some of the really good work that
we do--can really help these countries push back on things that
will harm their country in the long term.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
Let me go to another area here. TPP, unfortunately, became
a campaign issue in the last race. And both sides--and I don't
want to get too political here, but the Democratic candidate,
in particular, who had a history of being basically pro-TPP, I
think because of Bernie and a lot of his supporters ended up
getting dragged way to the left on this and ended up being
against it, and Trump was pretty much always against it, I
think. So you had both major candidates being against it. And I
think, to some degree, we have marginalized ourselves as a
result of that, and now China is much more in the driver's seat
because of our absence to affirm that.
What can we do about it at this point? I know the President
has talked about how he doesn't believe in regional trade
agreements, he wants bilateral trade agreements. And I have met
a number of times with some of his people about that and their
optimism for accomplishing that. But are there any suggestions
you gentlemen would make to the administration on how they can
actually move forward with that, if that is their philosophy?
Mr. Kamphausen?
Mr. Kamphausen. Very quickly, in my own discussions with
representatives from Japan's METI, I think they think in very
sophisticated terms about: Whatever we do in terms of our
bilateral deals, have them being TPP-ready for the future point
at which, you know, common sense might prevail and we will see
the need to return to a multilateral setting.
So the Japanese even use the term ``docking station,''
where a bilateral agreement could then, if you imagine a space
shuttle kind of setting, actually merge back into what TPP has
become. And I think there is a lot of value to that. We don't
want to sacrifice the standards; we want to have TPP-level
standards. And so, at that future point, they can potentially
be joined back in.
Mr. Chabot. Mr. Runde?
Mr. Runde. Thank you.
I would encourage this subcommittee to hold hearings on
prospects for a U.S.-Japan bilateral free trade agreement. I
think to the point Mr. Kamphausen was making, I think we need
to think about Lego building blocks for coming back. I would
like to see us return to something like a TPP.
And I think, as well, we need to take a look at trade and
investment agreements across Asia, and we should start with our
close allies and emerging economies of ASEAN. If it sounds a
little bit like TPP, well, maybe there is something to that.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
And I am almost out of time here, but let me raise one--and
I will toss this to you, Mr. Stivers, since you brought it up.
And that is Taiwan.
I happen to be one of the founders of the Congressional
Taiwan Caucus and have been there 10, 11 times, something like
that, over the years, very involved with Taiwan. And they have
been interested, obviously, in a bilateral trade agreement with
us or being in TPP, or, even prior to U.S. discussing TPP, they
want to be more involved in this. And, obviously, the PRC does
everything possible to suppress Taiwan because they consider
them a territory and all the rest.
What can we do, what should we do, to make even closer our
relationship with one of our key allies in the region, Taiwan,
whether it is trade or other things? I know getting into the
military is probably beyond the confines of this hearing, but
anything you would like to say relative to Taiwan.
Mr. Stivers. Absolutely. I mean, Taiwan has so much
resources, so much expertise, when it comes to global health,
when it comes to development. And they have this new southbound
policy, so it is in their interest to diversify away from their
dependence on China. So you have a confluence of interests
here. And, of course, the Southeast Asian countries, they want
Taiwan's economic activities. And so you have a confluence of
interests here.
And I think that--I didn't include this in my testimony
because I haven't really thought this out in too much detail.
But if there are ways, consistent with the Taiwan Relations
Act, for our entities, for our Government to help Taiwan join
some of these--obviously, the international organizations,
which, you know, you are a big supporter of Taiwan joining, but
if we can do some more things bilaterally to help them do what
they are already trying to do. I think they need some help
diplomatically with some of the inroads in these countries.
Again, they have so much to offer.
And could I mention TPP for a moment?
Mr. Chabot. Yes.
Mr. Stivers. As a member of the Obama administration, I was
always concerned that TPP was not enough as an economic
component of the Asian rebalance. You know, whether you are for
it or against it, the Asia rebalance needed a better economic
component to it.
And, also, not every country in Southeast Asia liked TPP. A
lot of the countries were worried about losing market share to
Vietnam. And so this is not something everyone in Asia wanted
except for China.
But more groundwork needs to be done in the region so that
these countries have the standards where they are able to enter
into a high-standard agreement. Vietnam needs a labor sector.
They don't have that. They don't have free association there.
There are the beginnings of that now, but not at a point where
I think we can connect them to our economy and meet the high
standards that TPP set out.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
And my time has expired.
Mr. Bera, if you would allow me just a couple seconds here
to say one last thing. I am going to give you additional time
too. It is not like there are others champing at the bit to get
into this.
But I would also just put in a pitch here for legislation
that I have introduced, along with some of my Democratic
colleagues, and that is the Taiwan Travel Act.
Right now, the high leadership of Taiwan--President, Vice
President, Foreign Minister, Defense Minister--cannot come to
the United States. One of our strongest allies. They can
transit through the U.S., but we can't meet in our Nation's
capital, for example, with others that are--essentially, it is
a de facto country. It is not a country in name, but it
functions as a country. It has for a half-century. And it is a
democracy. They freely elect their officials, unlike the PRC.
The PRC can come here. They get red-carpet treatment. Our
close ally, the President can't come here. Twenty-six Members
had to fly up after votes some years back to meet with
President Chen Shui-bian in New York City after votes one
evening, and we got back, like, 3 o'clock in the morning,
because we couldn't meet with him here in our Nation's capital.
It is disgraceful. It is a slap in the face to our close
ally. And we ought to change that, and we need to pass that
legislation.
Thank you. And I am off my rant now. And I will now
recognize the gentleman from California for as much time as he
wants.
Mr. Bera. Well, thank you, Mr. Chabot.
And thank you to the witnesses. I am sorry I missed your
opening statements. I had a conflict.
But if I just think about the post-war, post-World War II
world order, it was a U.S.-led world order. And, you know, in
many ways, the U.S. leadership, in helping rebuild Japan,
helping rebuild Europe, you know, answering the call to protect
South Korea, and helping rebuild South Korea, and the way we
approached the world in the last 70 years made the world a more
prosperous place, lifted a lot of people out of poverty, and
made those 70 years much more peaceful than the prior 70 years,
when two world wars and endless conflicts occurred.
So for us to start to withdraw from the world is a big
mistake. And, you know, Mr. Chabot touched on pulling out of
TPP. As a Democrat that supported the deal, I do think in our
lifetime this potentially is our biggest foreign policy
blunder. Because when we think about trade and engagement, it
is not just about commerce and economic activity; we are also
thinking strategically. And that is very different than how the
Chinese necessarily think about this.
We think it is a good thing to help other countries develop
their infrastructure, develop values, intrinsically, within
their own country, of what democracy looks like. It does create
competitors for us, but that is not necessarily a bad thing
either, because it also creates markets for us to sell our
goods and services.
The next 70 years may be a slightly different world order.
It may not be America going alone. And I actually think it
won't be an America alone. It will be America working with
partner nations that share similar values of democracy, of free
markets, of opportunity, of human rights, working together.
And, you know, I was in Japan a few weeks ago at the Mount
Fuji Dialogue, and we were talking about that. And, you brought
up, you know, how do we preserve TPP? One thing that we
discussed with, you know, Prime Minister Abe, as well as the
Diet members, they all get that they are going to have to keep
moving forward. And we have seen the TPP 11 countries moving
forward in this past week. But they also very much want the
United States to reengage.
And there is a clear message, and, you know, if any of
those TPP 11 countries are watching or listening, keep that
deal intact. Keep as high standards as possible intact. Because
I have to believe, 2 years from now or 4 years from now or at
some point in the near future, we will realize that, you know,
we have to do business with some of the most vibrant economies
in the world. Our businesses, our farmers, they are all
realizing this very rapidly. And, you know, they have to talk
to their workers, they have to talk to the folks here back
home.
By losing those markets, it doesn't mean those jobs are
coming back here. It means we are going to have trouble selling
our goods and services there. Once we lose market access, it is
very hard to get that market access back.
So we do have to have a real conversation about trade and,
you know, the impacts of trade here domestically but also the
fact that 95 percent of the world's consumers live outside of
the United States.
I would put our workers up against anyone else's workers, I
would put the quality of our products up against the quality of
products that, you know, China is making, and we will win. And
we shouldn't be afraid of that competition, as long as it is a
fair playing field.
I also am very critical of how China approaches things.
Where we approached it in a benevolent way, wanting to lift
those other countries up, China approaches investment in these
other countries in a very China-centric way.
You know, there was a Member of Congress who was in
Thailand recently and, you know, was traveling on a beautiful,
brand-new road in Thailand and mentioned to the cab driver,
``Hey, this is a great road.'' And, you know, the cab driver
said, ``Yeah, the Chinese built it.'' And he said, ``Oh, you
must feel great about it,'' and he said, ``No. You know, they
came here, they brought their workers, they built the road, and
they left.'' They didn't do anything to build that
sustainability, to help Thailand build--and that is a
fundamental difference in how we engage in the world and how
the Chinese engage in the world. And, you know, those Asian
nations recognize that. So it is incredibly important.
You said I could go on as long as I wanted.
So I just--I think it is incredibly important. I get we
have domestic issues that we have to address here. We have a
lot of folks that are being left behind. But it is incredibly
important for us not to withdraw from the world and to stay
engaged in a different way.
You know, if there were, you know, one or two things that
we as Congress ought to focus on, given the current political
realities right now, you know--and maybe we will just go down
the line--to not necessarily counter One Belt, One Road,
because I also think the Asian nations know they have to do
business with China, and they don't want to be considered a
pawn in between China, but to offer an alternative to One Belt,
One Road, what would those things be?
And maybe we will start with you, Mr. Runde.
Mr. Runde. Thank you, Mr. Bera. I broke my neck from
nodding my head in agreement with everything you said. Thank
you very much for your comments.
Sir, I think that this subcommittee has, I think, an
opportunity to use its platform to--I think this has been a
very important conversation. I really appreciate you all
convening this. I think that having--every country I go to,
they want more American engagement, not less American
engagement.
The second thing is I think that we need to work as closely
as possible with our allies. I agree with you, Mr. Bera. I
think our first conversation in Asia should always be with
Japan, a great ally, who wants to work with us on these issues.
Obviously, we always want to work with Australia, you know, who
has been with us in every conflict since World War I, and then,
of course, India and South Korea and Taiwan, a great nation as
well. So I think we have lots of friends, and we should use
them.
The other thing I would just say is that the world is not
going to wait on us. When we have fights, internal fights,
between the Congress and the executive branch on things like
the IMF quota reform, which is an obscure topic, the Chinese
said, ``I have $2 trillion in the bank. I am going to start my
own bank.'' The AIB was a direct result of our disagreement in
the United States on the obscure topic of IMF quota reform.
They will not wait for us. If we don't meet the hopes and
aspirations of countries, they are going to turn to China. And
it is not necessarily because they want to; because it is the
only game in town. So we have to offer a counter-narrative and
counter-alternative.
A mix of that are things, yes, like trade. Like I said
earlier, I think we should be beginning a U.S.-Japan free trade
agreement discussion. I think that is a start. But I think we
should look at other allies and how do we deepen our trade and
investment relations. Let's start with on a bilateral basis,
given that that seems to be the Trump administration's
preference for the moment.
But then we need a strengthened OPIC. We need a stronger,
larger OPIC. We need to strengthen USTDA. We need a functioning
Ex-Im Bank. It absurd that it is not fully functioning.
I will stop there, sir.
Mr. Kamphausen. Well, I, too, agreed, Mr. Bera, with almost
everything you said, with perhaps one amplification. The
Chinese absolutely think in terms of Belt and Road and their
broader set of investment and development initiatives as having
a strategic orientation. The Chinese are intent to avoid direct
confrontation with the United States, on the one hand. On the
other, they are also equally intent on building their own
comprehensive national power in ways that would, at a future
point, allow them to challenge us.
So the first point is to absolutely understand that we are
in a strategic competition with China now and to behave
accordingly.
The second is that we can sometimes, in our system, take
that first point and, as a policy response, blame China for
what it has accomplished. And this plays very poorly in the
region. It sounds a lot like sour grapes and a country that is
in a great power decline. And so we need to pair a constructive
message with an accurate assessment about the competition that
we are in.
And then the third point is, my two colleagues who are
experts in the field have talked about the institutional
streamlining that we can and need to do in order to make our
delivery of development and investment aid more effective, and
I think those make a lot of sense.
And the last point is just an observation. We are still
early in the process of what China is becoming. And to the
point about the cab driver observing that the Chinese had done
it and left, in a broader sense, there are still a lot of
questions about Chinese staying power once they have initiated
and completed projects, or even not completed projects. And so
there is an opportunity for us there, as well
Mr. Stivers. I would say that I think strategic competition
is the right frame for China these days. I mean, we talked
about a responsible stakeholder, and we tried to get China to
be a better player and to work better with international
institutions through the years. They are pursuing their own
interests, and they are not going to deviate from their own
interests, no matter how much we want to try to influence them
to go a certain direction.
And so, understanding that, it is a strategic competition,
and we have to recognize that. And we have to make sure that
what we do best, which I think is development. USAID is the
preeminent development agency in the entire world. We do global
health better than anyone. We do infectious disease better than
anyone. We do education, we do food security, we do disaster
relief better than anybody. Humanitarian assistance. Nobody can
compete with the United States on these things.
But we don't have the resources to do them at a high level,
so we are not even funding what we do best. We don't need to
start building infrastructure in Asia. The U.S. doesn't need to
do that. We should support the institutions that do do that.
And Japan and Korea and others, the Asian Development Bank in
particular, they need to be well-resourced, and they haven't
been.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you.
The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. First, it is the Financial Services Committee
that decided to have 20 rollcall votes just as this group was
meeting.
Second, I want to make the point that this is not a zero-
sum game. We want people in the world to live better.
Development is good, and if China will make that happen, that
is helpful. But China is not for really giving aid. China is
selling infrastructure on favorable financing terms. That isn't
aid; that is loans.
And if the projects are not helpful to the country's
economy, it is a lose situation for the country. And if the
project is so bad that the country can't find a way to pay the
debt, then it is a lose-lose situation for both the Chinese
banks and the developing country.
From a standpoint of our global relations, trade is good.
But from the standpoint of our economy, trade is good when it
is balanced or even favors us in the trade balance.
I think it was my first quarter here back long ago--I had
hair, I was new--and the USTR testified that if we could sign
an agreement that increased our exports by a billion and
increased our imports by $2 billion, that would be great
because it would be $3 billion of additional trade. That is not
the policy we should have now.
Looking at China's Road and Belt, you know, some of these
have had setbacks, both financial and logistical. It will be
interesting to see how viable it is. Second, we need to see
whether it hurts our interests. It may hurt our national
security interests if China is obtaining naval bases, in
particular, or bases from which they could do intelligence
gathering. Third, how is this all going to be financed? It is
not aid, it is sales, and seems to be more analogous to the
Import-Export Bank than to USAID, maybe halfway between OPIC
and the Export-Import Bank.
So how can we deal with infrastructure? First, we have the
multilateral development banks, including the World Bank and
the Asian Development Bank. We have our direct foreign
bilateral aid. I have mentioned OPIC, which doesn't really cost
us much compared to what it is able to finance but exists to
help development as much as it does to be an arm of our
economy. And then the flip side of that is the Export-Import
Bank, which is primarily focused on building jobs in the United
States but also finances infrastructure and development.
And then we can do joint ventures with others in the--what
is the new term?--Indo-Pacific region. I am going to have to
learn how to pronounce that quickly.
I should note that our annual funding of OPIC and the Asian
Development Bank is about $100 million each. In contrast, China
is doing several billions of dollars. Also, our bilateral
foreign aid to Asian countries is not large. It was $1.3
billion for South Asia and East Asia and a similar amount if
you look separately for Afghanistan, Pakistan. About half the
aid goes to economic development, the other half for social
development, health, education.
And I will want to look at aid in particular areas. And I
will kind of preview the questions, and then I will ask them,
believing that I have not only an opening statement but time to
ask some questions.
I will want to look at Pakistan in the sense of whether an
appropriate amount of our aid is going to the non-Urdu-speaking
areas, particularly Sindh; will want to ask whether Burma
should be getting any aid of any kind, given their treatment of
the Rohingya. Speaking of the Rohingya, are we doing enough to
help Bangladesh deal with the--I believe it is 500,000
refugees.
So let me first ask Mr. Stivers, are we doing enough to
make sure that a proportionate part of our aid in Pakistan goes
to Sindh? I realize you are no longer getting a paycheck
focused on that, you have left government, but I will still ask
you the question.
Mr. Stivers. I will have to defer the Pakistan question.
Pakistan is not in my wheelhouse. I apologize for that.
Mr. Sherman. I understand.
Do either of the other two witnesses--then that will be a
question for the record for whoever wants to respond.
And let's--who wants to respond to the issue, I know we not
giving much aid to Burma, but should we be giving any, given
their treatment?
Mr. Stivers?
Mr. Stivers. Yeah, I was hoping I wouldn't be asked that
question today, because it is--I worked at USAID. I was the
Assistant Administrator of the Asia Bureau, and we worked very
hard on the democratic reform that we had there. And we spent a
lot of money empowering civil society in terms of running the
election there. Very proud of the steps that country had made.
It is extremely disconcerting, the issues that have happened
with the Rohingya and the ethnic cleansing or genocide or
whatever the appropriate term is.
I think that the administration has taken some real steps
and put some real resources into helping that refugee community
in Bangladesh. I can't think of a worse country for refugees to
go to than the most densely populated, one of the poorest
countries in the world. And there is no question that
Bangladesh does not have the capacity to handle this kind of
influx of people. I don't think you can think of a higher
number that Bangladesh would need to improve conditions for
these people there.
In terms of----
Mr. Sherman. Does anybody have a recommendation as to
what--I call it a supplemental appropriation. Obviously, it
wouldn't be a separate bill. But how much more should the
United States be giving to Bangladesh to focus on the refugee
issue? Does anybody have an opinion?
Mr. Stivers. I don't think Congress can come up with a high
enough number, to be honest with you.
Mr. Sherman. Well----
Mr. Stivers. I think as much as Congress could do. Because
the needs are infinite.
Mr. Sherman. I understand.
Mr. Stivers. But----
Mr. Sherman. I want to go on to Sri Lanka, what examples
where we have a limited return on Chinese infrastructure
investment, such as the seaports, related to debt problems.
What lessons should we learn from some of the financial
difficulties of the seaport development problem in Sri Lanka?
Does anybody have any focus on that?
Mr. Stivers. I mentioned earlier that the two big
democratic breakthroughs that have happened in the Asia-Pacific
region have been in Burma and Sri Lanka over the last few
years, and both have a direct China component to it. Two
countries where there has been a popular backlash to Chinese
investment on projects, on major OBOR--they would call them
OBOR; we call everything OBOR now--but two major Chinese
projects. And I think Burma opened up their country because
they didn't want to be dependent on China. And I think Sri
Lanka was a similar situation.
And I think that goes to show the power of the backlash to
the Chinese on projects. And I think that is important to
watch. And I think it is a sense of how much concern there is
in the region about dependence on Chinese.
Mr. Sherman. Uh-huh.
The flip side of this is the effect it could have on China.
The sovereign debt of more than half of the countries China is
targeting under the One Belt, One Road program are not rated as
investment-grade securities. Chinese lenders are nevertheless
extending tens of billions of dollars of credit toward the One
Belt, One Road projects.
If those projects fail or if there is a default on the
loan, could there be an effect on Chinese banks that is
significant enough to affect the U.S. economy? And, in general,
does China guarantee its banks against loss on these loans?
Mr. Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. Yeah, in terms of the China Development Bank,
they do guarantee their assets. And, you know, China has lost a
lot of money on these projects. Venezuela is a great example.
China is losing a lot of money with the situation there in
Venezuela.
But, you know, authoritarian governments, this is a state-
driven enterprise. So they are not trying to make profits,
necessarily. Sometimes they do, sometimes they don't. They have
foreign policy objectives and domestic economic objectives,
which we talked about. Those are the priorities. And if they
take a loss somewhere, they withstand it.
Mr. Sherman. Uh-huh.
I will just add a comment, because I know you will just
be--on questions about southern Pakistan, you will be
responding for the record. But the China-Pakistan Economic
Corridor is the Pakistani component of the Belt and Road
Initiative. It is seen in the Pakistan Sindh province as a
strategic partnership between the Pakistani Armed Forces and
Beijing to exploit Sindh's resources, particularly coal in the
Thar region. And it causes a repression of local Sindhi voices
of dissent against either the projects or injustices in
general. And, of course, in Sindh, we have seen a number of
disappearances.
So, for the record, if you can give us some guidance on
what our policy ought to be with, it seems, the Pakistani Armed
Forces turning over resources from Sindh to China without any
beneficial impact to local people.
So I will wait to read your answer on that.
I want to thank the chair for indulging me and will not
mention the name of the chairman who delayed me for 45 minutes
without consulting with Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho [presiding]. They are just not as--their etiquette
is not as nice as ours here. No, I appreciate your input
because you always come well-prepared, and I appreciate your
input into that.
We are about at the close, if you can bear with me for a
few more minutes.
You know, when we look at that ASEAN nations, that whole
region, you know, we all know there are 630-million-plus people
there, $2.5 trillion in trade, and we have pivoted our
strategy, but it is time and we are seeing a pivot back.
You know, as we traveled to South Korea, Taiwan, Vietnam,
Hong Kong, Singapore, everybody was saying how bad it was that
we pulled out of the TPP, and I reminded them that, you know,
not that we can vote on it in the House, but the Senate wasn't
going to pass it, and candidate Clinton said she was not going
to approve it. I think President Trump did a very smart thing,
getting rid of it early.
And while we were over there, we were promoting FTAs with
every country we went to--Vietnam. You know, of course,
Singapore has a great one. South Korea has one. We mentioned it
to Japan, all the other regions in there, Hong Kong and Taiwan,
to have free trade agreements, to bolster our presence and the
caliber--and the thing that people said that they want more
than anything is rule of law--respect contracts, respect
intellectual property. And that is what they are not getting
when they see these other countries.
And, you know, being with a construction background
somewhat before I was a veterinarian, what I saw were a lot of
buildings being built where people built shopping malls, you
know, they built infrastructures, but they couldn't maintain
them. And so I think your recommendation is--I applaud China
for doing what they are doing. And I think we ought to tag
along and build businesses there and pick up the pieces, as we
do other investments in those.
And my last question--and you guys can weigh in on this. In
2016, about a quarter of OPIC projects were in Asia. Is this an
appropriate allocation? And should OPIC be funding more
investments in Asia?
Mr. Runde?
Mr. Runde. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to first say I completely agree with you. We need to
be thinking about our trade and investment relationships with
all of our allies in Asia. I don't know, sir, if you were in
when I said this earlier, but I encourage us to have a
bilateral free trade agreement with Japan as well. And I hope
this subcommittee will host a hearing on a bilateral free trade
agreement with----
Mr. Yoho. I think you will see a resolution coming up in
the not-too-distant future.
Mr. Runde. Thank you, Chairman.
So I think that OPIC is one of our greatest tools. It is
not well understood. I would like to see OPIC--we have written
for the record a number of reports about OPIC and how to use it
better.
I certainly think that we should be spending at least 25
percent in Asia. And I think, if we are thinking about--I think
we have to look at Asia not only as an economic and business
opportunity for the United States--and China looks at Asia as
an economic and business opportunity for them. We should be
doing the same.
And I do think that we should have at least 25 percent of
our portfolio of investments from OPIC in Asia. I do believe
that is the case. I think we should be thinking about more, not
less.
Mr. Yoho. Anybody else?
Mr. Kamphausen, you said that the Belt/Road Initiative is
China's stimulus initiative, increases China's military
footprint. It is a way secure China's periphery and a way to
consolidate China's initiatives and investment. And I think it
is a smart business move for them. But I just think, again,
going back to Xi Jinping's comments after the 19th Congress, I
think that shows their strategy.
And, you know, with the ASEAN nations or any of the regions
in that area that we decide to do FTAs, what I would see is a
structure. And I had mentioned this, and I guess you guys
mentioned it too, about: Have countries being able to plug in
and out. You know, if we are in agreement, kind of like a Lego
block model, where they plug in, and they just build upon that.
And if a country where members say, you know, it is not
working, you need to leave, they can be removed too.
And I think that is something that we need to look at, as
we revamp how we do foreign policy, how we do our trade
agreements. And what I can assure you is there are going to be
some strong initiatives coming out on economic growth and
development aid, and the restructuring of some of these
organizations to streamline them, or requesting more money when
we roll these out to be put in there. Because this is an
investment in our future, and we want to focus on national
security, economics, trade, and cultural exchanges.
Go ahead, Mr. Kamphausen.
Mr. Kamphausen. If I may offer a quick comment since you
raised the topic, it is clear that this is an experimental
field for the Chinese as they think about how they secure the
Belt and Road.
Mr. Yoho. Yeah.
Mr. Kamphausen. And there are at least three different
models that they are thinking about.
In Pakistan, they are essentially outsourcing the security
problem. So they are funding the fielding of essentially a
Pakistani Army division to secure the Belt and Road projects.
That is one model. And it works. The Pakistani Army is an
effective and coherent force, and so it makes sense in that
context.
The other two are perhaps a little more sketchy. One is to
essentially take demobilized PLA troops, because China has been
in the process over the last several years of demobilizing its
armed forces--downsizing, I should say--taking those troops and
then making them private security entities. And we understand
the challenges we have had with that system. Imagine the
Chinese trying to implement a coherent approach to that.
The third is to look at even more hybrid forms of security
and really imagine that the problems will sort themselves out
and leave them to the industries or the companies that are
imagining them themselves.
My broader point is to suggest, if we were to think in a
forward-looking way, consistent with your view that there are
pieces that we might need to pick up and make sense of, a lot
of this could go south. The Chinese bets about how to secure
their own initiative might not work. They have not done this
before. And there are potentially not obligations we might
sense but there are opportunities that we might be in a
position to respond to consistent with our own goals.
Mr. Yoho. Go ahead, Mr. Stivers.
Mr. Stivers. There are some major changes going on in the
Chinese economy now. They are trying to rebalance their economy
from going from this export-led dynamo to a consumption-
oriented economy. And I would argue that when they do these
OBOR projects and they export these raw materials, this
overcapacity, what that is doing is propping up these
inefficient state-owned enterprises and delaying real reform in
their economy.
And I think that is really bad for the United States,
because they are not opening up their economy to the United
States, and that is why I don't worry so much about trade
issues in terms of vis-a-vis China, because China is not going
to sign some major trade agreement, they are not opening up
their economy. And I think, by going down this road with the
way they are implementing OBOR, it is delaying reform and it is
delaying a lot of the needed reforms that their economy needs
to make that would be good for China and the U.S. and the world
economy.
Mr. Yoho. One quick question, and then I have a statement.
What funding levels would be needed for an effective
development institution? Just real quickly.
Mr. Runde. So I believe OPIC does about $4 billion a year.
I would like to see it do double that amount. As I said
earlier, we need to raise the credit card limit on OPIC, A.
USTA does around $70 million a year in terms of what the
Congress allocates, and I would double that.
And then I think we ought to be thinking--so I would say it
is not necessarily about additional--there are only marginal
appropriations, but the Congress has within its power to, you
know, put its foot on the gas in terms of giving additional
authorities and strengthening these institutions that already
exist.
Mr. Yoho. Anybody else?
You guys brought this up, and so I have to comment on it.
China is new at this, in the development. They have been around
for a long time as a nation, as a culture. We can't hold a
candle to that. But the thing that we do have is 241 years of
developing a nation, trade, and working in a market economy.
And there are a lot of trials and tribulations that we have
learned over 241 years. And I think it will work out well. We
will not allow ourselves to be supplanted from the world stage.
And I appreciate your input. I look forward to sharing our
bill with you when they do come out and get your feedback on
it.
With that, this meeting is adjourned, and thank you for
your time.
[Whereupon, at 4:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The following documents, submitted for the record by Mr. Daniel F.
Runde, William A. Schreyer Chair and director of the Project on
Prosperity and Development, Center for Strategic and International
Studies, are not reprinted here but may be found at: http://
docs.house.gov/Committee/Calendar/ByEvent.aspx?EventID=106635

``A New Development Agenda''

``A Path to US Leadership in the Asia-Pacific:
Revitalizing the Multilateral Financial Institutions''

``Closing Aid Programs in Middle-Income Countries: A
Big Opportunity''

``Development Finance Institutions Come of Age''

``English Language Proficiency and Development''

``Fixing Trade Facilitation: The Trillion-Dollar
Development Windfall''

``Global Infrastructure Development''

``Implementing the Forthcoming WTO Trade Facilitation
Agreement''

``Pay to Play Leadership: Why Investment in the
Multilateral Development Banks Is Critical to U.S. National
Security''

``Quality Infrastructure: Ensuring Sustainable
Economic Growth''

``Shaping the Asia-Pacific Future''

``The Clock Has Started on TFA Implementation''

``The Role of U.S. Soft-Infrastructure in Influencing
the Reconnecting of Asia''

``The WTO Trade Facilitation Agenda: 2015's Biggest
Development Opportunity''

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
