- BREXIT: A NEGOTIATION UPDATE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BREXIT: A NEGOTIATION UPDATE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EUROPE, EURASIA, AND EMERGING THREATS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 6, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-100

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
27-757 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin                        ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
As of
12:44 pm 11/29/17 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats

DANA ROHRABACHER, California, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
TED POE, Texas                       BRAD SHERMAN, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
Wisconsin                        DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida              ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
As of
12:44 pm 11/29/17 deg.

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Nile Gardiner, Ph.D., director, Margaret Thatcher Center for
Freedom, The Heritage Foundation...............................     6
Ms. Marjorie Chorlins, vice president for European Affairs,
Executive Director of U.S.-U.K. Business Council, U.S. Chamber
of Commerce....................................................    16
Thomas Wright, Ph.D., director, Center on the United States and
Europe, Brookings Institution..................................    28

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Nile Gardiner, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.........................     9
Ms. Marjorie Chorlins: Prepared statement........................    19
Thomas Wright, Ph.D.: Prepared statement.........................    30

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    48
Hearing minutes..................................................    49
Questions submitted for the record from the Honorable F. James
Sensenbrenner, Jr., a Representative in Congress from the State
of Wisconsin, to Nile Gardiner, Ph.D...........................    50
Questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Robin L.
Kelly, a Representative in Congress from the State of Illinois.    51

BREXIT: A NEGOTIATION UPDATE

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:00 p.m., in
room 2200 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Dana Rohrabacher
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I call to order this hearing of the
Europe, Eurasia, and Emerging Threats Subcommittee.
The topic for this afternoon's hearing is the United
Kingdom's exit from the European Union and to understand better
where those negotiations currently stand.
The Brexit vote represents a self-determination of the
British people. It reflects an inherent desire of people to
control their own destiny rather than be under the domination
of another country or another group of countries.
Around the world, populations are increasingly seeking to
exercise their right of self-determination. When done
peacefully through the ballot box, such as what happened in the
United Kingdom and, I might add, in the United Kingdom as
happened to Scotland, I believe the world would be a much
better place if people were allowed to make that choice in that
peaceful manner.
After 40 years of membership in the EU and its predecessor
organizations, the British people voted last year by a clear
margin to end that membership.
It has set the U.K. on a course which I guess would be on
March--in March 2019 for exit. Between now and that date, a
wide variety of issues remain to be resolved.
Many speculate that the major pieces of the transition must
be set far ahead of that date in order to allow industry and
business to adapt to the new rules.
Both sets of negotiation and the negotiating teams appear
to be dedicated to approaching their task with good will. But
the breadth and complexity of the challenges would be imposing
on any group of people trying to find those type of solutions.
While I have great sympathy for those in Britain who want
to return political power from Brussels to London and believe
that the EU countries--there probably are other EU countries
who want to follow their lead.
But whatever decision people make in terms of their own
self-determination, clearly, Americans have friends on both
sides of this issue and are inclined to support people who are
longing for their freedom as--and representative government.
As my colleagues and I get into this discussion with the
panelists, I especially want to talk about Ireland and learn
what progress has been made to ensure there will be no hard
border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
The return to a hard border, I fear, would be a needless
blow to the peace process that has achieved so much in that
part of the world over the last few decades.
The United States is, of course, not a party to the Brexit
negotiations. But we do have a keen interest in what the
outcome of those negotiations will come up with.
I hope to learn from our witnesses how the United States
Congress can play a positive and constructive role as both
sides work to establish a new relationship.
I also want to recognize that several members of the Irish
Parliament are with us today and we welcome you. And let me
just say this. I have a special place in my heart for Ireland.
I learned all about the real political facts of life from
the greatest Irish American President, Ronald Reagan, who--with
whom I spoke and met and worked with for 7\1/2\ years of my
life in the White House. So it is a pleasure to have you here
with us.
And let us also note--my staff didn't put this in my
notes--but let us also note that the Irish were really beside
the Americans, were the first ones to strike a blow for self-
determination and we are happy that their British--their former
British landlords now have learned a lesson and are now
establishing early self-determination in Europe.
So welcome aboard. And thanks to our witnesses. And without
objection, all the members will have 5 legislative days to
submit any written questions for you.
I would appreciate if you would basically limit your
testimony to 5 minutes each and then open up for the members to
ask what questions they have and we could have a dialogue.
With that said, I recognize my ranking member, Mr. Meeks,
and who we worked together very well and this shows you just
how people can work together with various different points of
view. I would say enough for my Irish parliamentarians over
there.
Mr. Meeks. Indeed. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
you also for calling this timely conversation on the Brexit
negotiations.
To be honest, I see the Brexit process as a lose-lose-lose
situation. The UK, the EU, and the United States--in other
words, the West, will take an economic and political hit.
Of course, there may be small pockets of economic winners
joined by cultural elites who will benefit. The vote did
reflect real grievances with the status quo.
America, meanwhile, is losing its closest ideological ally
in the European Union and the influence that came with it in
Great Britain.
Many remain to believe that Brexit negotiations will be
simple--that the EU would succumb to the British demands and a
global Britain will emerge, ready to strike trade deals and
still be able to set rules and standards at home.
In the past weeks, though, reality is beginning to bite.
More specifically, the Northern Island question--something my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle care deeply about, is
unresolved.
The Good Friday agreement, a delicate consensus that we
helped foster, is at risk. The essential question for the Irish
Government, and they have been--and they have the backing of
the EU with their veto just as every member state does, and
this is just one example of the similarly countless hurdles in
the negotiations that must end in March 2019. That is, unless
there is a transition period on extension as agreed upon.
The March 2019 deadline was imposed by the UK when it
triggered Article 50, thereby starting the 2-year clock.
Other red lines were perhaps prematurely set early such as
the refusal to entertain the customs union as an option, done
without considering the economic consequences.
Must of the Prime Minister's government, including the
Prime Minister herself, campaigned to remain. These questions
are all related or complicated and the EU is negotiating from a
unified position with a weak partner government. Not sure about
what it wants.
In the realm of bilateral U.S.-U.K. trade, we learned in
our February hearing that there is not much to gain nor is it
clear when we could even start negotiating, given the practical
constraints.
The potential gains are either not there, already
exhausted, or protected. In reality, the U.K. would be coming
to American negotiators looking for a deal, any deal. In our
negotiations, we look to extract the best deal for America.
So what does this mean for the special relationship?
Reckless hateful tweets from our Presidential--from our
President aside, and with the help of delicious British imports
we will carry on.
Our histories and our political ties are stronger than
that. We will continue to work closely with the U.K. and NATO
and encourage the U.K. to continue to support sanctions in the
Kremlin.
In the Brexit negotiations, as highlighted by Prime
Minister May in Philadelphia, our close relationship with a
strong EU is in both America's and the U.K.'s interest.
In that spirit, I hope the U.K. and the EU remain very
close partners that we, the United States, can count on and
cooperate with.
I encourage both sides to avoid the cliff edge no-deal
scenario. Come back to reality and compromise where possible.
There are forces driving Brexit that would like to see the
Transatlantic relationship unravel.
But we need each other today more than ever to protect the
values we fought for together in the 20th century. It is more
important now that the West stays together and does not allow
us to be divided for it is our values today in a collective way
that can lead the rest in a world that is more interconnected
and globalized than ever, and we may want or think that
globalization--some may like it and some may not.
But globalization is here and I think that we need to
utilize it to bring us closer together, set standards together,
and lead together from the west so that others can follow.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thanks very much, and I guess you can see
where there is a difference between Republicans and Democrats
on this. Just glad that the French decided to side with self-
determination for our side rather than back up the British.
Ms. Kelly, please feel free.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding a hearing
on the developments of the Brexit negotiations.
Given the issues earlier this week and the negotiations, it
is a particularly relevant time for this hearing. Time is
passing quickly and pressure is building to get a deal done by
March 2019, as you have already heard.
For the United States, there are important trade, national
security, and foreign policy implications for the United
Kingdom leaving the European Union.
The promises by the lead camp are likely to be broken with
agreements to the European court of justice and the costs of
leaving likely difficult pills to swallow.
While the U.S.-U.K. relationship is likely to change
following the exit from the EU, the bond between our two
nations will endure.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today about
Brexit and the best way for Congress to plan for the future.
I yield back.
Mr. Boyle. Yes. Well, thank you. I want to thank the
chairman and the ranking member.
Before I begin, I want to acknowledge a few dignitaries
with some elected officials from the Republic of Ireland who
are here this week in Washington for meetings and specifically
this hearing.
So Senator Billy Lawless, Deputy Darragh O'Brien and Deputy
Sean Barrett, you are--you are welcome here at any time in the
halls of Congress.
As perhaps the chairman and ranking member may now, and
certainly Chairman Royce will remember, last--in 2016 about a
month or two before the Brexit vote in June 2016, I went to
Chairman Royce and Ranking Member Engel and I said I would
really like to--for us in the Foreign Affairs Committee to hold
a hearing on Brexit.
And I think I have been pestering them every month or so
since then because at the time I thought there was a much
higher possibility of a vote for Brexit than was commonly
thought in the mainstream media either in the U.K. or the U.S.
And sure enough, by 52-48 Brexit ended up happening--one of--a
couple very interesting and surprising election results in that
year.
One of the reasons why I was so concerned about Brexit was
the impact, obviously, on the U.S.-U.K. relationship, a very
important relationship. Losing the U.K. as a voice at the Ryder
EU table, which I believe would hurt U.S. influence, but also
and especially the unintended consequence it would have on the
peace process in Northern Ireland.
One of the great achievements of American, Irish, and
British foreign policy, one of the few achievements in foreign
policy peace processes in my lifetime has been the Northern
Ireland peace process, and both Democrats and Republicans on
Capitol Hill can be proud of that because we played a leading
role in pushing our own U.S. administration at the Presidential
level to get diplomatically involved.
It was at the urging of Republican Congressman Pete King
and Democratic Congressman Richard Neal and Joe Crowley and a
number of others who have retired that President Clinton gave a
visa to Gerry Adams, brought Sinn Fein into a political
process.
At first it was controversial but the British eventually
saw the wisdom in that. We ended up having a cease fire and,
sure enough, especially through the good work of George
Mitchell and the support of Dublin and London, were able to
reach the Good Friday agreement.
But now because of Brexit, what for 20 years has been a
seamless border, I have crossed it by accident--you can
literally be driving along the road and not realize that you
have crossed the border in fact a couple times--now that is
suddenly all at risk, and as you may have noticed just recently
as this week, you saw the--apparently, British Prime Minister
Theresa May had reached an agreement only an hour later to
reverse that and here we are.
So when I ask my questions I am going to focus specifically
on the border issue. There are a number of very important
aspects of Brexit, specifically for the United States.
And so, again, we will commend the leadership of the
subcommittee for holding this hearing and I thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you, and welcome aboard.
And a new welcome aboard, of course, was John Curtis. Do
you have an opening statement for us today?
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just briefly I do, and would like to mention due to other
commitments I won't be able to answer my questions in person
but would like to submit those and look forward to hearing from
you.
However, I would want to make sure that I express my
appreciation for me and my constituents in Utah for the great
relationship that we have with the United Kingdom for the many
years of history of that relationship for the mutually
beneficial things that flow from that relationship and look
forward to maintaining that.
In addition, hoping that as this Brexit moves forward it
can be done as gracefully as possible so that we can enjoy that
same relationship with others in the European Union, and thank
you for being here today.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I will now introduce our panelists and,
again, thank you to each and every one of you today and, as I
say, if you could put it down to about 5 minutes then we can
all have a nice dialogue about the points that you've made.
So, first, what I will do is I will introduce all of you
and then we will go one by one.
First we have Nile Gardiner, and he's the director of the
Margaret Thatcher Center for Freedom at the Heritage
Foundation, and don't let anybody every suggest because I love
the Irish, as my boss, Ronald Reagan, did, that we didn't also
love Margaret Thatcher. So on the record there.
Dr. Gardiner is an expert on USA-U.K. relationships and
previously served as an aide to Lady Thatcher from 2000 to
2002. He earned a doctorate in history from Yale and holds
degrees from Oxford University as well.
And Marjorie Chorlins--all right--as vice president for
European Affairs at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the
executive director of the U.S.-U.K. Business Council.
She has worked in both the private and public sectors with
increasing seniority. She served as a deputy assistant
secretary within the Commerce Department and held senior
positions with Motorola as well.
She is a graduate of John Hopkins School of Advanced
International Studies and Wellesley College.
Finally, we have with us Thomas Wright. He is the director
of the Center on the United States and Europe at the Brookings
Institute.
Previously, he was executive director at the Chicago
Council on Global Affairs, a lecturer at the University of
Chicago and a senior researcher for the Princeton Project on
National Security.
He has earned a doctorate from Georgetown University and
other degrees from Cambridge University and the University in
Dublin.
Your full written statements will be made part of the
record and so Mr. Gardiner, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF NILE GARDINER, PH.D., DIRECTOR, MARGARET THATCHER
CENTER FOR FREEDOM, THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Gardiner. Yes. Thank you. Chairman Rohrabacher, Ranking
Member Meeks, and distinguished members, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before your committee.
For reasons of time, I will be summarizing parts of my
written statement. Today's hearing takes place at a crucially
important moment for the United Kingdom, America's closest
friend and ally.
On June 23rd, 2016, 17.4 million Britons voted to leave the
European Union in a historic referendum with nearly 52 percent
of the vote. Turnout was over 72 percent of the electorate.
A majority of the British people voted to retake control of
Britain's borders, laws, trade, and destiny with an emphatic
declaration of national sovereignty and self-determination.
On March 29th, 2019, Great Britain will leave the European
Union and, for the first time in nearly half a century, it will
be free to negotiate its own free trade deals and fully shape
its own path.
Brexit offers the British people an opportunity to forge a
new future as a truly global outward-looking, innovative, and
prosperous world power, a standard bearer of economic freedom
and liberty.
Despite the dire warnings presented by opponents of Brexit
in what was dubbed Project Fear, Britain has thrived since the
Brexit referendum with growing inward investment into the U.K.,
falling unemployment, and a soaring stock market.
The British Government is presently negotiating a post-
Brexit arrangement with 27 other members of the European Union
who are represented by the European Commission.
The talks, which began in June this year, have already gone
through several rounds with the seventh due to take place later
this month.
The negotiations are highly complex and have at times been
tense, especially over the EU's financial demands, which have
been rightly criticized in the U.K. in some quarters as
excessive and even extortionate.
The European Commission's extremely aggressive approach is
driven by several factors, including the desire to extract as
much money as possible from the British people before they are
freed from the shackles of the EU combined with the deep-seated
hostility toward Brexit among EU officials who see it as a
direct challenge to the European project.
The European Commission has taken the wrong lessons from
Britain's EU exit. Brexit sent a clear message that Europe
needs greater sovereignty, decentralization of power and
increased political accountability.
This should be a moment for humility rather than arrogance
from European Union officials. Yet, the response of European
Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has been to double
down and call for even greater powers for Brussels.
His recent State of the Union address before the European
Parliament was a delusional rallying cry for a Federal Europe
at a time when voters across Europe are increasingly opting for
a very different vision.
The EU's unelected and unaccountable ruling elites fear
that Britain's exit will encourage other countries in the EU to
go down the same path as the U.K.
They believe that the terms of Britain's exit must be
severe and harsh in order to act as a deterrent and as a
warning to others that there are major risks and consequences
for going down the same path.
The European Commission's demand for a vast Brexit bill
before trade talks can even begin are, in my view, mean
spirited, unrealistic, and insulting.
Additionally, they are potentially an insurmountable
stumbling block to any agreement being reached between London
and Brussels.
If the EU continues to insist on making demands that are
onerous and unacceptable, the United Kingdom should be prepared
to walk away from talks with Brussels and pursue a no-deal
option whereby Great Britain trades with the European Union
under World Trade Organization rules.
This would be a far better course than accepting terms
which are unpalatable to the British people. Britain is a
global economic power, but now it conducts more business with
the rest of the world than it does with the EU.
While a genuine free trade deal with the EU would be ideal,
Britain can thrive and prosper if necessary without one.
Britain's a huge export market for European producers and goods
and services will continue to flow between the U.K. and EU
regardless of whether a formal agreement is in place.
To be a truly sovereign nation, Britain must be outside of
the EU single market, customs union, and the jurisdiction of
the European Court of Justice. These should be clear red lines
for the Brexit negotiations.
The United States has a major strategic interest in the
long-term success of Brexit as well as an enduring
transatlantic alliance which has remained the foundation of
post-war U.S. global leadership.
An independent Britain will be a stronger ally for America
than one submerged within an increasingly Federal Europe.
Britain in the Brexit era is a powerful force on the world
stage, playing a leading role in bolstering NATO's eastern
flank in the Baltic States, acting as the second biggest
contributor to U.S.-led operations against ISIS, and preparing
to launch two world-class air craft carriers, far from
retreating to isolationism.
Brexit Britain is emerging as a growing force to be
reckoned with across the globe. Brexit will only strengthen the
transatlantic alliance rather than weaken it, leading to a more
self-confident Britain that is better able to stand with the
United States.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to testify before
you today. In conclusion, Britain's decision to leave the EU
should be a cause for celebration here in America, and as
Britain's foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, noted in his speech
to the Conservative Party Conference in Manchester recently, it
is time to let the British Lion roar again on the world stage,
a formidable force for freedom alongside the American eagle.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gardiner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

STATEMENT OF MS. MARJORIE CHORLINS, VICE PRESIDENT FOR EUROPEAN
AFFAIRS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR OF U.S.-U.K. BUSINESS COUNCIL, U.S.
CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Ms. Chorlins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member, distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you
very much for the opportunity to testify today on the economic
impact of Brexit and how we can strengthen relationship between
the U.S. and the U.K.
The Chamber established the U.S.-U.K. Business Council to
provide a platform for American businesses to be heard as the
U.K. resets its relationship with the EU.
Our members are eager to deepen our bilateral relationship
after Brexit takes place, up to and including negotiation of a
free trade agreement when the time is right.
The Council has provided inputs to Brussels and London on
several issues, including the future of U.K.-EU economic
relations, the urgent need for an early agreement on a
transition period, and the dangers of a no-deal Brexit.
Today's hearing is another useful opportunity to ensure
American investors' voices are heard. The longstanding special
relationship between the U.S. and U.K. is built on deep and
abiding economic and security ties.
The durability of this alliance derives from our shared
commitment to rule of law, democratic norms, and free
enterprise.
American companies have long looked to the U.K. as a safe
and certain market. Even though the U.S. has no direct role in
the negotiations between the U.K. and EU, we have a
responsibility to advocate for a minimally disruptive outcome.
If Brexit is mismanaged or if the U.K. crashes out of the
EU without an agreement, the economic consequences would be
substantial.
As had been noted, to date progress in these complicated
divorce proceedings has been limited, especially on the three
primary issues of citizens' rights, border in Ireland, and the
U.K.'s financial obligations.
European leaders do acknowledge that some progress is made,
but as of today they believe momentum is not yet sufficient to
move to discussion of the future relationship.
Our hope is that they will finally agree to move forward
with that broader discussion at the European Council meeting
later this month.
Still, that leaves less than a year to negotiate and ratify
the final terms of the U.K.'s exit and to outline the terms of
their future relationship. The clock is ticking, and time is
running short.
Bilateral economic ties between the U.S. and U.K. are
significant. We are each other's single largest foreign
investors, and more than 2.5 million jobs depend directly on
those investments.
U.S. companies have invested approximately $600 billion in
the U.K., which represents nearly a quarter of U.S. investment
in Europe and approximately 12 percent of all U.S. foreign
investment worldwide.
British companies have invested more than $480 billion
here. One point one million Americans work for these companies.
Every American state has jobs that are connected to or
originated from an investment by a U.K. company. These are high
quality and high-paying jobs.
The U.K. is our fourth largest export destination. U.S.
goods and services exports to the U.K. exceeded $120 billion in
2016, building a $15 billion trade surplus.
Over 42,000 American firms directly export to the U.K. and
more than 7,500 American companies have operations there. Given
the depth of our existing relationship, the Brexit negotiations
and follow-on U.K.-EU talks matter deeply for American
business.
It is important to underline that much of the U.S.
investment in the U.K. was made with an eye toward accessing
the much larger EU single market.
A future U.K.-EU trade agreement will almost certainly not
replicate the economic advantages of Britain's current
membership in the single market.
For example, financial services firms are likely to lose
their passporting rights to operate in all EU jurisdictions
from their U.K. headquarters. Changes in the regulatory space
also are anticipated.
Divergences between the U.K. and EU rules will make
compliance more difficult and expensive for U.S. companies with
interests across Europe.
Digital privacy compliance mechanisms would also be in
legal jeopardy if the EU and U.K. do not negotiate an agreement
on data flows.
This will affect every American company that does business
on either side of the English Channel. A no deal Brexit with no
negotiated outcome governing the future terms of trade
regulation or the movement of labor would be a disaster for
U.S. companies. The consequences will be immediate and severe.
For trade, implementing the so-called ``WTO option'' would
likely lead to sizeable losses in two-way trade and investment.
The WTO has not liberalized international trade in services to
nearly the same degree as the EU.
Services represent an outsized share of U.S. companies'
investment in and exports from Britain. So a lack of regulatory
certainty would be particularly damaging.
How many jobs will leave Britain and where they may end up
is among the most difficult changes to predict. Many companies
are understandably waiting for further clarity before green
lighting any new investments in the U.K.
American investors have developed worst case contingency
plans, which they may be forced to execute if clarity isn't
forthcoming quickly.
Even as the Brexit negotiations play out, the U.K. is and
will remain a vital economic partner for the United States. The
U.K. has a talented English-speaking and tech savvy workforce.
Its government has traditionally preferred a regulatory
model that rewards innovation and encourages competition, much
like the American model.
The U.K. has been a consistent advocate for the digital
economy, ensuring regulatory decisions are fact based and rely
on sound science and has supported a predictable and
transparent business climate.
While we will miss that voice in Brussels, the U.K.'s
departure creates opportunities for the U.S. to strengthen our
bilateral ties, up to and including a possible free trade
agreement when the time is right.
Any commercially meaningful U.S.-U.K. agreement should
focus heavily on the services sector and also on setting global
standards in important areas such as digital trade, regulatory
cooperation, investment protection, promoting trade
opportunities for small and medium sized enterprises,
competition, and treatment of state-owned enterprises.
While traditional market access barriers are low between
the U.S. and U.K., removing all tariffs would still yield
significant benefits.
This is especially true for small companies for which a 5
percent tariff or an extra customs form may be the difference
between a profitable sale and a missed opportunity.
In closing, even as we pursue closer U.S.-U.K. ties,
strengthening our ties with the rest of Europe also must remain
a priority.
The U.S. has promoted a more integrated European market for
the past seven decades. This has proven tremendously successful
for the transatlantic alliance and for American companies that
do business in Europe.
With that in mind, we must ultimately endeavor to deepen
trade and investment ties with both Britain and the EU in the
years ahead.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Chorlins follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
And Dr. Wright.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS WRIGHT, PH.D., DIRECTOR, CENTER ON THE
UNITED STATES AND EUROPE, BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Mr. Wright. Thank you.
Chairman Rohrabacher, Ranking Member Meeks, and
distinguished members, thank you for the opportunity to testify
in front of this committee.
We are gathered here at a crucial moment in the history of
post-war Europe. The U.K.'s decision to exit the EU I think is
the most significant and important decision it has taken since
the end of the Cold War. It raises fundamental questions about
Europe's future and the United States has a vital interest in
how these questions are resolved.
In my written testimony, I provide my analysis of where the
negotiations stand and where I think they are likely to end up.
I believe there will eventually be a deal largely along the
lines laid out by the EU side and I am happy to elaborate that
in the questions.
But I would like to use the time allotted to me to speak
now about American interests in U.S. policy in the Brexit
process.
In my view, if Brexit is going to occur, the United States
has a vital interest in a Brexit that produces as strong and as
prosperous a U.K. as possible and as strong and as prosperous
an EU as possible, working closely with each other and with
America.
This should be the organizing principle of U.S. policy
toward Brexit. We should actively consider any steps that can
facilitate this outcome and we should oppose any steps that
undermine it.
With that in mind, I am concerned by the current policy
pursued by the Trump administration. The Trump administration
has supported Brexit rhetorically put in practice it has done
the U.K. few favors.
Just two quick examples--in a major speech on U.S.-U.K.
relations in November, the U.S. Secretary of Commerce Wilbur
Ross made it clear that if the U.K. wanted a free trade
agreement with the U.S., the U.K. would have to choose between
the United States and the EU. The U.K. would have to choose
U.S. regulatory standards and diverge from those of the EU.
Secretary Ross' logic is clear. The U.K. is in a weak
position and needs trade deals with third parties so the United
States can afford to take a maximist position in negotiations.
Second example--at the World Trade Organization in October,
the Trump administration sided with Brazil and other countries
to oppose a deal already reached between the U.K. and the EU to
divide agricultural import quotas between then, greatly
complicating Britain's diplomacy.
More generally, the Trump administration has pursued a very
passive approach to the negotiations. It sees it purely as an
internal issue and has not identified any U.S. equities
including maintaining the Good Friday agreement, preserving
security cooperation between the U.K. and EU 27, or ensuring
there is a negotiated settlement between the parties.
On the contrary, it has given the impression that the U.K.
and the EU's problems may present the United States with
immediate opportunities.
I am in favor of closer economic ties between the U.S. and
the U.K. But at this time, I do not believe that Washington and
London should pursue a bilateral FTA along the lines of that
proposed by Secretary Ross and the Trump administration.
There are very few tariffs between the U.S. and U.K. so any
FTA would have to focus primarily on regulatory standards.
The Trump administration's current policy is to use all of
the leverage at its disposal including the threat of tariffs to
compel the U.K. to diverge from the EU regulations and adopt
ours.
That, I think, has two problems. The first is that the
negotiations are unlikely to succeed on these terms and will
alienate much of the U.K. population. I can expand more on that
later.
The second and I think even more critical problem is that
in the unlikely event that they do succeed on the terms set by
Secretary Ross, they will by definition reduce the U.K.'s trade
access to the EU. The more the U.K. diverges from the EU
regulatory standards the less assess they will have to the
single market.
The next effect of this will be to damage the economy of
the U.K. and the EU, which will also damage U.S. economic and
strategic interests.
It should be noted that closer economic ties between the
U.K. and the EU is, as close as possible, is the official
position of the U.K. Government, which is seeking a
comprehensive trade deal. They should be free to do so without
being pressured and by the United States.
And more generally, the U.S. should make it clear to the
U.K. and the EU that it favors a negotiated agreement. We can
live with almost any deal acceptable to both parties but a
Brexit without a deal would not be in our interests.
The United States--finally, as I am running out of time, I
would like to say a word about Northern Ireland. We are
approaching the 20th anniversary of the Good Friday agreement,
an agreement, as members have noted, that many Americans on
both sides of the aisle have helped to bring about and sustain.
It is absolutely necessary for the United States to remain
engaged on preserving the peace in Northern Ireland. I
elaborate this--on this in my written testimony but suffice to
say here that this peace I think is threatened by the current
state of the negotiations.
If there is not a special--a consideration for Northern
Ireland to ensure that there is an open border I think it does
put the Good Friday agreement at risk.
As a first step, the Trump administration should
immediately reinstate the position of special envoy for
Northern Ireland, which I understand was abolished by Secretary
Tillerson along with other envoys and prioritize and
preserving--and preserving the Good Friday agreement should
also be in issue in relations with the U.K. and the EU.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wright follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you all very much for your
testimony, and let's just--what I am going to do is I am going
to make sure my colleagues--you know what I am going to do?
I know that you have a special place in your heart for
Ireland, just from what you've said, so I am going to give you
a chance to talk about the Irish part of this right now before
we ask the rest of our questions. You can be the lead off guy.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you. You are very gracious and thank the
indulgence of my colleagues.
Dr. Wright, I wanted to follow up and actually this is a
perfect segue because you just completed on this. I noticed in
your written testimony you mentioned the recent study by the
U.K. Government and the EU Commission which identified--and
this was, frankly, a higher number than even I expected--the
U.K. Government EU Commission report identified a 142 areas of
cross-border activities, from health care to agriculture, which
I was familiar with. There are 142 areas, all of which would be
detrimentally impacted by Brexit.
Could you expand on the findings of the report specifically
as it relates to the border communities, whether they are--
regardless of which side of the border they currently sit on?
Mr. Wright. Yes. The study showed that the cross-border
cooperation that was provided for under the Good Friday
agreement really rests on regulatory alignment between the
Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.
So the fact that they have the same regulations on
agriculture, on health, on these wide array of issues, means
that that they are able to cooperate on these issues, and in
the aggregate this really, I think, has had a very progressive
impact in terms of the peace process. It has built trust across
the two communities and across the border. If there is
significant divergence in regulations all of those areas of
cooperation, my understanding is, either come to an end or are
significantly reduced.
And so the Irish Government and the EU 27 and the British
Government I think are concerned by the broader impact of
Brexit on Northern Ireland separately than the border issue
which, of course, is also a very severe issue with major
implications.
Mr. Boyle. I'll just share one specific anecdote that I
just heard the other day that crystalizes part of what you're
talking about.
The Irish Government funds a world class cancer research
center and in order to reach the northern counties it decided
to situate it in Derry, even though Derry is in fact not a part
of the Republic of Ireland.
But just geographically, in order to reach that part of the
Republic of Ireland and the counties in Northern Ireland that
are part of the U.K. decided that that would geographically be
the smartest place to put it as that's a big population center.
Now they are concerned what happens if you have different
regulations regulating health and the research that goes into
cancer, what that will do for pharmaceuticals. Essentially, it
creates a massive headache.
With the breakdown of talks on Monday where one moment
Financial Times is reporting breakthrough deal and the BBC
reporting the same thing, and then about an hour later, not so
fast.
This week has, obviously, been tumultuous--probably the
most tumultuous on the border issue. Again, Dr. Wright, if you
could discuss the various political issues at play.
I have had a number of colleagues come up to me asking me
so what exactly is this about, and if you could elaborate on
the issues that have prevented an agreed-upon solution to
prevent a hard border, even though it seems to be something
that Washington, London, Dublin, nationalists, and unionists
all agree on and yet in practice difficult to achieve.
Mr. Wright. Yes. Thank you.
The British Government, after Brexit, made it clear that
Brexit meant leaving the single market and the customs union.
So it would leave and the market that allowed for free movement
of good, capital, services, and people and the common tariff
area.
It is widely believed that if Britain leaves the customs
union and the single market that there will have to be a
customs border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of
Ireland--that without it there would be too--there will be
danger of smuggling. There will be all sorts of problems that
would arise.
And so in order to prevent a hard border from happening,
either the U.K. has to remain inside the single market and
customs union as a whole or there needs to be what the
diplomats I understand call--called regulatory alignment
whereby Northern Ireland chooses to maintain the regulations of
the single market and customs union so there would be no gap
with the Republic of Ireland and there could be an open border.
And that position is unacceptable to the Democratic
Unionist Party, which is providing support through a competence
and supply agreement with Theresa May's government.
So they are unable to get that through without their
support and as a result we are at a deadlock because the EU 27
including the Irish Government is very strongly of the view
there is going to be a hard border. The DUP is opposed to the
proposed solution.
The British Government also says it doesn't want a hard
border. But it finds itself unable, I think, to support the
solution that was identified.
Mr. Boyle. Finally, I just want to ask about the special
envoys. They are not specifically related to Brexit but,
obviously, this is an area where a special envoy could help.
Could you speak a bit about the importance of the U.S.
maintaining a special envoy, something that was supported by
the Bush administration, obviously created under the Clinton
administration.
That was the formal official role that George Mitchell had,
something that has happened for the previous 20 years. And
also, if you could address perhaps a perception by some in
Washington who maybe aren't intimately involved in this issue
who just assume oh, that's--that's all well and good, right?
Didn't they achieve peace and everyone lives happily ever
after and maybe doesn't quite recognize them. Unfortunately,
reality is not necessarily as rosy as that picture.
Mr. Wright. Yes. Very briefly, you know, the U.S. has had a
crucial role in the Northern Ireland peace process from the
very beginning, and I think that's been critical to its
success.
Secretary Tillerson abolished this position along with
other special envoys. I think it made sense if this hadn't been
happening because even though there are problems with the
governance in Belfast. But with Brexit, I think it is
particularly important to have U.S. engagement.
I would just raise one other issues as well that I didn't
have in my written testimony. But I think there is also a role
for a nongovernmental involvement by the former diplomats and
political leaders who have been involved in Northern Ireland.
For instance, the Irish Government and EU, the U.K. could
agree to set up an international commission led by an American
that would try to identify solutions to the--to Brexit that
uphold the Good Friday agreement.
They may be seen as more independently minded than the
Irish Government is by the unionist community. So I think there
are imaginative ways that we could proceed here.
But simply having no engagement whatsoever and treating it
purely as an internal issue with no role for the United States
I think is regrettable.
Mr. Boyle. Yes, because, obviously, as we saw throughout
the '70s and '80s, the British Government is not going to be
perceived as a neutral arbiter by the nationalist community and
the Irish Government in Dublin is not going to be perceived as
a neutral arbiter by the unionist community, hence, the
positive role that the U.S. can play, having a strong
relationship with all sides.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And yes, we are friends with both our
British friends and our Irish friends, which makes us the
perfect in between.
Let me just note there will always be a logical explanation
of why we need to give all of our rights to make our own
decisions away to some central government, maybe even some
global government, and that led to some real problems even at
the level that Great Britain had given up certain rights, as
Mr. Gardiner had mentioned. The centralization and the
bureaucracy that it spawned was not necessarily, or at least
the British people obviously did not think it was in their
interests.
Maybe you can tell us, Mr. Gardiner, what--your analysis of
where the British people are at in all of this. Obviously, they
voted by very recognizable majority that they wanted to
separate from Brussels. What was their reason and tell us going
from there.
Mr. Gardiner. Well, thank you very much for the question,
and a very important question.
I think the reasons for Brexit are multiple. Primarily, the
British people voted to leave the European Union to reestablish
their own full sovereignty as a sovereign nation state, to take
back control of British laws, Britain's borders, Britain's
destiny as a free country, and I think the issue of self-
determination was absolutely the heart of Brexit.
It was also, I think, a desire on the part of the British
people to be able to really take full control of their own
border, decide who comes into the country.
At the moment, Britain does not have that full control in
terms of people coming in from the European Union.
But this was also, I think, a rejection of the European
Union ruling elite seen as increasingly unaccountable, aloof,
undemocratic.
It is not just in Britain I think that you have this
momentum. You see it all over Europe in many European countries
and the reality is that the European project today is viewed by
I would say the majority of the British people as outdated.
It hasn't moved with the times. It is seen as a hugely
centralized entity, a supranational entity that tramples upon
the rights of individual nation states.
And so national sovereignty is fundamentally important to
the British people and I believe that the U.S. Government
actually fully understands that and I think the support given
by the present U.S. administration for the British Government
over Brexit has been very much welcomed by the British side and
it is good that, you know, the White House supports Brexit and
views Brexit as a powerful force that will strengthen the
special relationship actually which indeed it will do.
But at the end of the day, Brexit was all about the desire
on the part of the British people to once again be a truly free
sovereign people. Those are universal extremely powerful
principles.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Excuse me. Is this same spirit not
identified in several other areas in Europe where we have in
Spain you have people who want to have their own government and
you have various peoples now throughout the world actually that
are suggesting that the right of self-determination is not
something that just no longer exists in the souls of human
beings in this modern age.
Let me just note that I believe that that same type of
desire for a group of people to control their own destiny and
not to be controlled by even a group of nations or a group of
other people is just--it is part of what America was all about
in the beginning and that--that spirit is still around in
different parts of the world today.
And the more you have centralization I know that that's a
different way of looking at government. The more centralized
your government and distant is it, the more likely that those
people holding power will be arrogant and less responsive than
if you have someone in your local community or your state or
even in your own country handling those same type of
governmental decision making.
And could you, okay--could you please let us know what the
trade is like between the United States and the EU versus the
United States and just Great Britain?
Ms. Chorlins. Certainly. The U.K., as I mentioned, is the
U.S.'s fourth largest export destination and our seventh
largest trading partner overall.
The EU is our single largest trading partner if you look at
it as a unified market.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Now, does that include Great Britain?
Ms. Chorlins. Yes, it does.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. So how much--I am trying to see how
much of that trade thing is Great Britain and the two entities
as compared to one another?
Ms. Chorlins. I don't have specific facts at my disposal
but I am happy to provide that in my written answers to the
subcommittee.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I'd like to--please do, because when we
are trying to figure out the economic, you know, impact of
this, exactly whether or not the EU is in itself absent of
Great Britain is--dominates or whether Great Britain is
actually a major force in this. We need to know. Dr. Gardiner
already has mentioned that the stock market in Great Britain is
soaring. Is that correct?
Mr. Gardiner. Well, it has soared since the Brexit
referendum and I'd say that, you know, Britain is doing
extremely well in the Brexit era, including in terms of foreign
direct investment, which has risen significantly over the past
year and tens of thousands of new jobs have been created in the
U.K. since the Brexit referendum.
It is significant that Google, actually, is building a
brand new European headquarters in London at the cost of $1
billion, employing 7,000 people.
It is a sign of U.S. confidence in Great Britain and the
United States has invested in the U.K. about $5 trillion worth
of corporate assets. That's 22 percent of America's total
overseas corporate assets invested.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Now, I find that predictions of gloom and
doom when someone is trying to make political determinations
usually are absolutely wrong--I mean, just totally wrong.
And we had--don't want to rub it in too much but the fact
is that we were going to face a major economic crisis and the
stock market was going to the bottom if our current President
was elected and it has had--and we have seen just the opposite.
And so when trying to determine what economic viability is
we should actually look at the figures, figure out what is--and
let me ask Dr. Wright.
So what do you predict in terms of economically this--a
separate entity with Great Britain? Is this going to be a
positive economic force for both Britain, maybe even Europe, or
is this going to be a negative force?
Mr. Wright. I think it is negative for both the U.K. and
the EU Brexit, I think, will damage the U.K. in several
respects.
The first is that the proposal by the British Government is
to engage on this global economic diplomacy to secure trade
deals with all sorts of countries including the U.S. They are
doing so at a time when protectionist sentiment is at post-Cold
War high. So it is extremely difficult to negotiate trade deals
in that environment.
The city of London, which is probably Britain's most
important services economy I think will lose much of its
ability to do business for the EU because of the lack of what's
called passporting rights that it enjoys under the single
market.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So you're predicting a, for----
Mr. Wright. There will, I think, be something of a--
something of a decline. The other--the other--I don't know how
large it will be but I think it will--it will damage the
British economy overall.
And the final point is that it is often said that Britain
can deregulate if it leaves the single market and reduces the
number of regulations.
The opposite is also possible. If Jeremy Corbyn were to be
elected Prime Minister, he will be free to massively increase
U.S. regulation beyond that which is enjoyed--which is imposed
by the EU at the moment.
So you could easily see the arrow going the other direction
as well. So I think it is quite risky. That being said, they
have decided to leave, which is why I have argued for as close
an economic relationship between the U.K. and the EU and
between the U.S. and the U.K. and the EU.
So I think it is important to make sure that this works if
this is what they want to do. But I don't think we should
believe that there is enormous economic opportunities out there
that have not been availed of to date.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And Dr. Gardiner, you're not--you're
pretty optimistic as compared to pessimistic?
Mr. Gardiner. Yes. Actually, I mean, just in response to
Dr. Wright's comments, I would say that there is no evidence
whatsoever of any flight of capital out of the city of London
since the Brexit referendum. In fact, quite the opposite is
happening.
And as we saw, when Britain decided not to be part of the
European single currency, the city of London, the world's
biggest financial center, thrived and prospered outside of the
single currency and I think we are going to see the same thing
with Britain outside of the--outside of the European Union,
freed of the immense regulatory burdens that exist within the
EU.
And so there is not a shred of evidence to suggest that
Britain's economy or the city of London will suffer as a result
of being outside of the European Union. Not one U.S. investment
bank, for example, has decided to close its offices in London
and relocate elsewhere in Europe.
So American confidence and global confidence in the U.K. is
extremely high and already Britain is beginning to enter into
trade discussions--negotiations with over 70 countries across
the world.
And so there is every reason to believe there will be a
highly successful U.S.-U.K. free trade deal and trade
agreements between the United Kingdom, the world's fifth
largest economy, and nations across the--across the globe.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you, and we will wait and see
what happens and then we will--some--one of you guys are going
to have to buy the round of drinks for whoever--whoever was
right on this one.
Ms. Chorlins. Mr. Chairman, I would just note that while it
is the case that jobs may not yet have moved from American
companies who are present in the U.K., it is very much the case
that American companies have significant contingency plans in
place and some of them have in fact announced their decision to
move some part of their employee base from the U.K. to the
continent because of this uncertainty about the relationship in
the future. That's just the practical reality.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So when--we will wait and see if Britain
has a market that will attract more companies back. Then it is
making its own decisions as compared to whether it is making
its economic decisions with all those other countries being
involved and setting the policy that Great Britain will have
just like everybody else.
So with that said, Mr. Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was going to ask that very same question because I know
in our--talking to some of our--coming from New York, my
financial services community where we have got, you know, huge
trade in financial service and in services that they are
talking about contingency plans now as to whether they move.
Some, of course, coming back to New York and staying there
but others are looking at some other European cities because
they also want that connection with the EU because they are,
you know, as you said, collectively part of our largest trading
bloc collectively and they are trying to figure out how they
will continue with both because they are significant--it is
significant for both the EU and the U.K.
I am just--one of my concerns, of course, is I think that
the unity of the EU and setting rules collectively together,
working together, and we have been looking at standards even
with the United States.
It helps us with global trade and the economies all of over
the place. The lack of that is why I started out in my
statement of lose-lose-lose.
I see there is opportunities for each and every one of us
to lose in that regards if we don't figure out how to make sure
that we are working on doing this thing collectively, which is
why--and I'll start with you, Dr. Wright.
I didn't, you know, try to figure out why then would Prime
Minister May commit to bringing the U.K. outside of the custom
union and single market, thereby having a hard Brexit early in
the negotiations since, certainly, it would make sense for
Britain to remain within the customs union, I think, similarly
like Turkey has, considering how much trade the U.K. and the
EU. does.
So, I mean, can you give me any--fathom of the reasons why
or difficulties that are----
Mr. Wright. Yes, absolutely.
I think that the--it is a terrific question. I think the
short answer is that to remain part of the single market, which
would allow them to essentially continue to trade in the
financial services sector and all of its other service
industries, would have meant accepting the free movement of
peoples because there are four freedoms to the single market--
goods, services, capital, and people.
And the EU has said that those are indivisible. You cannot
cherry pick and say we are going to take three of the four.
The U.K., I think, would like to cherry pick and would like
to take some of those and keep their access on those but reject
the others and the EU has rejected that because the integrity
of the single market is of vital importance to them and as a
result Theresa May's--Theresa May's government has said it is
leaving the single markets and customs union.
I would be interested in Nile's view on that, too. I am not
sure we'd probably disagree much on the diagnosis of why that's
the case. But I think that's the nub of the--of the
disagreement.
Mr. Gardiner. Yes, that's an excellent question.
So I think Dr. Wright has made some very good points. It
would be really impossible for the United Kingdom to remain
inside the customs union and the single market if it is to
become a truly sovereign nation.
If Britain remains inside the customs union it would not be
able to negotiate its own free trade agreements and this--this
is a big part of Brexit, the idea of Britain being a truly
global actor free to negotiate its own free trade deals all
over the world including with the United States.
As a member of the--as a member of the customs union,
Britain would not be able to that. As a member of the single
market, Britain, as Dr. Wright mentioned, would not be able to
control its borders.
It would have no say really over who comes in from the rest
of Europe. And so fundamentally important issues.
And so the British view to retake control and reasserts its
sovereignty. And so remaining in the single market and the
customs union would be impossible if it was to honor those
commitments.
Mr. Meeks. It sounds to me that you're talking about part
of the issue with Brexit has more--has also to do with
migration and the problems that was taking place on the
European continent as opposed to talking about, as Mrs.
Chorlins is talking about, the integration of markets where we
can do trade and collectively there is the free flow of
business going across these borders. Is that not correct?
Mr. Gardiner. I think certainly that's--the issue of border
control and immigration was an important factor in the Brexit--
in the Brexit referendum--a major issue.
But I do believe that Britain is in a position to negotiate
a strong free trade agreement with the European Union. Britain
should continue to be able to have that access to European
markets.
It is in the interest of the United Kingdom and the EU to
reach an agreement that is good for both sides. After all, a
huge amount of exports from the EU go into the U.K.
You look, for example, at the German car market. About one
in every four or five German cars goes to Britain. And so it is
Germany's interest to strike a good--a good deal.
And I think that a free trade agreement between both sides
actually would be in the interest of both Britain and the--and
the European Union.
Mr. Meeks. Except I have found that, you know, sometimes
initially it is thought that the EU would just accept whatever
the U.K. said in this.
U.K. would be able to dominate that discussion and the U.K.
I think is finding out now that the EU is not just going to
give them whatever they want. That is not what the realities
are starting to show, and as a result, there is going to be a
give and take.
And I know in talking to some of our companies in the
United States as a result because one of the things that
business does not like--and I'll ask Mrs. Chorlins--is
uncertainty where you don't know, because they have to plan for
five and 10 and 15 years down the road.
They can't move, you know, just with--on whim with an
uncertainty. So I think that would have--that's going to affect
overall how we determine and where we negotiate free trade
agreements.
In fact, Mrs. Chorlins, you said that we will want to do
something with the U.K. when the time was right. That was an
important piece--when the time is right. When would that be?
I mean, I understand from the agreement with the--with
Brexit and that you can't negotiate anything until at least
after 2 years after the deal is done.
So how far down the road is it and how does that affect the
thinking of our American companies as to how they are going to
do business or where they are going to do business, whether it
is in the EU or the U.K. or anyplace else and try to do a deal.
Ms. Chorlins. Mr. Ranking Member, I think you touched on a
very important point about the need for certainty and that's
why the business community has been as active in pursuing or
following these negations.
As far as when the U.S. and U.K. could actually negotiate a
trade agreement between themselves, that's driven largely by
when the EU and U.K. complete their negotiations.
Until we know what the U.K.'s relationship will look like
with the EU, it will be impossible really for us to know what
the right terms should be for a U.K.-U.S. negotiation.
So the timing really is largely driven by the pace at which
the U.K. and the EU negotiate their own future trade
arrangement.
But you're absolutely right, certainty is something that
the business community is eagerly looking for in this process,
and we have gone out of our way to make clear to both the U.K.
and the EU governments that uncertainty about the way forward
is going to have a detrimental economic effect.
Mr. Meeks. And then, you know, because it becomes
important, you know, to me still once Brexit is done that the
EU and the U.K. still have relationships.
But my question is how will the U.K. be able to maintain a
friction-free trade with the EU's internal market after leaving
it because it rules out the European court of justice
jurisdiction and continued regulatory alignments.
So how is that going to work?
Ms. Chorlins. Mr. Ranking Member, I think you've put your
finger on what is the I don't know how many billion euro
question.
But the real issue is, indeed, how do you structure a
relationship that minimizes the friction when you have to
thrash out issues such as the Irish border where we risk
serious delays if a border is reimposed and there is real
economic cost associated with that.
I think that we have yet to see from either the U.K. or the
EU clear indications of what their thinking is about the future
relationship between those two.
Clearly, both sides want to sustain a strong relationship.
They need each other. But how that works in practical terms is
very much an open question and one that both sides are working
through in very real time.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Wright, do you want to add anything? Dr.
Wright. Excuse me.
Mr. Wright. Yes. There is no way, I think, for the U.K. to
have as much access as it currently does if it leaves to single
market and the customs union. It is just impossible.
Any deal that they do will be significantly less in terms
of access. A deal will not be agreed by March 2019. By March
2019, they propose only to have a broad political statement
about what the deal would look like.
It would then take many years for the trade deal to be
negotiated. It has to be ratified by every single country in
the EU including several by referendum.
So during that period of time there will be a transition
deal under which it almost looks certain that Britain will have
to abide by all of the rules of the single market and customs
union without any influence or votes. And so there is a problem
about how that deal would be structured.
I think that--I very much agree with you. I think that is
why remaining in the customs union and the single market would
be a better choice for the U.K.
But this government has decided not to do that.
Interestingly, it was not necessarily a key part of the
referendum campaign. Some people said that. Some people did
not.
And so there wasn't a unified position on it in advance.
But I think therein lies the risk for the U.S. economy because
the U.S. really needs a strong U.K. and a strong EU. It was
mentioned a number of times in this but the U.S. actually does
benefit from the EU.
If there is a Eurozone crisis or a breakup of the Eurozone,
that will cause a global financial crisis. The EU is a vital
partner of the U.S. and economic security like sanctions that
isn't a part of NATO or any other military organization.
You know, so it has all of these--it has all of these
benefits for the U.S. So I think moving the lose-lose-lose to a
win-win I think is a major challenge.
Mr. Meeks. And the way we do things today when you're
talking about trade I think Mrs. Chorlins talked about it--data
flows, which is important and how that's worked, and supply
chain.
You know, as we are talking about trade now, supply chain
is important. This is the way it develops. We no longer, you
know, the economy and trade we did it in the 19th and 20th
century.
This is the 21st century. Globalization is here. Things go
faster in speed than ever imagined before and there is
interconnectedness that depends upon our strength and if there
is a part of the chain that is weak then it could hurt and be
devastating to everybody as we saw what took place when we had
the financial crisis in the United States in 2008.
It affected everybody and not just the United States, and
that's why this is so important to all of us, whether you come
from--whether you're part of the EU or now a part of the U.K.
and, of course, the United States and why I feel that we have
got to make sure that there is, and we tell them this so that
can be a win-win-win because if we don't, we all will be
victimized and lose from it.
And I yield back to you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, thank you very much and thank you,
Mr. Meeks. I think we have had a very worthwhile discussion. I
am going to wait and see which one of you two guys in
particular--she was right there in the middle of all the facts
but you guys had your--have your opinions on this. This isn't a
safe seat or this is so we will watch and see.
Let me just note that I am really proud that the United
States led the way on this whole idea of self-determination. I
think that our Declaration of Independence says it all.
Government only derives its powers from the consent of the
governed and people have a right and must declare their right
to control their own destiny, and we declared that in our
Declaration of Independence.
That spirit, I think, is alive today and not just in Great
Britain but in other areas of the world where people are no
longer accepting the domination of other groups of people. And
I think that when you have a bureaucracy, and bureaucracies are
always arrogant, even if they are local bureaucracies, but they
become ever more arrogant and ineffective as far away from
those people who they are regulating as they go.
The farther away they go, the more arrogant it is, and I
think of the people I know in Great Britain who talked about
Brussels had a deep-seated just antagonistic relationship with
Brussels--people over there who they don't know who they are
and maybe don't even like people in Britain are making
decisions for them, economic decisions that affected their
lives.
I think that whole spirit--I know there are a lot of people
who think the spirit of nationalism is a negative force in this
world. I think that those--the greatest sins that have been
committed against the people on this planet, the human race,
have been done so by some not nationalistic enterprise but
instead by some global vision of whether it is radical Islamic
global world or whether it is some sort of communist world--
some ideal that they were going to superimpose and that all the
different things would then disappear because you'd have a
centralized government or based on benevolence and the
benevolence of those people would just come out naturally. I
don't think so. I don't think that's what government--I don't
think that's what happens. I don't think that's what actually
history will record, as the bigger the government gets and the
further away and the more it is going to control our lives for
the benefit of all, the more people get stepped on and the less
progress there is.
This is especially true, I believe, in this modern age, and
the fact is today smaller entities of government, whether it is
Great Britain as compared to all of Europe or whether it is
Singapore, whether it is--whatever entities are there, you can
do now--you've got global communications and global transfers
of wealth in one form or another in order to do business, and
that didn't happen in the years before. Maybe you needed a
bigger government at that time. But now you can have small
entities that are communicating with big entities all over the
world.
I'll be waiting to see whether or not, once this thing is--
all these things are settled--whether or not more people will
be trying to invest in Europe or whether more people will go to
Great Britain that is a--that is now separated from the EU.
That will be a very important historic occasion and it is ours
to see what happens with this.
So thank you for leading our discussion today. Thank you,
Gregory, for your major--he always contributes. It is always
right to the matter. We disagree on some things. But he is
really a genius and we love him.
So with that said, thank you all. This hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:56 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Note: Responses to these questions were not received prior to
printing.]

[all]
