- AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE OF MILITARY FORCE AND CURRENT TERRORIST THREATS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE OF MILITARY FORCE AND CURRENT TERRORIST
THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 25, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-62

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-424PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable Michael B. Mukasey (former Attorney General of the
United States).................................................     4
Brigadier General Richard C. Gross, USA, Retired, partner, Fluet
Huber + Hoang, PLLC (former legal counsel to the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff).....................................    12
The Honorable Matthew G. Olsen, lecturer on law, Harvard Law
School (former Director of the National Counterterrorism
Center)........................................................    20

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Michael B. Mukasey: Prepared statement.............     6
Brigadier General Richard C. Gross, USA, Retired: Prepared
statement......................................................    15
The Honorable Matthew G. Olsen: Prepared statement...............    22

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    74
Hearing minutes..................................................    75
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Material submitted for the record.......    77
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Rhode Island: Material submitted for the record...    84
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    90
Written responses from the Honorable Michael B. Mukasey to
questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Brad
Sherman, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.....................................................    92

AUTHORIZATION FOR THE USE OF MILITARY FORCE AND CURRENT TERRORIST
THREATS

----------

TUESDAY, JULY 25, 2017

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order.
Today we are going to review a critical national security
issue: The role of Congress in authorizing the use of military
force. We have a very distinguished panel to help us do so.
Our Nation continues to face the threat of radical jihadist
terrorism. We have confronted this deadly movement with some
measure of success, largely because of the skill, the
dedication, and the sacrifice of the brave men and women of our
armed services. But as recent attacks on the United States and
our allies--such as the United Kingdom--show, the threat
remains high. Our response must be coordinated, using
information and economic tools, too.
Today, most U.S. combat operations are conducted under the
Authorization for the Use of Military Force, or the AUMF, that
was enacted following the vicious September 11th, 2001 attacks
on our country. That AUMF has been used against al-Qaeda, the
Taliban, and what have since become known as ``associated
forces.'' Nearly 3 years ago, the Obama administration
determined that those forces include ISIS, which originated as
al-Qaeda in Iraq.
The continued reliance on this legal authority has spurred
debate. Some maintain that the 2001 AUMF has been stretched too
far. Some believe that Congress--most of whose members were not
here in 2001--should debate and reauthorize our military
engagement. We have Members of Congress who have fought these
wars, whose voices carry strong weight.
Over the last several years, this committee has conducted
more than 45 hearings related to conflicts fought under the
AUMF and we have often met in classified settings with military
commanders and other officials to review the grave terrorist
threat against our Nation. I know that our members on both
sides of the aisle take their responsibilities very seriously.
We have had many conversations about the AUMF.
I believe that the President has the authority under the
2001 AUMF to defeat and destroy ISIS. Key outside experts and
officials from the previous administration who have appeared
before this committee have testified to this. But I also
believe that a new and updated authorization for the use of
military force would be ideal. The challenge is getting
agreement on what exactly it should contain.
Proposed replacements vary widely. Some would empower the
Commander in Chief. Others would constrain him. Some would
target groups. Others would target ideologies. Some are limited
in time and place and type of military force. Others are
unlimited.
What I cannot support is any effort to repeal the 2001 AUMF
before reaching consensus on these issues. We face determined
enemies--al-Qaeda, ISIS, and the Taliban--absolutely committed
to harming us. There shouldn't be any signs of wavering in our
fight.
Today's witnesses will shed light on a few key questions:
Does the 2001 AUMF provide sufficient legal authority to deal
with all of today's threats? Does continuing to rely on that
authorization create any operational challenges or legal
dangers? What should--or shouldn't--be a replacement and what
should be included in that AUMF?
Authorizing the use of military force is a critical and
solemn congressional responsibility. This committee will
continue its focus on it.
I will now turn to Ranking Member Engel for his statement.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for calling this hearing.
To our witnesses, welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
We are grateful for your time and expertise.
The role of Congress in authorizing and overseeing the use
of American military force around the world is really such an
important issue.
Some of us have been trying to advance this debate for the
last several years. But for the most part, the topic has
remained on the back burner in the halls of Congress.
I am glad we are focusing on it today because I think the
need for congressional leadership is more important now than
ever.
The authorization for the use of military force passed by
Congress in 2001, and I was here then, authorized the President
to take military action against, and I quote, ``those nations,
organizations, or persons he determines planned, authorized,
committed, or aided the terrorist attacks that occurred on
September 11th, 2001, or harbored such organizations or
persons.''
In the intervening years, it has been used as a legal
justification for military force in a host of countries around
the world. Today, it is the legal basis for the fight against
ISIS.
That gives you a sense of just how broadly this
authorization has been interpreted by successive
administrations.
I was here when we passed this measure nearly 16 years ago,
and I have to say that none of us envisioned we would still be
relying on it nearly two decades later to fight an enemy that
didn't even exist when the Twin Towers came down. It has
essentially become a blank check.
Now, whatever you think of President Obama's foreign
policy, his administration did come to Congress and ask for an
updated authorization.
The current administration has not, and what concerns me
now is that we have seen escalating military activity on a
number of fronts--ratcheting up the use of force in
Afghanistan, a pledge by the administration to ramp up the
fight against ISIS, reckless talk about expanding the
Guantanamo Bay Detention Facility--which even President Bush
wanted to close--declaring parts of Somalia so-called ``areas
of active hostilities,'' which decreased oversight of air
strikes and increases the risk that American forces could be
drawn into clan conflicts, and strikes against the Assad regime
and associated forces.
Now, I am not saying that we shouldn't do some of this. I
am not saying that we should withdraw from these challenges.
The fight against ISIS is critical to protect the national
security of the United States and our allies. We have seen too
many murdered children and families and must continue to ensure
that Assad does not use chemical weapons and we have invested
too much blood and treasure in Afghanistan to stand by and
watch it fall back into the hands of extremists.
But we have to ask ourselves: Are we comfortable sending
American service members into harm's way based on a virtually
limitless 2001 authorization? If so, what will be the next
skirmish supposedly covered by this 16-year-old measure?
Extended hostilities toward Assad's forces? Shooting down a
Russian MiG? This, to me feels like a slippery slope.
So Congress needs to do its job. We need to do what we
should have
d1 deg. done years ago and pass a new
authorization governing the conflicts we are engaged in today.
And frankly, even though we call it an authorization, what we
need is a limitation.
The 2001 authorization is too broad. It needs to be put out
to pasture and scaled back. We need an authorization tailored
to the challenges we face today, one that gives the
administration the tools it needs to ensure our security
without dragging us into another war, turning the slippery
slope into a dangerous cliff.
Congress has the power to do this and we need to act. But
for us to craft a measure with the right boundaries we need to
know what strategies the United States is pursuing in these
global hot spots.
We have U.S. troops on the ground in Syria but we still
don't have a clear sense of the end game there or when the
troops will come home.
With the conflict in Afghanistan once again heating up and
a disturbing spike in civilian casualties, we have yet to learn
the Trump administration's approach to America's longest war.
And now that we have received the administration's plan to
deal with ISIS, I am not clear how it differs at all from the
approach of the last administration.
We haven't heard anything from the administration about how
it intends to win the peace in all these places once the
fighting is over.
I can tell you one thing--slashing funding for diplomacy
and development is the wrong approach that the administration
is doing. Planning a war without planning to secure the peace
is a sure path toward future conflict and instability and if we
don't have a strong State Department and USAID, we are taking
away the tools to build that long-term solution.
You cannot make foreign policy flying by the seat of your
pants, especially when it comes to our men and women in
uniform. The administration should be up here explaining how
they plan to deal with these conflicts, not careening from
crisis to crisis.
But one way or another, we, Congress, need to act. It is
time to retire the 2001 AUMF and stop shirking our
responsibility. I have an approach that I have been working on.
Other members have offered their views as well.
If these approaches aren't perfect at first, it doesn't
mean we can throw up our hands and walk away. It means we need
to work across the aisle to find the right answer and the right
approach.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. I thank
you again, Mr. Chairman. I want to hear from our witnesses
about the right way to grapple with this problem.
Before I yield back, I would like to ask unanimous consent
that Representative Barbara Lee be allowed to ask questions
after all members of the committee have had their chance at
this morning's hearing.
There is strong interest in this issue from the advocacy
community. We have received statements for the record from
Human Rights First, Third Way, and the Constitution Project as
well as a letter from a coalition of human rights, civil
liberties, and faith-based organizations and I would also like
to ask unanimous consent to enter these documents into the
record.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
We are pleased to welcome our colleague, Congresswoman
Barbara Lee from California.
And as to your suggested approach there, Mr. Engel, I quite
concur. I think it needs to be bipartisan.
This morning we are pleased to be joined by a distinguished
panel that we think will shed light on this.
The Honorable Michael Mukasey served as the 81st Attorney
General of the United States and as a U.S. district judge in
the Southern District of New York.
We have Brigadier General Richard Gross, partner at the
FH&H law firm in northern Virginia. Previously General Gross
served for over 30 years in the U.S. Army. He was the legal
counsel to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
We have Mr. Matt Olsen, a lecturer on law at Harvard Law
School. Previously, Mr. Olsen served as the director of the
National Counterterrorism Center.
So without objection, the witnesses' full prepared
statements will be made part of the record and all members will
have 5 calendar days to submit any statements or questions or
any extraneous material for the record.
Judge, would you like to begin? Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MICHAEL B. MUKASEY (FORMER ATTORNEY
GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES)

Judge Mukasey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Before I make any remarks, I'd like to thank both the chair
and the ranking member for having invited me and for holding
this hearing, which is, as you both pointed out, enormously
important and represents a real political commitment to putting
this Congress on record as it should be with this country and I
really appreciate that.
I am not going to read my statement. It is in the record. I
would simply make two additional points that are additional to
what I said in my prepared remarks, one having to do with the
sunset provision, which I endorsed simply because it does
provide for this added opportunity on every several years to
recommit to a course of action.
Obviously, there are authorities that have to remain in
force notwithstanding the arrival of a sunset so that, for
example, people detained in an initial encounter,
notwithstanding the sunset there would have to a be a separate
determination with respect to them. It doesn't become a home
free all for them.
And secondly, with respect to a requirement or statement of
strategy, which I did not touch on in my remarks but I think
that, obviously, it is important to have a general idea of what
you are going to do. But a statement of strategy that tells
your adversaries what it is you plan to do and how it is you
plan to do it I don't think is well taken and, as I believe the
ranking member pointed out, micro managing any combat is a
dangerous thing. So that that ought to be taken into account.
So far as our not having been able to envision being in
Afghanistan 16 years on from 9/11, I should point out that when
the bombers hit Pearl Harbor, they did not also drop leaflets
that said, don't worry, folks, this is all going to be over by
1945.
You never know when at the beginning of combat how it is
going to end. That is the nature of a conflict like this. But I
don't think that the fact that we don't precisely know how and
when should prevent us from opposing to the extent we can what
we are up against.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Judge Mukasey follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, your Honor.
General.

STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL RICHARD C. GROSS, USA, RETIRED,
PARTNER, FLUET HUBER + HOANG, PLLC (FORMER LEGAL COUNSEL TO THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF)

General Gross. Thank you, Chairman Royce. Thank you,
Ranking Member Engel and members of the committee. I am very
grateful for the opportunity to----
Chairman Royce. Make sure, General, that you've got that
red button on. There we go.
General Gross. It was.
Chairman Royce. And maybe pull it a little closer would be
the other suggestion.
General Gross. Yes, sir.
Again, it is a privilege to appear before the committee
today. I am purposely going to keep my remarks brief.
What I hope to offer the committee is a military, legal
practitioner's view of AUMFs and in particular the 2001.
As you mentioned, I retired after over 30 years in the U.S.
Army, both as an infantry officer and as a judge advocate. I
was the legal advisor to multiple joint and special operations
task forces with multiple deployments to Afghanistan and Iraq.
I was also the legal advisor for the Joint Special
Operations Command, NATO ISAF, U.S. Forces Afghanistan and U.S.
Central Command, and in my final 4 years I was General
Dempsey's legal advisor on the Joint Staff when he was the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
I worked closely when I was on the Joint Staff with the DoD
general counsel, the National Security Council legal staff, and
the interagency lawyers groups on national security law issues
to include counterterrorism operations.
I dealt with the 2001 and 2002 AUMFs multiple countless
times over those 4 years both in the context of specific
targeting operations as well as more general discussions on the
scope of the AUMF and proposals to revise or amend it. Many of
those discussions actually took place here in Congress in both
the Senate and the House in briefings, hearings, and informal
discussions with members and congressional staff.
My views on the 2001 AUMF have not changed since I retired
from the military. I continue to feel the 2001 AUMF is
adequate. It contains adequate legal authority for the use of
military force against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria,
which was a view first adopted by the previous administration
and I believe to be the position of the current administration.
I recognize, however, that reasonable minds disagree on
this point and many have voiced criticisms of the decision to
rely on the 2001 AUMF as the domestic legal authority to
conduct military operations against ISIS.
While I believe the 2001 AUMF is adequate to address the
ISIS threat, I also believe it would be prudent for Congress to
enact the new AUMF to specifically address the threat of ISIS
and other terrorist groups for a variety of reasons.
First, a new AUMF would reflect the current will of the
American people as exercised through their elected leaders
regarding our ongoing operations against ISIS, al-Qaeda, the
Taliban, and other terrorist groups.
A new AUMF would also define the current scope and extent
of our military's mission against terrorist organizations, and
finally, a new AUMF would signal congressional support to the
U.S. armed forces.
As the committee considers what provisions a new AUMF might
contain, please allow me to give you my perspective as a
practitioner.
When I review an AUMF proposal, I think of it in terms of
the mission--who, what, when, where, and how. Against whom are
we using force, what force is authorized, and for how long?
Where is the use of force authorized? Finally, how are we
authorized to use that force? Are there restraints or
restrictions?
To be clear, I do not think it is helpful nor desirable to
have all of these elements in an AUMF, a point I will expound
upon more in a moment.
With these elements, there is necessarily a trade-off
between transparency and certainty, on one hand, and
flexibility for commanders on the other.
The more descriptive or proscriptive a provision of AUMF
is, the less flexibility it may afford the President and
military commanders to pursue a dynamic ever-changing enemy
terrorist group.
I would urge the committee to carefully consider that
balance as it takes up the AUMF proposals.
The most critical provision of an AUMF is the who--
identifying the enemy against whom force may be used. Our
current enemies do not wear a uniform, hide among civilian
populations, and operate in a dynamic, disperse network of
clandestine cells. This makes defining them challenging.
Given that, there should be some flexibility in the AUMF to
account for an ever-changing and expansive nature of the enemy
while also defining with affiliates and co-belligerents rise to
the level of associated forces.
The what element defines the scope of the authorized force.
The 2001 AUMF authorized the President to use all necessary and
appropriate force. This same language is also used in the
Senate Joint Resolution introduced by Senators Flake and Kaine.
This particular language provides maximum flexibility to
commanders. Other elements--when, where, and how--often appear
in AUMF proposals, but these elements may create unintended
consequences. I will discuss each of these in turn.
The when or for how long element usually arises in the form
of a sunset provision which results in the automatic
termination of the AUMF after a set period of time. These are
generally included as a forcing function, a means of ensuring
periodic review of the authority granted by Congress.
However, sunset provisions may also create legal
uncertainty for the President and military, particularly as the
expiration date approaches without action to extend or
reauthorize the AUMF.
Sunset provisions could also be interpreted by both
adversaries and coalition partners as a lack of resolve and
could potentially embolden adversaries to wait this out.
The where element is typically reflected as a geographic
limitation. This provides certainty and transparency but may
not afford the President and military commanders the
flexibility necessary to pursue the enemy outside the named
countries.
Terrorist groups often seek safe haven in ungoverned and
under governed spaces and publically announcing geographic
limits in an AUMF may encourage adversaries to seek those
countries out.
Finally, the how element, which occasionally appears in
some proposals, may be the most problematic, in my opinion.
These are provisions that attempt to specifically define how
the military will be used, a role normally reserved for the
President and the military commanders.
For example, some proposals seek to prohibit combat roles
or boots on the ground, and one past proposal included a
prohibition against the use of the military in enduring
offensive ground combat operations.
Provisions like these may significantly restrict the
flexibility of the President and military commanders to adapt
to a constantly changing dynamic enemy.
I want to mention two final points. First, one should
consider the AUMF in the broader context of other sources of
law and policy. There are other sources of law and authority
that act as restraints on the use of military force to include
international law, domestic law, U.S. policy and the orders of
the Commander in Chief and combatant commanders.
Second, I want to assure the committee that before any
military force is used, there is a robust review process in
place.
Up and down the military chain of command, senior
commanders advised by trained and experienced staffs--including
intelligence officers, operations officers, and judge
advocates--review operations for compliance with the applicable
law and policy, and for consistency with the orders of
superiors in the chain of command.
In counterterrorism operations, the AUMF is central to that
robust review process. During my 30 years in the military it
was my experience that commanders and their staffs worked very
hard to ensure that all operations were conducted morally,
legally, and ethically, and I have no doubt they will continue
to do so in the future.
I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Gross follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Yes, Mr. Olsen, please.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MATTHEW G. OLSEN, LECTURER ON LAW,
HARVARD LAW SCHOOL (FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE NATIONAL
COUNTERTERRORISM CENTER)

Mr. Olsen. Thank you, Chairman Royce and Ranking Member
Engel and members of the committee. I am honored to be here
this morning to address this very important issue.
I am also pleased to join with such distinguished
witnesses, Judge Mukasey and General Gross, this morning.
I approach these issues from the perspective of my two
decades working as a government official tackling national
security and intelligence and law enforcement matters under
both Republican and Democratic administrations.
From this vantage point, my bottom line up front is that
the importance of updating and clarifying the 2001 AUMF is
quite clear. By renewing this authority in light of the current
terrorism landscape, Congress can provide its explicit
authority for our counterterrorism efforts while at the same
time exercising that responsible oversight that is consistent
with Congress' role under the Constitution.
So my views are based on my time in the intelligence
community as well as my time at the Department of Justice.
I most recently served as the director of the National
Counterterrorism Center, which is an agency that provides
intelligence analysis and the integration of intelligence about
counterterrorism. I was responsible for briefing the President
and the National Security Council as well as the strategic
operational planning of counterterrorism activities.
I also served in national security leadership roles at the
Department of Justice, including having the privilege of
working under Judge Mukasey for a period of time at the Justice
Department.
So let me begin briefly by emphasizing the dynamic and
persistent threat that we face from terrorist groups. In short,
the range of threats that we face from terrorists today is more
diverse, more fragmented, and more geographically expansive
than at any time in recent history.
The so-called Islamic State, or ISIS, presents the most
urgent threat to us. Its sanctuary in Syria and Iraq, while
significantly diminished recently by the U.S.-led military
coalition, has enabled that group to regroup and train and then
execute external attacks, including more recently in Europe.
The rise of ISIS more generally reflects the transformation
of the jihadist threat over the past several years. ISIS and
other groups have taken advantage of unrest in the region to
expand their reach and establish safe havens. As a result the
terrorism threat now comes from a decentralized array of
networks and organizations. They include al-Qaeda, al-Qaeda's
affiliates, and then a range of violent jihadist groups that
share al-Qaeda's ideology.
So it is against this backdrop of this very evolving and
persistent terrorist threat that I think it is clear that the
2001 AUMF is ill-suited to today's threats. It was enacted just
days after 9/11. It provided the authority to use all necessary
and appropriate force against those responsible for the 9/11
attacks.
Years later, the terrorist groups threatening the United
States have changed but the 2001 AUMF remains the foundational
authority for the use of force.
The AUMF has now been invoked over 37 times in at least 14
different nations and against more than half a dozen terrorist
groups. It is unlikely, as you said, Ranking Member Engel, that
Members of Congress who voted for the 2001 AUMF would have
contemplated that the law would be used in this manner today.
This lack of clarity about the scope and applicability of
the 2001 AUMF in today's threat landscape has the potential to
undermine our efforts to use force against terrorist groups
that evolve or emerge and have emerged over the past 16 years.
At the same time, it is my view that the AUMF's lack of
time limits and reporting requirements and the open-ended
definition of who is covered by the AUMF have undermined
Congress' ability to conduct effective oversight of the use of
military force.
So in updating the AUMF to match the current threat
environment, I would suggest, respectfully, that Congress
consider several issues, and I will touch on these very
briefly.
First, Congress should start by specifying which groups are
covered and for what purpose. The AUMF-based authorities are
needed for armed conflicts against al-Qaeda, the Taliban, and
ISIS but these authorities are not needed for groups that don't
pose a similar threat. That is one.
Two, Congress should set a time limit on the AUMF to ensure
continued congressional approval, engagement, and oversight as
these conflicts evolve.
I believe that a sunset signals to our partners and our
adversaries that the United States is committed to use the
force required to combat the current threats we face even as we
sustain the fight for as long as it takes.
And then third, Congress should include reporting
requirements for the executive branch. The regular and detailed
reporting to Congress and therefore to the public about the war
effort is vital to our democracy and it is necessary for
Congress to fulfil its oversight obligations and thereby
strengthens the legitimacy of the mission overall.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the terrorist threat facing
the Nation is persistent, it is complex, and it is evolving. I
believe that Congress should update the increasingly outdated
2001 AUMF to explicitly provide a mandate for the use of force
but subject to appropriate congressional oversight and
constraints.
I believe that fulfilling this responsibility will show our
troops that Congress is behind them, it will assure our allies
and partners that the United States is committed to human
rights and the rule of law, and it will demonstrate to our
enemies that we are committed to their defeat.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Olsen follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Olsen.
I have reviewed with interest the bipartisan AUMF over in
the Senate, the Flake and Kaine measure, and I want to ask you
about that.
Before I do, just a quick question on repeal and
replacement. Do you believe that the 2001 AUMF should be
repealed until a replacement is enacted? Because there is some
debate on how that would create a problem for our national
security.
And so I just would ask you outright about just repealing
it now and then waiting to see if we can reach accord on a
replacement.
Judge.
Judge Mukasey. I think that would be enormously dangerous.
It would set off a debate as to whether there was existing
authority to conduct any of the operations we are conducting
now and would signal to our adversaries a level of uncertainty
that I think could invite additional attacks.
So the short answer is, no, I don't think there ought to be
a repeal until there is a consensus about what is going to
replace it.
Chairman Royce. General.
General Gross. Yes. Sir, I agree that there should not be a
repeal until there's a replacement in place, as the judge
mentioned.
But in addition, it would create an enormous amount of
legal uncertainty with respect to our detention operations in
Guantanamo Bay and other places.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Olsen.
Mr. Olsen. I share that view.
Chairman Royce. All right.
Now, let me go to the Flake-Kaine bill. This would
authorize the President for 5 years to use force against
designated groups in designated countries and it would allow
the President to add new ``associated forces''--as we used to
use the term--if there is a spinoff group, and new countries.
But you would have to report them to Congress, which would
then have the opportunity to disapprove of those expansions.
That is the way the bill is set up.
So I just ask each of you what you think of that construct.
Would it fix some of the ambiguities that we face with the 2001
AUMF by making sure that Congress receives clear, timely notice
of the boundaries of the authority to use force?
The other aspect of this is a little more complicated--
would such a delegation of war making decisions--allowing the
President to add groups to the AUMF without congressional
action; in other words, this associated forces if there's a
spinoff terrorist group--would handling it in that way be
constitutional.
So Judge?
Judge Mukasey. I think it would be constitutional. There is
a lively debate as to whether the underlying problem here--
which is whether the war powers resolution back in 1973 was
itself constitutional--and that has never been tested. Rather,
it has been tested through a back and forth between Congress
and the President, which is probably the wisest way to do it.
I think that is a rational way to treat the issue because
otherwise, you have the exercise that we have now, which is we
conduct a kind of DNA test on the various groups to find out
whether they do or don't carry the DNA of al-Qaeda and so far
the judgment is that, for example, that ISIS does carry the DNA
of al-Qaeda.
That is a respectable point of view. On the other hand, you
get further and further out on the branch it starts to look
increasingly strained and----
Chairman Royce. Let me get General Gross' view of it.
General Gross. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
One of the things I noticed that--first of all, I do think
it does a good job of laying out the authorities against the
current threat.
It mentions al-Qaeda, the Taliban, ISIS. It has a provision
for associated forces that is fairly clear and would help. It
includes other groups that we currently have or have had
operations against--al Nusra Front, Khorasan Group, AQAP, al-
Shabaab, and others that are listed in here.
I can't speak to the constitutionality or not of the
approval-disapproval procedures. I would refer those to a
constitutional expert.
I do think it might create a lack of flexibility for the
commander, a lack of flexibility for the President. As
intelligence changes and they try to move quickly against an
ever-changing enemy, I think that could be problematic.
Chairman Royce. Well, this is an attempt to reconcile that
so that a quickly changing or morphing enemy--but I would
assume your major point would be the time frame.
General Gross. Yes, sir.
Chairman Royce. And yet, we are in a bit of a conundrum
here because in order to reach consensus with members of both
sides of the aisle we are wrestling with this issue of a time
frame. Otherwise, it puts us right back to where we are today.
General Gross. Yes, sir.
Chairman Royce. Let me go to Mr. Olsen for his----
General Gross. Sir----
Chairman Royce. Yes?
General Gross [continuing]. If I could just make one----
Chairman Royce. Yes.
General Gross [continuing]. One other point. One of the
things in here, the disapproval procedure for a group--as I
read it, once you disapprove a group, you can't renominate that
group and that seemed to me to be a----
Chairman Royce. Okay.
General Gross [continuing]. Unless I am misreading it----
Chairman Royce. Okay. So that is a technical change that we
could, in theory, address.
General Gross. Yes, sir, because as intelligence changes--
--
Chairman Royce. Yes. Right.
General Gross [continuing]. A group that we nominate now--
--
Chairman Royce. Right. Right.
General Gross. Yes, sir.
Chairman Royce. I understand. Good point.
Mr. Olsen.
Mr. Olsen. Yes, sir. I actually think it is a sensible and
reasonable good faith bipartisan approach. It has many of the
elements that I would think are appropriate, including a sunset
provision and reporting requirements.
I think that the approval--or disapproval--process, that
seems to me to be an appropriate way to reconcile Congress'
role relative to the executive branch's role.
My suggestion would be that an approval process versus a
disapproval process might be more appropriate because of the
consequences or difficulty of Congress disapproving an action
once it has already started to take place.
In other words, facts on the ground may make it more
difficult for Congress to disapprove the additional----
Chairman Royce. But that would be the equivalent of having
a whole new AUMF if you had an organization that changed its
name.
Mr. Olsen. Not necessarily changed its name. In other
words, changing its name could still fall under the actual
group itself.
But when a new associated force would be added by the
executive branch, they would have to obtain the approval of
Congress. I think that would be an appropriate question.
Chairman Royce. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, panel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Mukasey, it seems
at least--please correct me if I am wrong--that you seem to
favor giving any administration a blank check in doing whatever
they deem necessary to combat whatever they are combatting.
I feel--and I know a number of my colleagues feel on both
sides of the aisle--that there is an important congressional
role to be played here--that it is not simply a matter of
passing an AUMF 15 years ago and sort of relieving it as a
catch-all for every administration, both parties, because they
want maximum flexibility to do whatever they want.
While I want to give the administration the tools to fight
terrorism, I don't want to give them or anybody else a blank
check and I don't care who is the President, Democrat or
Republican.
So could you please explain to me a little bit, or clarify
to me a little bit that you don't favor a blank check? Because
I think from your remarks it seems to indicate that you do.
Judge Mukasey. Okay. I don't understand what in my remarks
suggests that I favor a blank check since I favored----
Mr. Engel. So clarify it for me, please.
Judge Mukasey [continuing]. A sunset provision and I
favored updating the list of who. So I am kind of puzzled.
Mr. Engel. Well, don't be puzzled. Just tell me what your
views are. I am happy to hear them.
Judge Mukasey. My views are, as I expressed them today and
as I expressed them in my written statement, and my comment at
the beginning about World War II not having started with a
deadline remains true.
The fact is that I can't necessarily envision how all of
this is going to end. On the other hand, there is nothing wrong
with periodic reauthorizations, periodic reconsiderations of
what it is we are doing. That is my view.
Mr. Engel. Well, periodic reconsiderations are fine. But if
they don't happen, then are you in favor of just allowing
things to continue as we have for the past 16 years?
You seem to feel very complacent about it and some of us
are really angry that 16 years later we are still doing the
same things.
And by the way, I voted for that 2001 authorization.
Judge Mukasey. Hardly complacent. I favored reconsidering
the AUMF for years and the fact that Congress hasn't done it
has nothing to do with my complacency.
Chairman Royce. Okay.
Let me ask Mr. Olsen--many Americans are concerned about
another escalation in U.S. military involvement overseas. While
certainly there are important threats both in ISIS and, I would
say, even Assad, I am very wary about getting us into another
ground war in Iraq or Syria.
You provided a lot of detail in your written testimony
about what an updated AUMF could include. Can you summarize how
you think an AUMF would responsibly limit the authority that
currently exists under the 2001 AUMF and provide greater
congressional oversight and transparency at the same time?
Mr. Olsen. Yes, certainly.
In short, I think the key is that, first, that a new AUMF
be tailored to the current threat environment. That, I think,
is paramount. The threats have changed. The groups have
changed.
What the country faces in terms of terrorist threats have
changed over the past 16 years. So updating the AUMF to reflect
the current threat environment is actually an endorsement--a
mandate for the current use of force in those appropriate
circumstances.
I think it is also important to say that there are many
instances that don't require the authorization for use of
military force. In other words, there are a number of tools
that the government has, speaking from my time at the National
Counterterrorism Center, to take on the threats that we face
and they include law enforcement, intelligence, and diplomatic
tools. There is an array of capabilities that the United States
has that are not the use of force which typically should be the
last resort.
So updating the AUMF to reflect the current threats, that
is number one. Then there are a number of other requirements
that are suggested procedural elements that I think should be
kindled.
First, a sunset provision--I recommended a 3-year sunset to
ensure that, given how dynamic the threat is, that AUMF stays
up to date. Two, that there are reporting requirements--in
other words, that the executive branch be required to brief
Congress and to provide reporting on the nature of the threats
and what groups it is considering as associated forces.
I also think that it is appropriate to consider similar
restrictions or processes to balance the flexibility and
transparency that General Gross talked about, including
provisions like requiring an approval or disapproval of new
associated forces and limitations on particular types of
activities, such as sustained ground forces and occupation of
territory.
I think that is another element that Congress should
consider including in an AUMF.
Mr. Engel. General Gross, first of all, you are much too
young to have served in the military for 30 years. I don't
believe it.
Secondly, do you agree with Mr. Olsen?
General Gross. I agree with some of what he said, sir.
I mean, I think the critical thing for Congress to consider
is that balance--that the more proscriptive or descriptive an
AUMF is, the less flexibility a commander and the President
has.
But Congress plays an absolutely critical role here and I
think it is important that Congress speaks as to our current
conflicts and where we ought to go with that.
Mr. Engel. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
Just let me ask a couple questions. Thank you for your very
incisive testimony.
Let me ask you, did the current AUMF restrict our efforts
in any way over the last 16 years, and Mr. Olsen, you mentioned
37 times it has been invoked, or was it just a matter of the
lawyers coming up with a way of explaining what had to be done
and how do they get from here to there?
Secondly, how might terrorists read or misread a re-
examination of a new AUMF? We never want to unwittingly
embolden the enemy.
Could they misread this to think that a hard sunset is
actually an exit strategy? Whether that is good or bad but it
might embolden them.
I have been around here long enough to know that nothing in
Congress ever happens quickly and I am wondering--again, on
sunsets we might not get to it, even if it is expedited on some
way.
Sequestration wasn't supposed to happen in terms of
imposition of it and yet it did and we know it has hurt
severely our military because of it. But it was supposed to be
such an unthinkable outcome that it wouldn't happen.
So, a 3-year sunset, 5-year sunset--House and Senate bills
have that in it. A hard sunset, could that embolden the enemy
unwittingly?
And then, finally, what are the advantages, negative and
positive consequences, to having a sunset date? I mean, could
we just require more oversight to the existing AUMF from the
administration or what does the sunset actually give us?
Judge, if we can start with you.
Judge Mukasey. Taking the questions in order, did the AUMF
limit us? In one case, I think it actually did or at least
potentially did.
There was a man named Faisal Shahzad who was apprehended in
New York, planning to blow up Times Square with an--with an
improvised bomb.
Turned out he was funded by Pakistani Taliban rather than
the Afghan Taliban with which we were familiar, and on one view
of the AUMF he and his activities and those who funded him were
not covered by the AUMF.
Now, he was treated as an ordinary criminal. What else was
done, I don't know. But there was a lively argument as to
whether or not the sources of that funding were covered by the
existing AUMF when it shouldn't have. There shouldn't have been
that kind of debate, number one.
Secondly, could our enemies misread it? I think our enemies
could misread it unless we make the message explicit that the
sunset provision is only to re-examine the way we focus our
activities and is not and should not be read as a limit on our
commitment to oppose the forces that are fighting us.
I am sure that with the clever people--clever draftsmen
here we can come up with language that would convey that loud
and clear.
And finally, what are the advantages of a sunset--I think
what they do is refocus and recommit people who were not around
when the original AUMF passed who may feel that politically it
is easier to just find fault than it is to get behind
something.
I am not suggesting anybody here is doing that but there is
always that temptation and I think a requirement that people
focus, that Members of Congress focus, provides that advantage.
Thank you.
General Gross. Yes, sir. As far as limitations, I mean, it
is--I am thinking back. There had to have been over my 4 years
times when there were individuals who were nominated for
looking at military targeting operations that did not follow
them--that we couldn't find the authority within the AUMF to go
forward.
If I could remember the details they would be classified.
But I can't imagine I went 4 years. I just seem to recall there
were times that individuals didn't fit under the AUMF.
As far as the sunset, I agree with what the judge said. I
think the positive consequences, if you will, of a sunset
provision are requiring that re-examination.
It sets a date certain when both sides will--both sides
being both the President and the executive branch and the
Congress--will know the deadline is coming up and begin to re-
examine that and look at that.
I think the negative consequences--those that I pointed out
in my testimony--it does create a lot of legal uncertainty.
As you approach that deadline and as you get real close to
that line, and particularly if you cross that line without a
new authorization, there is a lot of uncertainty with whatever
military operations are ongoing at that time and whatever
detention operations are going on at that time.
So that creates quite a bit of uncertainty there.
Mr. Olsen. Yes, sir.
I think, first, on the question of the AUMF and whether it
has restricted the government's actions I think the answer is
yes, if you look, for example, at detainees at Guantanamo.
Judges have found in several cases that individuals at
Guantanamo did not fit within the AUMF. I think an appropriate
exercise of judicial oversight to look and see what the
contours of the law are, who is part of al-Qaeda, who is an
associated force, and making a determination, I agree with
General Gross as well.
Operational activities have looked at individuals and
determined they did not fall within the AUMF; again, I think
appropriately so.
So I think that is, again, a reasonable exercise of
executive and judicial branch discretion and judgment about who
falls within. So that is one.
Quickly, on the other two, the question of whether a sunset
would embolden our enemies--I think exactly the opposite, to be
quite honest.
I think the reassertion of the authority to use military
force on a timely basis really sends the message to our enemies
that Congress, on behalf of the American people, stands behind
our troops and is saying we are continuing to authorize force.
I think it sends a message of commitment and dedication to the
fight.
And then, third, on the sunset, I think the pros and cons--
I think one thing to consider, I would respectfully suggest, is
that this particular conflict, now the longest in U.S. history,
is different from conventional traditional wars we have come to
know in World War II and in the past, and therefore a sunset is
appropriate, given that terrorism is going to be with us. That
is a fact. So the use of a sunset is appropriate under those
circumstances. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Thank you, all three of you.
Brad Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Our Founders wrestled with this issue over 200
years ago. They knew that by vesting--they could have vested
all power in the executive branch, thereby achieving security,
secrecy, and flexibility.
They chose not to. But the advocates of Presidential power
keep pretending that they did and we are told that we would be
best off if the executive branch could make all the decisions
with secrecy and flexibility, and we should trust that because,
well, our men and women in uniform and the Pentagon in general
will be careful or that Congress can exercise oversight and
consultation.
That is not what the Constitution provides. It vests in
Congress not only the power to declare war but control over the
money that funds military operations. It also makes the
President Commander in Chief. So how do we wrestle with those
competing constitutional provisions?
President Jefferson did and he is far more familiar with
the Constitution than any of us. Americans had been attacked in
the Mediterranean by the Bay of Tripoli. Not our allies
attacked, not civilians of another country attacked--American
ships were attacked and before sending our naval forces--
basically most of the military power of the United States to
the Mediterranean, to the shores of Tripoli--he sought
congressional authorization, which was provided on February 2,
1802.
The advocates of unlimited executive power without the need
for congressional authorization--I am willing to do that as
soon as we elect a President who is wiser than Jefferson.
So in 1973, we passed the War Powers Resolution, known as
the War Powers Act, that allows the President to do pretty much
what he or she wants for 60 to 90 days but does provide real
restrictions.
Since then, every President has said that they don't
recognize the binding power of the AUMF but they will often act
consistent with it.
The most recent clear violation, because our attacks on
ISIS may be authorized by the 2001 AUMF but was not authorized
by an AUMF, was our many months of operations against Qaddafi.
Qaddafi wasn't associated with Saddam Hussein or al-Qaeda and
we were told at that time that as a substitute for
congressional authorization maybe there would be a U.N.
resolution or NATO or coalition of the willing.
The fact is that at least in that circumstance the
President, and others have as well, simply violated the War
Powers Act.
What we did, though, in 2011, at least in the House of
Representatives, is provide a way to enforce the War Powers
Act, because although the War Powers Act is argued by some to
violate the constitutional right to be Commander in Chief, no
one doubts Congress' right to control what happens to
appropriated funds.
And so in 2011 I proposed an amendment--failed the first
time, finally got it passed--to say that no funds shall be
spent in contravention of the War Powers Act and that has been
part of the base bill for defense appropriations ever since, as
it will be this year.
We don't need to pass a new AUMF to show the world we
support our troops. We provide funds for them and support them
in so many other ways. But repeal now replace later doesn't
work for health care. I don't know if it will work here but I
know I am very much opposed to it in health care.
And while I think the general has argued that specificity
is the opposite of flexibility, I would point out that vague
authorization--a blank check, if you will--is the opposite of
democracy.
My question for all three panellists is, would you advise a
President that the War Powers Act is not constitutionally
binding on the President or is it the law of the land that the
President must adhere to? Can I get a one-word answer from
each? Mr. Olsen.
Mr. Olsen. My experience, Mr. Sherman, is similar to yours,
which is that, at least with the Obama administration where I
was most familiar, that----
Mr. Sherman. I need a one-word answer. I've got limited
time. I will go on to the general.
Mr. Olsen [continuing]. That it was considered to be
something that the administration complied with.
Mr. Sherman. Something they will comply with because it is
convenient or something that is legally binding?
General, why don't you answer?
General Gross. Sir, I am not a constitutional expert.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I will go to the judge.
Judge Mukasey. I give the same answer that every Attorney
General since Jimmy Carter's Attorney General gave, which is
yes.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, it is binding?
Judge Mukasey. No. Yes, it is unconstitutional.
Mr. Sherman. Yes, it is--okay. I will follow that up with
one quick question.
Can Congress legally provide that moneys provided by the
defense approps bill cannot be spent in contravention of that
act?
Judge Mukasey. Sure.
Mr. Sherman. So that is the way to enforce it.
I will yield back.
Judge Mukasey. That is a way.
Mr. Smith. Chair recognizes the gentleman from California,
Dana Rohrabacher.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, first and foremost, I would like to
thank our chairman, Mr. Royce, and Mr. Engel for calling this
hearing. I think this is the type of hearing we need to have
where you have various points of view being expressed and on a
very important issue for us to understand.
So and I will have to say that my depth of knowledge has
been increased due to your testimony today and I thank the
witnesses for that.
Let me just note some of the points that have been made.
But first, Mr. Sherman mentioned Thomas Jefferson's sending
this issue to Congress.
Let us note that Thomas Jefferson also, when sending this
issue of how to deal with the Barbary Pirates in Tripoli, he
received a certain, how do you say, instructions from Congress.
Yes, he did and he disobeyed them.
And in fact, I am sure our witnesses know about the William
Eaton effort that overthrew the Government of Tripoli, which
was done in direct contradiction to what Congress had
instructed the President to do.
So with that note, there are various interpretations about
various things that were going on during that time period.
We do know that Congress has--as Mr. Sherman noted--that we
do have the authority here and we need to exercise that. The
executive branch, obviously, has the major portion of
authority. I do not believe that--and one of the points made
today was that when you limit a commitment to a goal, that is a
bad thing.
We should not be limiting--if we have a goal and it is
verified by Congress, we shouldn't put limits on a commitment
to the goal but instead the AUMF is actually a commitment to
get the job done in a timely manner and I think that that is a
very legitimate analysis. We aren't limiting the commitment.
We are just telling people if you got a commitment to
military action, you better get it done and that this is not
just going to linger forever.
The sunset provisions, which were the majority of
discussion today, are vital for us to understand. I would have
to say that authorizing--telling someone that you only have
between now and then before you have to get a reauthorization
in no way, I believe, weakens our position.
The fact is that if indeed the American people are
supportive of a military action and the Congress knows that--
and the military and our executive branch knows they are going
to have to come before the government again to have an
approval, that if the American people are not supportive of it,
maybe that sunset should be able to function and we should
maybe walk away.
Maybe we should have walked away from Vietnam 4 years into
the action rather than let it linger 10 years. And I left
Vietnam in 1967 and I was just there a couple months--I was not
in the military--I was doing some things up in the Central
Highlands and I knew we were going to lose then. I knew--I
walked away. I said, we are going to lose this war, and there
were 30,000 casualties after that. So it would have been a good
thing for us to have to re-evaluate after 4 or 5 years that
whole Gulf of Tonkin resolution.
So I appreciate, again, you giving us, really, food for
thought today. The one example, the Guantanamo example--what
was your point in that in terms of saying that when you had
some authorization of force that it didn't include certain
prisoners in Guantanamo that we shouldn't have had then? What
was the point of that whole example?
Mr. Olsen. Yes, sir. My comment was with respect to the
application of the existing AUMF to the current detainees at
Guantanamo and the fact that the executive branch and the
judicial branch have determined on a number of occasions that
individuals at Guantanamo did not fall within the purview of
the AUMF. I suggest that was an appropriate exercise of that
judgment.
But the other issue is the lack of certainty around the
existing AUMF as it applies to ISIS and how that might affect
detention operations.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Then could that be interpreted as, again,
how do you say, fine tuning? Are we going to micro manage?
When we permit something to happen that we should be micro
managing it in that way, again, determine what enemies are
going to be going to Guantanamo and what enemies are not?
Mr. Olsen. Well, respectfully, I wouldn't suggest that is
micro managing for Congress.
Congress would name the group--the organization that is
subject to the AUMF and then it would be up to individual cases
based on the facts--the executive branch, with oversight from
the judicial branch--to determine who falls within that
definition.
Mr. Smith. Time of the gentleman----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Just for the record, I believe in sunsets but I also
believe that once you have provided an authorization of force
that the executive branch should be able to do their job and do
it right.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Deutch.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank
you and the ranking member for holding today's hearing. It is
one that this committee should be having and, frankly, I think
we would all agree it is one that we should have had many times
over the recent years.
I know, Mr. Chairman, that both you and the ranking member
believe strongly in the jurisdictional prerogative of this
committee to lead on the authorization of the use of military
force.
So I hope that today is only the start of what will become
a serious conversation about the situation we find ourselves in
where we continue to rely on an AUMF post-911 in order to guide
every military action that we take around the world.
For more than 4 years now, we have not been having a
serious conversation at all in this Congress about this.
Discussion about a new AUMF does bubble up. It comes up when we
are reacting to a new horror in the Syrian conflict, whether it
was after the 2013 chemical weapon attack or the latest
decision by the administration to strike Assad's air base in
April.
In 2015, the Obama administration sent a proposed AUMF to
Congress. We did not consider it. We did not consider an
alternative. It is a hard conversation to have and we passed.
I know it is hard. There are divisions on both sides of the
aisle. But not having a conversation at all, a real robust
debate in the United States Congress, just because it is hard
is an abdication of our responsibilities to represent our
constituents.
It is clear that relying on the 2001 AUMF for the new fight
against terror is no longer the best option to protect this
country and our men and women in uniform.
It is even more clear that the AUMF for the Iraq war has to
be repealed. So let us at least start where we have some
agreement.
Our inaction only enables this administration--or any
administration, frankly--to continue operating militarily with
a free pass from the American people--a free pass from the
United States Congress.
I am deeply concerned about what happens when Congress
continually refuses to act and that is what I would like to ask
about.
Mr. Olsen, I will start with you. Every time Congress
consents to the President using military force without prior
congressional approval, whether it is in Libya or in Syria, the
President seems to rely on Congress' failure to act as evidence
in support of even stronger unilateral executive war powers.
Does the lack of congressional action on authorizing force
increase the likelihood that this President and future
Presidents will engage U.S. troops in more conflicts without
congressional consent?
Mr. Olsen. Well, I think the answer to that question is
yes. In other words, the consistent failure for the Congress to
act does tend to erode Congress' appropriate role under the
Constitution over time relative to the executive branch in,
one, declaring war but also exercising appropriate oversight
over the executive branch.
I think there is that potential for an erosion of
congressional authority in this particular space.
Mr. Deutch. General Gross.
General Gross. Sir, at the level that I operated for the
things that I did that conversation didn't go on.
The conversation that went on as a practitioner was here's
the proposed operation, here's the proposed enemy or person or
group or target or objective, and is there legal authority
right now under the existing framework to conduct that military
operation? And that is the conversation that I participated in.
Mr. Deutch. Judge Mukasey.
Judge Mukasey. I can answer it only from a legal
perspective. A congressional failure to act is considered
probably the weakest kind of legislative evidence because it
can show a whole lot of things other than endorsement.
That said, I certainly agree that there ought to be a
reconsideration and a reauthorization.
Mr. Deutch. General Gross, just a question about the Syrian
conflict specifically. On the one hand, the question is how do
we ensure that a new AUMF both gives us the flexibility we need
to go after various actors and at the same time or can it at
the same time help reduce the risk of unintended military
conflict with other actors in Syria?
General Gross. Well, sir, I think that is a good question
and I think the Flake-Kaine amendment does that--the proposal.
You define the groups that you are going after. You can,
obviously, define geographic limits but that wouldn't, in this
case, do that, and you define other parameters, as Congress
would deem appropriate, and that provides the framework within
where we have to operate.
And so if a certain force in a certain country doesn't fit
within the definition of the named groups or fit within the
definition of an associated force, then the AUMF can't be the
source of domestic law for that particular operation.
Mr. Deutch. And if the AUMF can't be the source of domestic
law, then you are violating--it would be a violation of the
AUMF.
General Gross. Not necessarily because the President can
and often does fall back on their Article 2 authority which
then kicks in the War Powers Resolution and the 60-day. There
is still authority for the President under Article 2 and
Presidents from both parties have relied on that throughout
history as the authority.
Mr. Deutch. That wouldn't have been authorized before.
Thank you. Thank you to our witnesses and thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank each of you for
being here today on this very important issue.
As a member of this committee and the House Armed Services
Committee, and as the grateful dead said, four sons serve in
Iraq, Egypt, and Afghanistan in the global war on terrorism, I
particularly appreciate the efforts that you are expressing
today. I also agree with the comments of Chairman Ed Royce that
any effort to repeal the 2001 authorization for use of military
force without having more effective replacement that does not
place arbitrary restrictions on the present military
commanders.
This is so important because if we play around with the
wording we should always be mindful that we are dealing with
illegal enemy combatants who are not in uniform who will be
placing American families at risk.
We have a circumstance of where ever changing--their names
are changing, the people are changing, the places are changing.
Over and over again we see them using civilians as human
shields, targeting civilians, as we saw again yesterday--
incredibly enough, mass murder again in Kabul. Over and over we
see this.
For each of you, we have had administrations that have
claimed the AUMF is not strictly necessary--a new one. They
claim that they possess ample legal authority to prosecute the
war against al-Qaeda and associated forces such as ISIS.
Just last week, General Joseph Dunford, chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, stated, ``We are now relying on the 2001
authorization for use of military force. What I have said is we
have all the legal authority that we need now to prosecute al-
Qaeda, ISIS, and other affiliated groups.''
For each of you, do you agree with the assessment that the
2001 AUMF provides, in the words of General Dunford, all the
legal authority?
Beginning with Judge Mukasey.
Judge Mukasey. If we are talking legal authority and we are
talking ISIS, I believe the answer is yes. But that doesn't
mean that we ought not to reauthorize and ought not to pass a
new AUMF.
If the question is whether the military efforts now in the
field are backed by legal authority, I believe they are.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
And General.
General Gross. I would agree with that answer, sir, in the
sense that it is adequate for ISIS, al-Qaeda, Taliban, and
associated forces.
Mr. Olsen. I agree with both of those comments that the
current interpretation is appropriate and that there is
adequate authority.
I think it is important, though, to emphasize this notion
that it is simply adequate but I think there is a consensus
among all three of us that it is appropriate to update the AUMF
for a variety of reasons, including the dynamic threat and how
it has changed, and to really clarify how it applies to ISIS,
which remains a controversial interpretation to this day.
Mr. Wilson. Well, thank you to each of you. But the key
thing is that we are operating under legal authority properly
for our military.
And General Mukasey, thank you for identifying the Taliban
distinctions--Afghan versus Pakistani. The 2001 AUMF--and this
is a question for you--has been used against al-Qaeda, the
Taliban-associated forces, groups that have joined al-Qaeda or
the Taliban in their fight against the United States.
So far, they have included al-Qaeda affiliates in the
Arabian Peninsula, Libya, and Syria, al-Shabaab and ISIS from
North Africa to the Philippines.
Are there terrorist groups that pose a serious threat to
the United States that do not have enough of an al-Qaeda or
Taliban nexus to qualify as associated forces under the 2001
AUMF? If so, is the threat urgent enough that they be included
in a new AUMF?
Judge Mukasey. It may be that Hezbollah, potentially, poses
that threat. Whether they can be traced to organizations that
were active against us at the time the AUMF was passed, I
seriously doubt.
There are separate entities that ought to be perhaps the
subject of a separate AUMF like the Somali pirates and so on,
but that is something beyond, probably, this hearing.
Mr. Wilson. And I appreciate your raising that--Hamas,
Hezbollah, the pirates. It is incredible what the American
people face and our ally, Israel, simultaneously.
And, General Gross, I am really going to conclude by
thanking you for your service. I served, myself, 31 years Army
Guard Reserves.
But as a fellow JAG officer, I am particularly grateful for
your service and for all three of you.
So thank you and best wishes on your service.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
chairman and the ranking member for having this important
hearing and taking a leadership role on really an important
issue that Congress has gone silent on for many years now.
I want to also thank our witnesses and thank you for your
service to this country and thank you for being here to share
your thoughts on this.
Our success and what we have had as a game plan has
depended so much, and I think in the future will depend on so
much of our ability to deal as a coalition with other
countries.
To me, going it alone is perilous in today's world. And I
just want to ask, particularly Mr. Olsen at first, we have on
one hand, counterterrorism to balance, but we have on the other
a coalition to maintain dealing with this--a coalition that has
been with us during such difficult times.
Now, in the absence of having a new AUMF and making those
lines clearer, given some of the dialogue that has occurred
with our allies and with our NATO allies, the failure to do
that, going forward, what could you see as a problem in keeping
our coalition together if things aren't defined? Or do you
think we are better off keeping the flexibility that appears to
be there now?
Mr. Olsen. So, first of all, let me agree wholeheartedly
with your observation about the importance of the United States
taking on terrorist groups as part of a broader coalition. I
think we have seen operationally over time that there is really
no question about our effectives when we work with our allies,
whether those are our European allies or our partners in the
region and that has been proven over and over again.
Mr. Keating. I would say yes, that--to interrupt you with
that--our long-term success it is essential because we can win
militarily but holding that area, too.
So it is not just our allies that are participating. It is
the world community that we are seeing now where the people
have a stake in the action on the ground and will hold what we
are able to accomplish militarily against ISIS or other groups.
Mr. Olsen. Absolutely right. I totally agree with that, and
I do think--bringing it back to this discussion--that including
in a new AUMF both some requirements for a sunset and reporting
requirements, they reassure our allies about how we view this
conflict, that it is not never ending, that there is the
support of the American people as voiced through Congress as
well as a clear commitment to the application of international
law, which is an important element to our allies.
I believe in developing and building a coalition that will
be sustained not just in the short term through military
conflict, as you point out, but over the long haul, which is
required, I think, for our success.
Mr. Keating. Yes.
General Gross, too, if you could comment on the other
aspect of having countries with a stake in the action, being
able to hold that territory when we see terrorist groups like
ISIS moving forward. It is important for our coalition to be
maintained but it is also important to have nations on the
ground willing to hold that territory.
General Gross. No, sir. I couldn't agree more. I mean,
fighting in a coalition really is virtually essential today to
have the capabilities, the international credibility, the
support.
Different countries bring different things to the fight and
I think we are stronger for it when we fight as a coalition
than when we try to go it alone. And so I agree completely.
My experience, talking to allies--and we often had
discussions on legal authorities--is they tended to focus more
on whether or not there was an international legal basis for a
particular military operation because if we didn't have one
they didn't have one.
And so that tended to be the focus. They were concerned
with domestic legal authority, particularly when it came to
detention operations because often some countries might not
have a domestic legal basis for detaining someone in a
particular theater or operation and therefore they couldn't and
they might want to transfer detainees to a country that did and
so they would be concerned that the country receiving detainees
had a domestic legal authority for that.
So that tended to be when that conversation came up. But
for the most part, the international legal basis was the focus
of discussions country to country when you talked about legal
authority.
Mr. Keating. Do you see the ability right now, because a
lot of this is about timing--do you see the ability right--or,
really, do you see any warning signs that our failure to act as
a Congress could endanger future coalitions, going forward?
General Gross. I don't--again, I think if they felt like we
had some authority internationally--under international law and
domestic law to continue operations that would be their focus.
It is just hard for me to say how much they pay attention
to whether or not Congress is acting. I just can't recall ever
having those discussions.
Mr. Keating. Great. I yield back.
Mr. Duncan. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes.
Drone strikes--we had this debate back when the Libya
involvement was going on and whether the AUMF authorized drones
strikes in Libya.
Can you cover--and I will ask Mr. Olsen first--drone
strikes and how they fit in this AUMF wherever they may occur,
whether it is Middle East, North Africa, Africa proper. How do
you feel about that?
Mr. Olsen. Well, certainly, from a legal perspective and
from a domestic law perspective, when the government considered
carrying out a lethal strike, whether by drone or otherwise--
one of the critical determinations or considerations was
whether the target fell within the authorization for use of
military force.
So the application of the AUMF to a particular proposed
individual was certainly part of that discussion.
I do think, from my own experience in the last
administration where there were heightened standards in place
for carrying out drone strikes--again, these are typically--I
am thinking of strikes off of the hot battlefield in places
like Yemen or Somalia, not Afghanistan, for example--that the
heightened standard of requiring a near certainty of no
civilians being killed was an appropriate way to, as a policy
matter, impose a standard that, again, we are in a new era of
warfare where we are taking legal action outside of a hot
battlefield. That seemed to me to be both appropriate and
actually operationally workable, in my experience under the
last administration.
Mr. Duncan. Are we seeking authorization of using airspace
where drones are flown?
Mr. Olsen. I don't think so. That is more a question
probably better posed to somebody who is actively operating in
the military. But my expectation would be no.
Mr. Duncan. Right. So I remember at Benghazi the argument
was made that we didn't have over flight rules to send in help
for the guys in Benghazi but yet there was a drone flying
overhead providing live real-time feed.
So I am in conflict with whether we had over flight
permission or not in that instance. Do you care to comment?
Mr. Olsen. Well, the only thing I would say, when I think
of Benghazi, in a successful military operation I think of the
apprehension of Abu Khattala in his home on the Mediterranean
in Benghazi and who is now here in the United States facing
trial for his role in the Benghazi attacks. That was certainly
a very successful military operation which was carried out in
combination with our law enforcement authorities.
Mr. Duncan. Right. So thank you for that.
I want to shift gears a little bit and talk about the
adequacy of current legal authority in the AUMF, and although
most would agree that the new and updated AUMF would be a good
thing, especially because of the signal it would send to our
troops overseas.
I wonder about the legal authority, and General Dunford
recently said that, let me see, I don't have the date for
that--``We were relying on the 2001 AUMF. What I have said is
that we have all the legal authority that we need right now to
prosecute al-Qaeda, ISIS, and other affiliated groups even
though they are not ISIS, as mentioned.''
Do you agree with the assessment of both the Obama and
Trump administrations that the 2001 AUMF provides, in the words
of General Dunford last month, ``all legal authority that we
need right now to prosecute al-Qaeda, ISIS, and other
affiliated groups?''
General.
General Gross. Sir, I like to say adequate legal authority
but that is probably mincing words. I mean, it provides legal
authority.
As a lawyer, when I advise a commander you talk about the
amount of legal risk and the amount of legal clarity, and in a
case where a law is very clear and it is bright line, you can
say that absolutely this law applies.
If the speed limit is 25 miles an hour, I can say that
you're going 25 absolutely you are complying with the law. On
the other hand, if the law says you must drive a reasonable
speed for the conditions and if someone says, I am driving 25,
does that comply with the law? Maybe.
And then you identify the legal risk and you say the
conditions are this and that. And so in this case, I think we
can say that the 2001 AUMF is adequate to provide legal
authority for going against ISIS on its own terms. It doesn't
say ISIS. It says al-Qaeda, Taliban, and organizations, et
cetera, and you have that language.
And so as we made the determination that ISIS was a follow-
on successor, really the same organization as al-Qaeda in Iraq
and had never cut that tie, then we felt like that was adequate
to provide the----
Mr. Duncan. ISIS and al-Qaeda would argue with you over
that but----
General Gross. Well, and again, that is where the legal
risk comes in. You could imagine reasonable minds disagreeing
with that and saying----
Mr. Duncan. So we have advisors and maybe limited combat
troops in Syria right now, or western Iraq and possibly Syria.
I am extrapolating from what I read in the news. Does the AUMF
cover countries like Syria?
General Gross. It doesn't mention countries, sir.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
General Gross. It mentions, you know, who----
Mr. Duncan. Groups.
General Gross [continuing]. Enemy groups.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
General Gross. And so if you were conducting operations----
Mr. Duncan. Do you think that is wherever they crop up?
General Gross. Well, there is no geographic limitations in
the 2001 AUMF. There are other sources of international law and
domestic law that provide constraints and restraints on issues
like violating another country's sovereignty and things like
that. So you----
Mr. Duncan. So I am going to use a total hypothetical
here--and the press is covering this. This is totally
hypothetical.
But let us just say that Abu Sayyaf terrorists evolved into
an ISIS organization in the Philippines. Does the AUMF
authorize the United States to go there to fight that ISIS-
affiliated group?
General Gross. I don't know, and that would be one where
you would have to examine the intelligence, examine all the
facts that you have at hand.
You would have to decide or make a legal determination if
they can be considered an associated force of al-Qaeda or the
Taliban.
What we don't know--one of the uncertainties is, we have
always determined as a legal matter that an associated force of
al-Qaeda or a group that is part of al-Qaeda would fall under
the AUMF.
I don't know that we have ever looked at an associated
force of ISIS, and whether or not they have done that since I
left I don't know and I can't recall whether we looked at that.
And so now you are starting to get more and more attenuated
and so the legal risk raises that you may say, yes, this falls
within the AUMF but reasonable minds can disagree and a court
or someone else may say no, that wasn't what we intended with
that law. My----
Mr. Duncan. So just--I agree--so just a last question. My
time has expired. The Houthis in Yemen--are they an ISIS-
affiliated group? We have had military strikes there. I am just
asking.
General Gross. I don't know enough of the current
intelligence and facts about that.
Mr. Duncan. Just trying to get my head wrapped around what
this AUMF covers, what it may not cover, and going forward what
we might need to include for potential future threats.
General Gross. So the current AUMF as it has been
interpreted by the administrations, you would have to look at
whether or not they are an associated force--and we have a
definition that we have used for associated force--must be both
an organized armed group that has entered the fight alongside
al-Qaeda and a co-belligerent with al-Qaeda in hostilities
against the United States or its coalition partners.
That is the definition of associated force that the
previous administration adopted and used and that is what I
used as my working definition for legal analysis.
I don't know what the current administration or the current
lawyer on the joint staff is using. But I can't imagine that
has changed significantly.
Obviously, Senator Flake and Kaine have put their own
definition in their proposal, which defines associated force,
and if enacted that would become the definition you would use
to analyse that.
Mr. Duncan. I thank you for that.
And I will now go to Mr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
You know, our founders in the design of our country really
laid out a brilliant design. But part of that brilliance was a
separation of powers giving, very clearly, Congress in Article
1 the ability to declare war; giving the Commander in Chief,
our President, the ability to execute on those plans. Doesn't
seem ambiguous.
But as we are having conversations here, the current AUMF
is rife with ambiguity in there, and I think it is consistent.
Just listening to each of the witnesses, I think each of you is
consistent that it would be appropriate to update the AUMF. Is
that correct? And I think just listening to my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle we also think it would be appropriate
to update the AUMF.
Now, there is recognition it is not going to be easy. It is
going to require vigorous debate. It is going to require, you
know, talking to our military commanders, talking to the
executive branch.
But we owe it to our men and women who are making that
ultimate sacrifice to their families to clear up this
ambiguity--to give them a clear sense that the American people
are with them--to give them a clear sense of what their mission
is. That is our job as Members of Congress.
I would argue we are not doing our job by not having the
courage to engage in what are not easy conversations. But that
is what we ought to do.
I guess I will ask you, General Gross. By having that
debate, by giving clear definitions, removing some of the
ambiguity, that sends a message to our troops, does it not?
General Gross. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bera. So we ought to and, again, we shouldn't do the
easy things. The American people expect us as their
representatives to engage in the necessary things and it is
pretty clear from the discussion and dialogue that updating
this AUMF that is 16 years old is absolutely necessary,
particularly given that the majority of us, as Members of
Congress, weren't here when this AUMF was authorized.
So if we are actually going to do it, many of you have
referred to the Flake-Kaine amendment and framework as a
potential starting point.
I guess starting with you, Mr. Olsen, would that be a
reasonable starting point if we were to debate this?
Mr. Olsen. I do think that is a reasonable starting point.
If I could just go back to your introductory comments about the
current ambiguity.
I think it is worth pointing that, again, the AUMF that we
are operating under now actually mentions no groups. It doesn't
mention al-Qaeda. It doesn't mention the Taliban.
It talks about those organizations and individuals
responsible for the attacks of 9/11. So it is tied to a
particular heinous act of terrorism which occurred 16 years
ago.
So as you get to groups like Abu Sayyaf or the Houthis,
whether they are tied to other groups, you get into this area
of extreme ambiguity and that is why I think you hearing from
this panel a consensus view, as you expressed, of support for
updating the AUMF. So yes, and I do think that the Kaine-Flake
bill is a sensible starting point for that discussion.
Mr. Bera. General Gross.
General Gross. Yes, sir. I think it is a good starting
point and I know in particular Senator Kaine has been a deep
thinker on this issue and I can remember talking to his staff
years ago about this. So he has given it a lot of thought.
Mr. Bera. Judge Mukasey.
Judge Mukasey. I agree that it is certainly a sensible
starting point as long as we remember that it is a starting
point and that it is going to need the debate that you referred
to.
But certainly it is a good place to start and some of the
comments that were made today about, for example, adding groups
on either an approval or disapproval basis is something that
ought to be considered.
Mr. Bera. So, again, we have a starting point, and I am not
suggesting that it is the end point. It is the starting point
of a debate that we ought to have, that the American people
expect us to have and, most importantly, that we owe to our
troops--our men and women and their families.
There is no greater responsibility that we have when we
send someone's son or daughter, mother or father, husband or
wife, into harm's way and, again, I feel that this body owes it
to them to have that debate.
Also, when we talk about a sunset provision, from my
perspective that is not an expiration date. That is a forcing
function to have this body evaluate where we are, update and
refresh and perhaps end an AUMF but also perhaps reinforcing an
AUMF.
And is that the right interpretation when we are talking
about sunset provisions?
General Gross. Sir, except that--I mean, I think by its own
terms, at least for the Flake-Kaine bill, it expires at the end
of that 5-year period if Congress hasn't acted.
And so I think that risk of uncertainty in particular with,
for example, detainees who are currently held, that the
authority could lapse to hold them and therefore you have to
look at that.
Ongoing operations that were being conducted under that
AUMF arguably would expire and then, you know, that would set
off a debate.
So, if there were to be a sunset provision, and I am not
taking a position one way or the other. I am just pointing out
different pros and cons, if you will. There might be ways to
design language such that the AUMF expires but there's a tail
of authority that survives that would allow detention for a
certain period of time or ongoing operations or et cetera.
Now, I don't know how to write that but I know you all
have----
Mr. Bera. But, again, that is our job, right?
General Gross. Yes, sir. Exactly.
Mr. Bera. Thank you. I will yield back.
Mr. Duncan. Gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair will now go to Mr. Perry from Pennsylvania for 5
minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thanks, gentlemen. General
Gross, thanks for your time and uniform service.
Gentlemen, you all referenced the Flake-Kaine legislation,
and I should be familiar but I am not. But can you tell me if
it identifies the enemy or an enemy by name?
General Gross. Yes, sir, it does.
Mr. Olsen. It does. I can tell you, it identifies ISIS, al-
Qaeda, Taliban, and their associated persons or forces.
Mr. Perry. All right. So it seems to me, and I have had an
AUMF that I have offered in the past and I have one sitting
right in front of me that I have offered again this session,
which seems somewhat analogous to the ones that Mr. Flake and
Mr. Kaine have authored, or offered.
But I feel like we are lacking in identifying correctly the
enemy and that has been my frustration because the enemy keeps
changing, whether its name, whether its affiliations.
We are attacking ISIS now under the provisions of some
associate with al-Qaeda when they both eschew one another at
least in name even though they have the same eventual ultimate
goal.
And then you have the myriad list of different actors,
which ebbs and flows and changes on a regular basis. Mine
determines that the enemy and the use of force would be against
Islamist extremism, which seems to be whether you determine
that is fundamentalism, the strict following of the Koran by
generally Sunni groups as opposed to Shi'a or something else.
It seems to me that that can be described that way and cover
all these groups, and I go on further.
I include, of course, al-Qaeda and ISIS, AQAP, AQIM, al-
Shabaab, Boko Haram, al-Nusra, Haqqani, the Taliban, Houthis,
Khorasan, Hezbollah, and then I put substantial supporters,
associated forces, or closely-related successor entities.
Now, I, too, agree, obviously, since I have authored this
that we need to refresh this and we need the American people's
and Congress' involvement in it.
I would take some issue with the time frame. As a person
who has been privileged to serve in uniform as well, I just see
that as an opportunity for opposing forces to use that to be
victorious when we cannot.
And I don't know how you have a time frame imposed and then
say, well, we are going to refresh this and we are going to get
the will of the American people but then we are going to
continue operations while that is occurring. I don't know how
you skin that cat, quite honestly.
As a former military commander, you have to have the
latitude to fight the battle and if there is going to be a time
frame, a limitation on that--at the same time, I don't think
this should be forever but that is not our choice.
We have an enemy and they get a vote, as we all know,
right. We always say no plan survives first contact, right. The
enemy gets a vote.
And so let me ask a very pointed question because I am
looking--General Gross, you would name ISIS. Mr. Mukasey, you
would say that it should be as broad as possible and, Mr.
Olsen, you say all necessary and appropriate force.
I think mine is fairly broad. I know it mentions all
necessary and appropriate. I only mention ISIS as one of the
co-conspirators under the guise of Islamist extremism.
With that, is there a problem with using Islamist
extremism? Is there a problem with that phraseology, number
one? And number two, regarding Guantanamo Bay in particular,
how do we make sure that we are inclusive of those detainees?
I think you touched on that a little bit. But under the
context of this language, what could I be missing? What do I
need to know?
Mr. Olsen. Well, I would say, respectfully, that your
approach would be over broad. In other words, identifying the
enemy by a belief system, essentially.
Extremist Islamists would not be sustainable and it would
be essentially an open-ended war with people who have a
particular----
Mr. Perry. Who have an open-ended war with us right now and
change their names on a regular basis and their affiliations
and their geographic locations.
Mr. Olsen. Again, respectfully, your suggestion would be
based on someone's viewpoints and, obviously, that would be
quite extraordinary in terms of our history to identify an
enemy by those terms and I think unprecedented. So I would not
recommend that approach.
I do think there is the opportunity to identify groups, to
use international law principles to identify those associated
with those groups is--again, we are talking about the most
extreme use of our nation's capabilities--that is, use the
military force--and therefore should be reserved for those
circumstances against those groups who do pose the most
significant threat to us.
So I would not recommend an approach as broad as you have
suggested.
Mr. Perry. Gentlemen?
Judge Mukasey. There is one additional problem there and
that is you identify this as extremism. There are people who
believe that the literal interpretation of the Koran, even to
the point where it involves people crashing airplanes into
buildings to bring down Western civilization, is not an
extremist view--that it is a mainstream view.
We shouldn't have to get into that debate. I think it is
much safer to identify particular groups and their affiliates
and go after them.
How Islamic society generally deals with extremism or our
view of what constitutes extremism is really up to them. It is
not, I think, subject to a military solution.
Mr. Perry. Can I have the general answer?
General Gross. Sir, where I struggle with this is I look at
an authorization for use of force as a response to an enemy who
has attacked us--an organized armed group. And therefore there
is some value in identifying by groups as enemy combatants as
opposed to the Islamist extremism.
Without having the opportunity to look at your proposal I
don't know how I would define that. I would have to have some
guidance if that were the law to help me advise a commander on
who fits within that or who doesn't.
So it would need to be fleshed out. It does seem to be a
bit broad--I mean, just speaking frankly.
The language I do like that I don't see in the Flake-Kaine
bill is the successor language. I think that is important. I
know that has been in previous proposals.
Mr. Perry. And it is mine as well. But I----
General Gross. Yes, and I don't see it in this one that
would allow--if al-Qaeda or ISIS or another group changed to a
different organization I don't know how we would treat that
under this.
Mr. Perry. Thanks.
I yield.
Chairman Royce. Thanks, General.
We go to Gerry Connolly from Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to our
panel.
Mr. Olsen, Article 1 Section 8 of the Constitution states
Congress shall have the power to declare war and to raise and
support armies and other armed forces.
Article 2 that follows that, Section 2, designates the
President shall be Commander in Chief of the nation's armed
forces.
Do you think those are ambiguous or vague declarations in
the Constitution in terms of the enumeration of powers?
Mr. Olsen. No, and I think, as other members of the
committee have pointed out, it does strike me to be a
particularly wise approach that our Framers imposed in terms of
separating powers.
Mr. Connolly. But you said the consistent failure of
Congress to act erodes congressional authority relative to the
executive when it comes to war powers. Are you contending that
the failure to act here in Congress over many decades has in
fact compromised the language in the Constitution with respect
to Congress' power to declare war?
Mr. Olsen. No.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Mr. Olsen. No, I do think that over the past 16 years that
Congress' failure to update the AUMF has allowed the executive
branch, or really required the executive branch, to undertake
interpretations of the AUMF that have been, as a result,
controversial.
Mr. Connolly. So are there implied powers in Article 2
Section 2 with respect to the role of Commander in Chief or the
President? I mean, not as enumerated----
Mr. Olsen. I am not a constitutional scholar but I do
believe that there certainly would be implied powers under the
Commander in Chief authority under Article 2.
Mr. Connolly. And almost every Commander in Chief has so
claimed, going back to James K. Polk.
Mr. Olsen. I defer to your expertise on that question.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Mr. Olsen. That sounds right.
Mr. Connolly. Right. Although as recently as Franklin
Delano Roosevelt, people forget he asked Congress to declare
war against Japan after Pearl Harbor. He did not ask Congress
to declare war against Germany and Italy.
He waited until Hitler, several days later, declared war on
us--considered one of his biggest mistakes--and then Congress
declared war on Germany and Italy. So Franklin Delano Roosevelt
still deferred to that Article 1 power before he engaged with
Hitler, who was really kind of the prime focus of Churchill and
FDR. But he still deferred to the congressional power.
So there are implied powers of being Commander in Chief--I
got to protect the country even if Congress isn't in session, I
got to make decisions about troop deployments. I even go
further--I actually deploy and kind of notify you later.
Are there implied powers for Congress in this declaration
of war power? Do we have implied power? Since the executive
claims implied powers, do we have some?
Mr. Olsen. I certainly think in the sense of conducting
oversight, implied powers in terms of not only the authority to
declare war but also to appropriate funds, there is an
implication, certainly, in terms of providing oversight over
how those funds are used.
Mr. Connolly. Well, one could argue that what we are
debating today the AUMF has such an implied power. Because it
is not a declaration of war but it is an authorization to use
force that we grant, delegate, to the executive, correct?
Mr. Olsen. I think that is correct.
Mr. Connolly. Does the delegation of such authority ever
get stale and expire on its own, even if we don't have a
statutory sunset provision? Is it ad infinitum?
Mr. Olsen. I would think that the authorization for the use
of force, unless it is extinguished in some other act of
Congress, would stay on the----
Mr. Connolly. Goes back to implied powers. Presumably, it
is implied at some point that the original purpose for the
original authorization expires, either through natural causes
or over time, even if it isn't enumerated. Now, we are not
operating on that principle at the moment but it is worthy of
examination.
Is the War Powers Act constitutional?
Mr. Olsen. I would defer to Judge Mukasey on that question.
Yes.
Mr. Connolly. Judge Mukasey.
Judge Mukasey. No.
Mr. Connolly. No. So there we go again. Here is somebody
representing the executive branch who decides they have all
kinds of implied powers and, oh by the way, they get to
enumerate whether our statutory expression of our powers in
Article 1 are constitutional and they get to cherry pick what
they will and won't abide by.
And I would contend, with respect, that there are serious
implied powers in Article 1 and that it is not the purview of
the executive branch to determine on its own the
constitutionality of any circumspection or circumscribing with
respect to the Commander in Chief's powers. That is why it is
Article 2, not Article 1.
My time has expired.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
We go to Adam Kinzinger of Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
all for being here and bearing with us. It is really important.
What Mr. Connolly was saying, I think it is essential to
remember that I think when our Founders were writing the
Constitution they understood that you cannot have 535
commanders in chief because we never agree with anybody.
We can debate things and everything else but the reality is
when it comes to making decisive decisions overseas, time-
reactive decisions, destroying an enemy, that is--can only be
invested in one person and that is the President of the United
States.
I actually would agree with the judge. I am not sure that
the War Powers Act would pass the constitutional test. But our
power is to simply declare, I believe that a state of war
exists as enumerated in the Constitution and then we can have
power through appropriating money, et cetera.
I was very concerned when a colleague of mine attempted to
basically withdraw the current AUMFs out of provision because,
as was discussed a little earlier, I fear that that would have
immediately--I mean, if we believe that we can debate and pass
a new AUMF in 6 months, I want to point to sequester and some
of these other things in Congress that we have taken up to the
time limit and actually not been able to successfully compel us
to an answer.
And I would hate to think that--so I am an Air Force
pilot--I would hate to think that my colleagues would one day
wake up and not have the legal authority to destroy our main
enemy and that is, frankly, what we would run into.
I do support a new AUMF in the current construct where we
are at, but I don't think there can be any time limit on it and
there can be no limitation on what the President can do because
that makes us Commander in Chief.
And I think what is being missed in all of this is ISIS--
yes, ISIS is an enemy. This is a generational fight that we are
in against terrorism.
This is not just about destroying troops on the battlefield
now, which is extremely essential to do, but this is about
understanding that hard and soft power come into play here and
that this military fight, I truly believe, will be going on for
the rest of my life to some extent.
And so the 7- and 8-year-olds in the refugee camps today
are the ones we need to be focussing on to deny ISIS or the
next generation of ISIS or whatever we call them their ability
to recruit their next recruits.
So, General, I want to ask you, you know, as I mentioned, I
supported----
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Mr. Kinzinger [continuing]. I supported--yes.
Mr. Connolly. Real briefly. You know I respect you. I would
say that what you have just enumerated is unlimited power
delegated, in my opinion, unconstitutionally, to the executive.
You took issue with the expression of our power and the War
Powers Act being constitutional or not. What you have just
said, if we acted on would be an unprecedented delegation of
power to the executive----
Mr. Kinzinger. Well, I--with respect----
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Virtually conceding our war
powers----
Mr. Kinzinger [continuing]. With respect, and I appreciate
that.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend for yielding.
Mr. Kinzinger. I appreciate that. But I believe that when
you put 535 Members of Congress into the Commander in Chief
seat and you state you have an enemy--we have an enemy right
now, which is terrorism.
So we give the President the authority to destroy
terrorists and we can't put a time limit on it because we don't
know how long it is going to take.
It is the internally-displaced refugees now that are prime
recruiting ground if we don't give them hope and opportunity.
So, General, just to ask you, if we tie the hands of the
President and the military by putting restrictions in the AUMF
or we sunset the provision, do you think that will have
negative repercussions on the overall fight in this war?
General Gross. Well, yes, sir, it could. It depends on what
those restrictions are. For example, if you put a 5-year sunset
on it, it certainly wouldn't restrict operations for the first
4 years and 364 days.
But then if there is not a new AUMF in place to replace it,
then if it sunsets and expires then that would create issues.
If you wrote in provisions, I mentioned some examples in my
testimony--for example, a no boots on the ground or no enduring
large-scale combat--then those restrict the ability of the
President and military commanders to plan and they would have
to plan operations that were consistent with the AUMF and it
might take options off the table that they needed.
Mr. Kinzinger. And one of the things you know, General, as
I do, as everybody here does, no plan survives the first
contact with the enemy.
So you never know what you need or what you don't need. And
so our job through the construct of the War Powers Act, which
hasn't been thrown out by the courts so I accept it, is to give
the President the authority to declare war on our end, to say
that a state of war exists, and give him the authority to do
what he needs to do.
Judge, I know you talked about this earlier. I wasn't here
and I apologize, so maybe you are repeating yourself. But can
you talk about what would happen the moment these current 2003
and 2001 AUMFs are rescinded? What would be the legal
implications?
Judge Mukasey. Well, I think questions would be raised
principally about detention since that is where the rubber
meets the road.
As far as ongoing military operations, obviously, there
would be a debate about that. There would be uncertainty about
that.
But although the discussion before began the analysis of
Article 2 powers at Section 2, I would go back to Article 2
Section 1, which begins with the words ``the executive power
shall be vested in a President of the United States.''
It doesn't say, all except a little bit of it. Doesn't say,
these particular instances of it. It says, the executive power.
That means all of it.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. [presiding]. The Chair now will recognize Ms.
Kelly of Illinois.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the
witnesses.
In addition to granting military authority to the
President, this bill would also require the President to send
Congress a comprehensive strategy to defeat ISIS.
But as we know, the U.S. fight against ISIS is not just
military. It is political, it is economic, and diplomatic.
How will the President's strategy address the economic and
political pressure needed to defeat ISIS and to prevent
successor uprising? Whoever wants to answer.
Judge Mukasey. Obviously, that would be up to each
President to respond to. Since this is an authorization for the
use of military force, I think the sense is that the strategy
indicated here is a military strategy.
But I certainly agree with the implication of your
question, which is that it is going to take a lot more than
simply military strategy to do it and that is something we are
going to have to resolve more broadly in the political debate
that we have and in the way that the Congress authorizes the
activities not only with the military but also, for example,
with the State Department and other entities that carry on the
fight in other forums.
Mr. Olsen. I would just suggest that your question does
raise an important point, as Judge Mukasey said, and that is
that including a reporting requirement in an AUMF would enable
Congress to actually have the opportunity to review the
military strategy--again, not substituting its judgment for the
executive branch on how to execute the war but actually being
able to review the strategy and thereby exercise, I think,
Congress' appropriate role under the Constitution.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
How do you feel or what provisions do you feel should be
included in an AUMF dealing with, like, cyber terror--I mean,
wars not fought in the same exact way anymore and what do you
think about that?
General Gross. Well, ma'am, you know, the provision in the
current AUMF that is reflected in the Flake-Kaine example, and
I believe Mr. Perry's--as he mentioned as well, his proposal
talks about all necessary means or language similar to that.
And that would include, I think, cyber authority subject to
other laws and, as I mentioned in my opening statement, there's
always other laws--international law, other domestic law, U.S.
policy, et cetera. So the AUMF alone might give authority that
there might be some other source of law that might restrain or
constrain in some way.
But we would look to all of that, or they would look to all
of that, as they analysed a particular operation to see, is
this a lawful enemy under the AUMF? If so, is this a lawful
means of force to use against that enemy in this setting.
Ms. Kelly. Anybody else?
Mr. Olsen. No, I would just agree with General Gross on
that question. I think that is the right answer.
Ms. Kelly. And believe it or not, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Brian Mast of Florida.
Mr. Mast. Thank you, Chairman.
General Gross and Mr. Olsen, you have both spoken
extensively about the who as the most critical part of the
AUMF. General, you said who was most critical and you actually
said how was the most problematic piece of everything you
listed. Mr. Olsen, you said of the three things you listed that
Congress should consider you said who as the first one that
you'd mentioned so take that at a priority list.
So I want to talk to you both a little bit about how you
determine who--get to the bottom of that a little bit, and who
we should be considering.
Not to use who too many times, but do you think that we
should be considering those who conduct acts of terror? Rapid
fire this if you want.
Mr. Olsen. As an initial question, yes. You want to look at
who poses that degree of threat to us. I think that is a
starting point. I don't think that is the dispositive question
in any sense.
Mr. Mast. I take your head shaking as a yes?
General Gross. Yes, sir. As I was telling Mr. Perry, I
think you start with the premise that this is a response to an
act of armed conflict--an act of war.
And so as we look, and I will use the word enemy--as we
look to define who is the enemy that Congress and the President
have decided to use the military element of power against.
And so there are numerous terrorist groups all over the
world but they may not be an enemy in the sense that they have
opened up armed conflict against the United States and
therefore it wouldn't be, in my view, appropriate to add them
to an AUMF. Really, an AUMF----
Mr. Mast. Considering whether it was on U.S. soil, a U.S.
Embassy, a U.S. warship, some other threat oversea somewhere?
General Gross. All of those are threats to the United
States--yes, sir.
Mr. Mast. What about those who conduct acts of genocide--
Bashar al Assad, somebody else? Somebody conducting an act of
genocide against their people. Should that be somebody, in your
opinion, that we should consider in an AUMF?
Mr. Olsen. Again, I think the reference must be made to
whether this is an act of armed conflict against the United
States and, again, there are other sources of law--
international law, Article 2 authority, a backdrop Article 2
authority--for the President to take steps in the absence of an
AUMF to protect the country. I think----
Mr. Mast. And you advocate primarily or only for those that
have conducted some sort of kinetic action against the U.S.?
Mr. Olsen. Again, certainly, as a starting point, and then
the question is, are we in an active armed conflict with a
particular group before I think it would be appropriate to
include them in an AUMF.
Mr. Mast. Would either of you look at an AUMF for those
that have conducted cyber terrorism--a nonkinetic action?
Mr. Olsen. So I think--again, if I could just answer a
little bit more fulsomely, I think there is a risk in looking
at every threat through the lens of an AUMF and deciding that
we want to use military force against that threat.
There is a whole range of options that the government has
whether it is a cyber threat, whether it is a humanitarian
question or issue.
There are lots of things the government has the ability to
do that are short of the authorization for the use of force
against that particular threat or group and I think that it is
appropriate to reserve the use of an AUMF only for those groups
that rise to the level of posing a threat that is an active
armed conflict against the United States.
Mr. Mast. Okay. General, when we are considering, as
Members of Congress, an AUMF, do you think we should be looking
at the extent of military force that would be needed to bring
us to victory or bring us to success?
Should that be a consideration? Should we be looking at
whether it could lead to only conventional weapons or nuclear
weapons or expected casualties--KIA? Should that be a
consideration for us when deciding an AUMF?
General Gross. Sir, are you saying a consideration of the
other side's capabilities or our capabilities?
Mr. Mast. If it could lead to nuclear war, should that be
something we should consider or the amount of KIAs that we
could expect as a result of a use of military force--should
that play a role in our decision as Members of Congress for an
AUMF?
General Gross. Well, I would think you would consider all
factors involved with such an important and serious step. As
you consider whether or not to authorize armed conflict,
authorize the use of military force, I would hope all those
considerations would come into play because it is a serious
decision to authorize military force against another entity
whether that is a nation, an organization, a group, a person.
It is a big step. So I would hope yes.
Mr. Mast. So then I would ask, do you think that Members of
Congress should have access to the operation's orders that
exist out there with the Department of Defense--the war plans--
when we are considering an AUMF--you know, the mission, the
commander's intent, the center of gravity, disposition of
forces both allied and those that we consider aggressors?
Should we have access to operation's orders?
General Gross. I don't know. It depends on how far down. I
mean, I know that there are regular reporting requirements. I
know we came over frequently to both the Senate and House Armed
Services Committees and by invitation to other committees,
although that is within your jurisdiction and I don't fully
understand that, to be clear. But I do know that we make a
wealth of--or made a wealth and they still do, I assume--a
wealth of information available. At what level that becomes
appropriate, how far down, not because we are hiding anything
but just that the amount of stuff you would see.
So if we are talking wave top, large-scale campaign plans
against nation-states, that might be informative for you all if
we are talking about a battalion's operation order to conduct a
particular objective in Afghanistan in a district. It seems
like that might be below the level where Congress ought to be
focused, in my opinion.
Mr. Mast. My time has expired. I thank you for your
comments, gentlemen.
Mr. Yoho. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
We will now go to Mr. Schneider from Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the witnesses for not just your service to the country but your
generosity with your time and insights today. It is very much
appreciated.
As others have said, I agree with the consensus that it is
long overdue that this body has had the debate that there is
clearly a need for an updated AUMF. So I thank you for that. My
colleague from Illinois indicated--I don't want to misquote him
but it was--essentially, I believe he said simply that Congress
simply has the power to declare a state of war exists. But, in
fact, the last declaration of war was World War II. We are
operating currently under an AUMF, something that is distinct,
issued in 2001. Maybe just briefly if you could indicate the
difference between an AUMF and a declaration of war.
General Gross. I will take a first stab, sir. Again, not a
constitutional scholar but I have heard other people who speak
on this. First of all, we have only declared war five times and
the last time was World War II. You all have only declared war
five times. And there is some thought that perhaps that is
reserved for nation-state on nation-state traditional
international armed conflict--that you wouldn't declare war in
a setting where--now, that doesn't talk about Korea or Vietnam,
which were both nation-states.
There is some thought that a declaration of war is--I am
being careful with my words--is perhaps with the passing of the
U.N. Charter, which is an attempt to outlaw offensive war--in
other words, declaring war on another nation without some
justification of self-defense or so forth--that perhaps
declarations of war are no longer something nations do since
the passage of the U.N. Charter. To my knowledge, there hasn't
been a declaration of war since World War II.
Mr. Schneider. Right. And I am going to reclaim my time
just because it is limited. But same with you, General Gross.
In your testimony, you talked about within an AUMF it
establishes definitions. It creates parameters, as you laid it
out as the why, the who, what, when, where, how questions, and
those parameters distinct from what we are talking about with a
declaration of war, I guess turning to the whole panel, is it
within the authority of Congress to establish parameters of how
we engage, where we engage, who we engage?
Judge Mukasey.
Judge Mukasey. How? I don't think so.
Again, Article 2 Section 1 begins with, the executive
power--all of it. Deciding how we should exercise an authority
that Congress says the President should have, I think, is an
invasion of that executive authority.
Mr. Schneider. General.
General Gross. Yes. As not being a constitutional scholar,
I would say that you would have to look at the specifics and
see whether or not that rose to the level of a conflict between
the executive and the legislature. But I certainly think it is
within the parameter of Congress to draft and enact an
authorization for use of military force.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Olsen.
Mr. Olsen. In preparing for this hearing, looking at the
case law on this particular question, I do think that the law
supports Congress' authority to impose some limitations on the
types of activities that can be undertaken by the executive
under a grant or authorization for the use of force. Again,
there are serious policy judgments about where to draw the line
between Congress and the executive branch and how to execute a
war. But I do think that the law supports an appropriate role
for Congress in setting some limits whether it is occupying
territory or extensive use of ground forces.
I think the law is clear that Congress has authority to
impose those limitations on the executive branch.
Mr. Schneider. And my understanding, just for
clarification, all of you have said you support the idea of an
AUMF having a sunset. Is that correct?
Mr. Olsen. Yes, from my part.
General Gross. I didn't take a position either way.
Mr. Schneider. Okay.
General Gross. I just point it out.
Mr. Schneider. All right. To the extent that sunset is a
parameter, would there be circumstances beyond time that would
suggest it should come back to Congress to review a change? We
have talked about the morphing of organizations. They can
change their names. They can change their geography. But if it
morphs into a completely different dynamic, are there times
where an AUMF reaches a limit where it should come back to
Congress to review and refine? Judge.
Judge Mukasey. Again, that is a policy choice rather than a
legal choice and it is up to this body to decide whether an
unlimited piece of legislation ought to come back to be limited
or to be reconsidered.
Mr. Schneider. And I asked the question--let me state it in
a specific context. As we look and are considering a refined
AUMF, going forward, we have a conflict taking place in Syria
now. It has multi facets to it. It is going to change many
times over from the time whatever we decide to the time we get
to whatever hopeful conclusion we achieve a peaceful--what I
ultimately believe will be a non-military solution. But I am
concerned that there will be a moment in that conflict that we
need to ask ourselves, again, questions--how far do we go?
And my time has expired but if the panel wants to touch on
that at all, I would welcome that.
Mr. Olsen. If I may, just very briefly, because I do agree
that the situation in Syria, as complicated as it is,
highlights the need for clarity with respect to the use of
force and I do think that you are correct in the Congress'
authority to set parameters and to require whether it is an
approval or a disapproval process some mechanism for reviewing
the expansion of authority whether it is to new groups or new
geographic areas such as new countries and I think Syria is a
prime example of why that is a prudent thing for Congress to
do.
General Gross. And I would just add, by necessity I never
think of a single conflict just because it is inside a country.
There are multiple conflicts going on inside Syria and so
if something happened that the United States was no longer
acting within the authority of its AUMF and found itself acting
against another enemy, whether that was a nation-state or some
other organized armed group, then we would need to have some
domestic legal authority for that conflict separate from the
one with ISIS.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your response.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. I am over time. I appreciate the
extended time.
Mr. Yoho. We will now go to Mr. Garrett from Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is like I live in a parallel universe sometimes when I
am in this town. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who I hold in high
regard, once suggested that you are entitled to your own
opinions but not entitled to your own facts, and Vandenberg
famously said that politics should stop at the water's edge.
But when I listen to my esteemed colleague make his
introductory remarks where he said he is ``not clear on the
administration's plans to deal with ISIS and how it differs
from the last administration, if it does,'' I thought, where am
I?
So I am going to use such hard-line conservative sources as
the Huffington Post, CNN, and the Atlantic to try to address
his concerns and inability to differentiate.
On June 8th of this year, CNN said, ``Iran calls Trump's
ISIS response repugnant.'' I don't think the Iranians
criticized the last administration so vociferously.
On June 29th, Huffington Post said, ``U.S.-supported forces
retake Mosul.'' The Atlantic, on May 20th, said, ``The scramble
for a post-ISIS Syria is beginning.''
And ABC News, on July 20th, said, or quoted a former three-
star general who said, ``It's simple. We are winning. They are
losing.''
Let us contrast that to the previous administration. ABC
News, June 29th, 2016, said, ``ISIS 2 years later: From JV team
to international killers.''
November 14th, 2015, CNN said, ``Obama declares ISIS
contained''--the day before the Paris attacks. Newsweek, April
19th, 2016, said, ``Obama: Mosul will be recaptured from ISIS
by the end of this year.'' We know how that turned out.
And The New Yorker, January 10th, 2017, said, ``During
President Obama's 8 years in office jihadis gained more turf,
more followers, and more money.''
So I wish that my colleague who said he couldn't
differentiate between the policies of the previous
administration had looked not at policies but at results
because I think they are relatively easily differentiated.
Sorry. I couldn't help myself there.
We talked early in this hearing about repealing the AUMF
and then replacing it. I will submit--and, again, I apologize--
I have limited time--that that is incredibly dangerous, in my
estimation, because historically what I think we have learned
is that the Article 2 branch will exercise executive authority
without authorization where they deem it necessarily and
candidly, I think constitutionally they almost have a duty to
do that. And historically, I think it is telling what Andrew
Jackson said after the court ruled: They have made their
ruling--now let us see them enforce it.
So we have a duty here. I would adopt the comments of my
colleague from the other side of the aisle, Congressman Deutch,
not doing a new AUMF is an abdication of our responsibility and
our duties and, candidly, unfortunately, it seems that we
abdicate more frequently sometimes in this body than we act.
But I think it is our responsibility to review the
circumstances in light of obvious changes over the course of 16
years and then act appropriately to authorize and fund, because
that is our Article 1 responsibility, our Government as it
pursues the enemies of this Nation and ensures, hopefully,
peace and stability, and that is prosperity and opportunity for
our posterity.
I would also, however, reference positively the comments
that my colleague, Mr. Kinzinger, who said, and I will
paraphrase, that we are at war not with a nation but an idea
and that we need to focus on that 7-year-old displaced child in
a camp somewhere because you can't declare victory against an
idea and have it be a fait accompli.
You have to create circumstances where individuals have
hope, have a pathway to opportunity, because it has been my
observation that you are much less likely to strap an explosive
vest to yourself when you aspire one day to be a doctor or a
lawyer or a teacher.
So we need to look to the future but we also need to
aggressively prosecute those who would do us harm. My fear is
that we have all too often in the past looked at what the needs
of the moment were and not looked to the long-term needs. We
articulated early upon being sworn into office that we should
never engage in regime change without contemplating just what
might fill the vacuum. And so specifically, as it relates to
Syria, and again, I want to advocate very clearly that we
should enact a new AUMF, that we should not repeal the existing
AUMF until the day after the old one goes into effect because
creating a vacuum means something will fill it.
But, specifically, as it relates to Syria, everyone knows
the horrific acts of Assad but are there--and maybe I am a
little bit afield, Mr. Chairman--are there any viable entities
to run that nation as it currently exists on a map who wouldn't
be equal to or worse than Syria?
Jabhat Al-Nusra, Jabhat Fateh al-Sham are essentially co-
opted by al-Qaeda, right? And then there is ISIS. You have got
the Kurds, who have no desire to run that country, and the
country who has no desire to be ruled by Kurds.
So open-endedly, as we authorize an AUMF and we act in
Syria, don't we need to be careful that we don't create a
circumstance where what follows is worse than--if conceivable,
than what we have now?
I will yield back, but that one can be rhetorical but----
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Garrett [continuing]. I think I know the answer.
Mr. Yoho. Appreciate your comments.
We now go to Mr. David Cicilline from Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman.
I want to thank our chairman and ranking member for giving
us the opportunity to explore this important issue and really
thank our three witnesses for helping to inform this
discussion.
I am extremely concerned by the escalation of violence in
Syria in recent months and by the extremely broad and, in my
view, incorrect interpretation that this administration has
taken of its authority to take military action in Syria. Let me
be clear that I also had deep reservations about some of the
Obama administration's actions in the region, which I voiced
openly at that time.
However, the missile strikes, the shooting down of a Syrian
Government plane, and other actions that the Trump
administration has taken have seriously ratcheted up American
military engagement in Syria without congressional input or
authorization.
I know many of my colleagues share my deep concerns and
that is why more than 60 of them have joined me in sending a
letter to the President raising their serious concerns about
his actions and reminding him that the Constitution requires
him to seek congressional approval for military actions and I
would ask unanimous consent that this letter be entered for the
record.
In my view, the 2001 AUMF needs to be repealed and replaced
by an authorization that is tailored to the threats that we
currently face, not the threats of almost two decades ago. It
is clear that the President of any party will use a broad
interpretation of the existing authorization to justify their
use of military force. It is up to Congress to reassert our
role and consider a new authorization for the use of military
force.
However, let us be clear. This President has presented no
strategy for dealing with ISIS, no strategy for ending the
brutal reign of the Assad regime, and no strategy for engaging
with other terrorist threats around the globe.
And here is my first question--is it not correct that the
President must come to Congress with a plan, with an actual
strategy, and then seek congressional authorization for any
part of that plan that requires the use of military force--that
it cannot be done in the reverse when we imagine what the plan
is and sort of estimate what we think the use of military force
would be to support the plan, it doesn't exist.
So don't we have to first have a plan and a strategy from
the President that says, here is what we will do to defeat ISIS
and here is the force that I need to execute that plan? Anyone
disagree with that?
Judge Mukasey. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. You disagree. Why?
Judge Mukasey. Because even declarations of war simply
declare that a state of war existed. They did not declare how
the plan was to be, how the plan was to be executed, what
strategy was to be pursued, and what any limits were.
You cannot declare in advance how you intend to achieve a
victory.
Mr. Cicilline. So, Judge, do you then think that there is
no limitation to congressional action with respect to the use
of military force--that it is simply a declaration of war or
not? That Congress doesn't have the ability to limit?
Judge Mukasey. No. It can limit as to who is the enemy.
Mr. Cicilline. That is it? Not as to----
Judge Mukasey. It can limit--it can, although the question
whether it should--limit as to where.
Mr. Cicilline. But if in fact Congress has the ability to
limit who and where and maybe something else, doesn't it make
sense that the President of the United States should share with
Members of Congress what that plan is, what that strategy is,
so we can make a determination as to whether or not the use of
military force ought to be authorized?
Judge Mukasey. No, because that would mean that we would
have 535 commanders in chief of the armed forces----
Mr. Cicilline. No. It would mean we would have Congress----
Judge Mukasey [continuing]. And the executive power is
vested----
Mr. Cicilline [continuing]. Playing that role of
authorizing the use of the----
Judge Mukasey [continuing]. In one person.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. I understand that there is a sense
that the executive branch should have maximum flexibility in
this area. But I think most of us understand the American
people are very concerned about authorizing a President to take
us into another war like Iraq and Afghanistan. So in what ways,
General and Mr. Olsen, do you think Congress can provide a
check on the President's authority to deploy ground troops,
which is an issue which we hear a lot about from constituents
and some sense that we can engage in this fight without the use
of ground troops? In what ways can Congress or should Congress
impose limits on the President's use of military force?
Mr. Olsen. I do think there is a very important policy
judgement for Congress to make here and I, too, think Congress,
as I mentioned before, has the legal authority to impose some
restrictions along the lines of, for example, limiting ground
troops.
To your question before--the conversation with Judge
Mukasey, I think it is important to take into account the
current nature of this conflict--in other words, the difference
between Japan bombing Pearl Harbor and a declaration of war or
even al-Qaeda attacking us on 9/11 and the authorization of use
of force days later.
We are in a very long struggle with a very complicated,
dynamic, and persistent enemy, which I think does suggest that
it is appropriate for the executive branch to come to Congress
and explain who is the enemy, how are we going to attack it,
where do we need to use force, and that should inform how
Congress imposes any restrictions on the use of such force,
because at the end of the day, Congress speaks for the American
people.
Every member of this committee has individuals in their
district who are fighting on the front lines in this conflict
and I think as the representatives of the American people,
Congress has an extraordinarily important role to speak for the
American people and impose appropriate restrictions on how that
force is exercised.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cicilline. Mr. Chairman, I don't think you ruled on my
unanimous consent request to put into the record the letter
that we sent to President Trump signed by 60 of my colleagues.
I would just ask unanimous consent it be placed in the record.
Mr. Yoho. Accepted.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Ron DeSantis from Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Judge, what distinction do you draw, if any, between a
declaration of war and an authorization for the use of military
force?
Judge Mukasey. Hard to draw that distinction. As has been
pointed out, we have declared war only five times in our
history. We have fought many, many more wars. It is possible
that a declaration of war would apply simply to the
conventional nation-state situation. But I think what we are
talking about is the question of how and whether our armed
forces are deployed rather than distinctions between AUMF and a
declaration of war.
Mr. DeSantis. The criticism that is sometimes lodged is oh,
you guys are doing authorization of force--you haven't declared
war--somehow that is an illegitimate use of force. You don't
think that that carries any water, correct?
Judge Mukasey. I do not.
Mr. DeSantis. When, in your judgement, is congressional
authorization needed for force? Obviously, if Congress declares
war or authorizes it, the President's good--if we are attacked
or he is fending off an attack. But there are certain times in
the middle where a President could potentially engage. If you
look at some of the hot spots that are not necessarily covered
by an AUMF, whether it is a North Korea threat or Iran, when
does it come to where Congress has to authorize it, in your
judgement?
Judge Mukasey. That is a political decision that is made in
the tug of war between Congress and the executive. We have this
Constitution and there is a lot of play in the joints and that
is where the tug of war goes on. I can't sit here and tell you
a priori precisely where it is necessary for the Congress to
assert itself. But I shouldn't have to.
Mr. DeSantis. So how about the funding--what I want to get
at is how the funding power interacts with the authorization.
You, in your testimony, said you would be willing to live with
a 5-year lapse, although I think you would prefer no lapse,
correct, if you just had your druthers or----
Judge Mukasey. I would prefer no lapse in dedication and
commitment. Part of the problem is that when you pass a
resolution in 2001 and it gets to be 2017 and you have people
scratching their heads about how it all happened and how we got
here, that means that there has been a lapse in commitment.
Mr. DeSantis. If we do the 5-year and it lapses but then
Congress continues to dedicate funding for the military effort,
do you consider that to be implicit authorization?
Judge Mukasey. It is a de facto authorization and that has
happened in other settings and that is what I mean by the tug
of war and the political interaction.
Mr. DeSantis. Because we had this issue with the Obama
administration. He wanted an authorization of force that
limited the use of force. First of all, I don't think that that
would make sense anyways. But if you are going to try to limit
it if there is a political concern wouldn't it be better to
authorize the force and then use the funding mechanism to say
okay, we don't want ground troops in Syria and then just limit
it that way rather than tie the hands at the start of the
conflict?
Judge Mukasey. The funding power is a sharp-edged
instrument, but it can certainly be used.
Mr. DeSantis. Let me ask you this question. We are debating
on this committee, Judiciary, some other ones, about whether or
not that we should designate the Muslim Brotherhood as a
terrorist organization. I know you were involved in terrorist
cases as a judge and as Attorney General. What is your
recommendation for us? Should we consider them a terrorist
organization or not?
Judge Mukasey. My sense is that it is the State Department
that draws up the list of foreign terrorist organizations
rather than Congress. The----
Mr. DeSantis. Well, let me just correct--what we are doing
is we did a bill out of the committee last year saying Congress
believes and then urging the secretary of state to make the
determination.
Judge Mukasey. Based on what has been their slogan ever
since they were founded that ends with ``jihad is our way and
dying in the way of Allah is our highest hope,'' yes.
Mr. DeSantis. No, I agree with you. I think that that
should be done. I have urged the administration to do it.
Mr. Chairman, thanks for holding the hearing. I think the
witnesses have been really good so thank you, guys. And we
should debate this. We should update the AUMF. I think it could
be done. I think it would be actually one of the few times we
actually have an insightful debate on the House floor for a
change. So I am all for it but we have got to understand--I
think all of you do--that this is a threat that is not going
away. It evolves and the idea that we are only going to target
the people who are actually responsible for 9/11 and not open
our eyes to the fact that we have militant jihadists waging war
against us and other parts of the world. I just think that
doesn't cut it. So we have got to update it and do it right.
Thanks.
Mr. Yoho. I thank the gentleman from Florida.
We will now go to Ms. Barbara Lee from California.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all very much.
It has been a very enlightening and important hearing. Now, I
am glad to be back. I was on this committee for 11 years and I
was here during the debate around the authorization of the 2001
authorization.
However, that never came to this committee. Three days
after the horrific events of 9/11 it went straight to the
floor. So this committee never had a chance to weigh in on
that. The resolution, as was mentioned earlier and read, it was
60 words, it was overly broad, and it did set the stage in the
framework for perpetual war. I think now it is about 20 percent
of members who are here today were here during that period. And
so I have been consistently trying to repeal that authorization
and I want to clarify what several have said earlier including
Chairman Royce.
The amendment I offered, I have been offering it for many
years but this year in Appropriations Committee--I serve on
Approps now--which was adopted was an amendment that would
repeal the 2001 resolution but it would give Congress 8 months,
mind you--8 months to come up with a new one prior to its
repeal. Somehow it has been misunderstood and misconstrued that
I am saying let us repeal it and then take as long as we want.
So that is not the case and I want to make sure everyone
knows that because that would be irresponsible and I would not
offer such an amendment. So we would have 8 months after the
repeal to come up with a new one and the repeal would stay in
effect until we came up with a new one.
I wanted to ask just with regard to our national security
strategy. Mr. Olsen, you mentioned the toolbox in which we have
in our counterterrorism efforts and that every non-military
strategy should possibly be used before the use of force. So I
would like to ask all of you how do you view preventing
conflicts in the first place and what do you think about a 30
percent cut to the State Department and USAID funds in terms of
our strategies to prevent the use of force and wars--the
necessity for the use of force.
And then secondly, on what basis should we authorize the
use of force? I mean, General, you mentioned terrorism is going
to be with us. You know, we can't continue to use force
everywhere in the world.
How do we really refine and know which groups, which
nations, which organizations are real threats to our national
security or do we continue to, in many ways, get embroiled in
civil wars that will just provide the United States the--well,
it would be assured that we would be in the civil wars in
perpetuity?
So, Mr. Olsen, could you start?
Mr. Olsen. Sure, I will start and I will say that I agree
with the point that you raised about the importance of a whole
of government approach to our counterterrorism efforts. I think
that is something that everyone I served with over two
administrations, both Republican and Democrat, agreed with and
that it was the necessary approach. In fact, the comments more
recently of Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis have agreed with
that as well, calling the use of military force a last resort
in our counterterrorism fight.
So there is broad agreement on that point. There is broad
agreement on all the different tools that are available from
law enforcement to economic to diplomatic and I think a number
of the comments that have been made today during this hearing
about the fact that this a, at some level, a struggle for ideas
and that countering the ideology that fuels terrorism is part
of our efforts and a lot of that is done out of the State
Department. And so that is a critical component of our overall
counterterrorism strategy.
General Gross. Yes. I couldn't agree more, Congresswoman. I
mean, I love Secretary Mattis' quote he is famous for: ``If you
are going to cut the State Department's budget, I need a bigger
budget for bullets,'' the idea being that that is just going to
generate more conflict without diplomacy.
I agree that all the elements of national power ought to be
brought to bear and the military ought to be a last resort. I
don't think you will find anyone in the military who likes war.
I mean, it is just the horrific results of war and the toll on
family and on our service members and civilians. We would like
to avoid war whenever possible and so I agree with you 100
percent.
We need diplomacy to work. We need other elements of
national power to come into play first, and I think as Mr.
Olsen has pointed out, we often look for the military as that
one solution and therefore it is an important solution but it
is not the solution to every problem.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I guess I
would just conclude by just saying as we talk about and debate
a new authorization, we have to remember this in terms of
preventing the use of force as we discuss a new, if we ever do,
authorization to use force because, clearly--and I did vote
against it because, for me--I was the only one who voted
against it--it was just too broad and I knew it would set the
stage for where we are now.
So I thank you for this hearing and I would hope that as we
debate this that what we just talked about is part of that
debate so the Members of Congress can understand that our
actions do lead to reactions that could continue these spiral
of events where we may be able to pull back at some point and
try to prevent further acts of terrorism if we do it
differently. Thank you again.
Mr. Yoho. I thank Ms. Lee and I thank your hard work for
trying to bring the AUMF to an end, and I have been on several
of your bills and I think we need to keep fighting that and we
will get this clarified. So thank you for your comments and
your time.
Gentleman, I am the last one here and so the end is near.
Here we are 16 years into this AUMF and as has been pointed
out, a lot of the Members of Congress including myself were not
here when that happened and so what I have seen is an open-
ended war.
And General Gross, you commented that the current AUMF may
not be legal to go after ISIS in Country X or an affiliated
Group B that develops later because now ISIS is in the
Philippines. We have got reports in South America, and without
a clear definition and a mission statement, this has morphed
into a war in a designated area, in a region, to what we see
today, and my fear is if we don't bring this under closure or
get closure to this, where are we going to be in 5, 10, 15
years from now.
And I don't want to have to think about if Congress had
declared war on Nazism or imperialism during World War II,
would our country still be at war today. What are your thoughts
on declaring war on an ideology versus a nation-state like
Germany or Japan back in World War II?
General Gross. I will take the first stab, sir. And first
of all, just to be clear, I don't think I said you couldn't go
after ISIS in different countries because I think there is
adequate legal basis for them as an enemy, which leads into the
question you just asked. An AUMF really should focus on an
enemy, an enemy force, whether it is a group, a person, or an
organization who has attacked the United States and against
whom should we use military force.
And so declaring war or authorizing military force against
an ideology or an idea makes it difficult for me to put in the
terms of armed conflict and what I understand to be both
international law, international humanitarian law, the law of
armed conflict.
You know, it deals with enemies, not with ideas, and so
that is what makes that difficult. I mean, you could define it,
I suppose, in such a way that you could get to the enemy. But,
to me, you define an enemy. You define against whom you can use
military force.
Mr. Yoho. Mr. Olsen, did you have something you want to
say?
Mr. Olsen. I just wanted to add, briefly, that I totally
agree it would be both legally and operationally
extraordinarily problematic to define the enemy in terms of an
ideology. It would not work on either of those dimensions,
legal or operationally. I would also just quickly point out
that even in the immediate aftermath of 9/11, so days after 9/
11 under the extraordinary circumstances that were occurring in
this country at that point, Congress pushed back on an
executive branch request for a grant of authority to use
military force against terrorism and aggression.
So a broad grant of authority the executive branch asked
for and Congress pulled back and only authorized use of force
against those responsible for 9/11 to deter future acts of
terrorism. So precedent exists even in those extraordinary
times for Congress' role here.
Mr. Yoho. What I saw was an--and Ms. Lee brought it up--is
it didn't get debated in committee. It went right to the House
floor. I don't want to call it a knee-jerk reaction but it was
a rapid response. Had we had that debate, we might have had
things clarified as far as the direction, the commitment, and
we have been struggling with this for the last 5 years that I
have been here and the idea somebody brought up, should an AUMF
sunset with that administration, with the ability to be renewed
to carry into the next administration, does anybody have a
thought on that?
Judge?
Judge Mukasey. I don't know that the tenure of
administrations really coincides with the ebb and flow of
events, you don't necessarily have an occasion for passing an
AUMF at the beginning of an administration so that if you get
to the end of an administration you get an AUMF, what do you
do?
Do you then have it lapse until the new administration
comes into force? I think that it has to be responsive to the
events rather than to the change of administration.
Mr. Yoho. I guess the biggest thing is, so that we don't
get these open-ended conflicts that morph from what we went to
the conflict in Afghanistan in 2001 to where we are now where
it is spread throughout. You know, we went after al-Qaeda. We
went after the people that committed the atrocities of 9/11.
But yet, now we have got ISIS that has come out of the morphing
of the terrorist groups at that time.
What happens when ISIS is gone? There is going to be an
ISIS 2.0 or 3.0 the next generation. And so without a clear
definition, this is in perpetuity. It is like the war on
poverty or the war on drugs. And I think for the sake of our
young men and women in the military, for the commitment this
country has made financially, this last National Defense
Authorization Act is pushing $700 billion--$700 billion today
after a conflict that started 16 years ago.
So I think there needs to be strong and clear decisive
directions and authorization and maybe move this war on terror
into another vehicle and then reel back the AUMF and use it for
nation-on-nation kinetic energy or kinetic contact.
It is just something that, hopefully, with this hearing
today a lot of good ideas and we can bring this to an end and
move on to the next. I don't want to say the next conflict but
focus our country's energy where we need to be for national
security.
Any closing thoughts?
Judge Mukasey. I think even if we were to say that the AUMF
went out of existence, at the end of the day we would still
experience attacks----
Mr. Yoho. We will.
Judge Mukasey [continuing]. Because they are focused on us
as the principal and the most powerful country in the world and
the principal exponent of Western ideas.
Mr. Yoho. Sure.
Judge Mukasey. And that is really the way it starts and I
think that we blink reality by disregarding that.
Mr. Yoho. General.
General Gross. I was just going to say thank you. I very
much appreciate and I know all members of the armed forces
appreciate how serious Congress takes these issues. No matter
where you come out, it matters--that knowing that you all care
enough to take the time means a great deal to the members of
the armed forces. So I would just say thank you again.
Mr. Yoho. Well, again, I appreciate all your service. I,
personally, have known five young men and women that have lost
their lives in this conflict and here we are 16 years later.
So it is something we do take seriously. It is something
that we want to make sure that we get it right so we don't
commit our young men and women and put them in harm's way.
And I appreciate your time. That is the end of the
questioning. This meeting is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:54 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
