- U.S. INTERESTS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC: FY 2018 BUDGET HEARING

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. INTERESTS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC:
FY 2018 BUDGET HEARING

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 27, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-73

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-430 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific

TED S. YOHO, Florida, Chairman
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   AMI BERA, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DINA TITUS, Nevada
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
ANN WAGNER, Missouri

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

Ms. Susan Thornton, Acting Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, U.S. Department of State............     8
Ms. Gloria Steele, Acting Assistant Administrator, Bureau for
Asia, U.S. Agency for International Development................    16

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Ted S. Yoho, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, and chairman, Subcommittee on Asia and the
Pacific: Prepared statement....................................     3
Ms. Susan Thornton: Prepared statement...........................    10
Ms. Gloria Steele: Prepared statement............................    18

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    42
Hearing minutes..................................................    43
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    44
Questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Eliot L.
Engel, a Representative in Congress from the State of New York.    46
Written responses from Ms. Susan Thornton and Ms. Gloria Steele
to questions submitted for the record by the Honorable Ami
Bera, a Representative in Congress from the State of California    50

U.S. INTERESTS IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC:
FY 2018 BUDGET HEARING

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 27, 2017

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Asia and the Pacific,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ted Yoho
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Yoho. The subcommittee will come to order.
Members present will be permitted to submit written
statements to be included in the official hearing record.
Without objection, the hearing record will remain open for 5
calendar days to allow statements, questions, and extraneous
materials for the record subject to lengthen--or to length
limitations in the rules.
Good afternoon again. We call this hearing to order
pursuant to our congressional oversight responsibilities to
discuss the administration's fiscal year 2018 state and foreign
operations budget request for the East Asia-Pacific region. On
behalf of the subcommittee, I thank the panel for joining us
today to share the insights and expertise they have gained
over--and I don't want them to be offended--over their lengthy
diplomatic careers as we deliberate this important topic.
East Asia and the Pacific represents the opportunities and
challenges of this century like no other part of the world.
Just over 30 percent of the world's population lives in this
region. It accounts for the same share of global GDP and
continues to lead the world in annual GDP growth. Four of the
top ten U.S. trading partners are located in this area. Five of
the United States' seven collective defense arrangements are
located in the Asia-Pacific region where over 63,000 U.S.
troops are stationed.
This region is home to what many believe to be our most
urgent existential threat, the nuclear belligerence of North
Korea. We also see rising Islamist militancy and major
territorial disputes in the South China Sea, the East China
Sea, and the Sea of Japan. About a third of the world's
maritime trade passes through these disputed areas, as does
most of the energy supply of South Korea, Japan, and Taiwan,
all critical U.S. security partners. This is the same area over
which China, our chief global rival, seeks hegemony.
The importance of East Asia to U.S. interests is beyond
doubt. If the United States is to remain relevant as a global
leader, we cannot sit out the transformation happening among
our neighbors across the Pacific. Our diplomatic engagement in
the region should advance our interests throughout Asia and
should also be the first line of American defense among its
many security challenges. As Secretary of Defense Mattis
famously said, ``When American diplomats don't have the
resources they need, our military needs to buy more
ammunition.''
I applaud the administration for their efforts to move
toward a more fiscally responsible executive branch, but I am
concerned that the symbolism of cuts have been given more
importance than the actual value of individual programs. It is
worth reiterating that even before this year's foreign
operations budget was slashed by 30 percent, it accounted for
just 1 percent of annual Federal outlay. Empty gestures are not
the way to truly rein in our control, our out-of-control
government spending, especially if they undermine U.S.
interests.
Business logic dictates that we should continue projects
that deliver a good return on investment, yet I see many
potentially sound investments that have been left out of this
year's request. For example, foreign military financing grants
have been mostly stripped out of this year's budget. In the
Asia-Pacific theater, these grants have been used to advance
U.S. national security, for example, by boosting our allies'
ability to counter China's maritime aggression.
Similarly, the United States has traditionally supported
democratic reform, in part because working with friendly
democracies is better for American peace, security, and
influence, and it builds stronger relationships with our
country. But this year's request drops support for democracy
and governance reforms for Cambodia, which is just 1 year away
from an election that could help transform it away from an
autocracy.
Overall, the most worrying implication of this year's EAP,
Eastern Asia-Pacific, budget may be that it reflects a
continuing misalignment of the administration's strategic
planning with the importance of Asia. Even during the so-called
pivot to Asia, budgetary commitments to Asia were the smallest
of any region. This year's request would cut this by a further
46 percent, the largest percentage cut for any region other
than Europe.
This afternoon we discuss the details of this year's state
and foreign operations request for East Asia and the Pacific.
We will try to strike a balance between fiscal responsibility
and sound investments in our national security and other
strategic priorities. In conducting our oversight of this
request we will seek to advance the national interests by
making sure that U.S. diplomatic engagement is up to the
multitude of challenges and opportunities presented by this
dynamic region.
I thank the witnesses for joining us today to discuss this
important topic. Without objection, the witnesses' written
statements will be entered into the hearing record.
I now turn to our ranking member for any remarks he may
have.
[The opening statement of Mr. Yoho follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We should discuss security, economics, democracy, and human
rights. As to security, our security interests cover familiar
and new terrain. We have alliances with Japan, South Korea,
Australia, Thailand, the Philippines. We have security
relations with New Zealand and Singapore, and are building
partnerships with Vietnam, Malaysia, and Indonesia. Of course,
we are dedicated to the security of Taiwan. These alliances and
partnerships provide stability in the Asia-Pacific region and
counter terrorism, piracy, and provide for humanitarian
assistance in the wake of natural disasters.
The huge proposed reduction in the Asia-Pacific diplomatic
and aid budgets sends entirely the wrong message. If we do not
reassure our partners of our commitment to the region, they'll
be inclined to go with China. It is especially absurd to have a
system of slashing our aid and diplomacy and public policy
outreach to the Asia-Pacific region while massively increasing
our military, most of that going to the Asia-Pacific region.
Let us talk about North Korea. We have got a huge threat.
Assistant Secretary Thornton observed that North Korea has no
intention of abandoning its nuclear program in the current
environment. In two hearings this year I mentioned the
possibility of moderating our objectives to achieve a freeze of
their nuclear missile program together with in-person
monitoring. North Korea is believed to have roughly 20 nuclear
weapons, maybe producing three to seven a year, unless we are
able to get a freeze.
Now, of course, that does not meet American political needs
for politicians and operatives here in Washington. You meet
those political needs by pounding the table, saying that any
North Korean nuclear weapons is completely unacceptable. We
have been doing that for the last 17 years. People say it is a
complete failure because within a year or two my city will be
subject to North Korean nuclear weapons. But it is not a
failure because it has met the political needs of the people
who keep bleating the same slogans over and over again.
So, if the objective is to reach a consensus in Washington,
and all say the same things, and the policy is going well. If
the, if a goal is to try to keep this country safe from North
Korean ICBMs, then I suggest we make it clear to China that
they cannot have access to U.S. markets unabated on the one
hand, and continue their current policy toward North Korea on
the other. Of course, a lot of money would be lost by a lot of
big companies if we were to do that, or even threaten to do
that, and so we won't. We will continue to meet the political
needs of Washington and the economic needs of Wall Street.
Moving on to economics. We have got a $340 billion trade
deficit with China; $69 billion with Japan; $83 billion with
the Southeast Asian countries. It is about time that we do
something about that. Access to the U.S. market should be
dependent upon fair and balanced trade.
As to human rights, we see that Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam
are not democratic. Democracy has regressed in Thailand.
Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines are democratic to a
varying degree. Myanmar, also known as Burma, has made a
transition from military rule to something that at least seems
to be civilian government.
Given the fundamental importance of democracy, human
rights, and the rule of law why has our FY 2018 budget proposal
slashed support for these efforts in Asia? We know that 121
three- and four-star military officers, retired military
officers have said that if we slash our diplomatic and aid
efforts this will undermine American security. That is why we
need a budget that reflects our values.
Instead, we are being told slash the diplomacy, slash the
aid, slash the money for communication with the peoples, and
somehow instead increase the military budget by $50 billion,
$60 billion, $70 billion, and pivot that military toward Asia.
I suggest that that is a dangerous and shortsighted approach to
budgeting. But budgeting is policy.
And I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for those comments, and very direct. I
will look forward to an engaging hearing here.
We next go to Mr. Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this important hearing this afternoon.
There are just two topics I would like to comment, the
first being Taiwan. As one of the, as I mentioned before, one
of the co-founders of the Congressional Taiwan Caucus I have
been interested in this issue for over 20 years now and
involved in it. I remember when I first came to Congress back
then, there were a couple hundred missiles aimed at Taiwan from
across the Taiwan Straits from the PRC to Taiwan. That has gone
from a couple hundred now to 1,600 approximately.
The PRC has been bullying Taiwan for years and years now. I
would just say that we ought to be very clear that we are
committed to the Taiwan Relations Act and the six assurances.
Taiwan needs to beef up their military. The best way to avoid
conflict is to be strong and not perceived as being weak.
Very quickly on North Korea, you have got a madman there.
We have had three administrations that have had the luxury of
being able to enter into talks about the threat from North
Korea. Essentially what would happen as a result of these talks
we would end up giving them stuff--oil, food, other
necessities--that they couldn't provide themselves because
everything they have goes to their military. That also freed up
these things; because we are giving them food, they could give
food to the military.
So they would say they would back off from their nuclear
program but they cheated every time. It was a luxury, I say,
because they couldn't, they couldn't hit us. They could hit our
allies. They could hit Japan, they could hit our military
forces, but they couldn't hit us. Now they can. There is only
one thing that I think gets China's attention, and that is if
we seriously discuss a nuclear programs for South Korea and
Japan. I think that is the only thing that will get China's
attention to get them to get North Korea to back off.
I know two people have been saying this for years, myself
and Charles Krauthammer, I don't know which one of us said it
first but I have been preaching it a long time, and I think
that is the only thing that will work.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate your comments. And, again, I think
this is going to be very engaging.
We next go to Mr. Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. I yield my time to Mr. Bera.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. Mr. Bera.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member Sherman.
You know, the countries in East Asia rely quite heavily on
U.S. assistance for their national and regional security,
particularly in Southeast Asia. But yet, when we look at the FY
2018 budget request, that is not reflected in here. In there,
the rationale for this budget says to reinforce the rules-based
order in the region by building an international commitment to
defeat ISIS and defending freedom of navigation in the region's
maritime spaces, including the South China Sea, with U.S.
leadership.
But the budget request proposes eliminating foreign
military financing altogether for the countries in Asia. U.S.
foreign assistance to Indonesia is cut by 31 percent; 56
percent to the Philippines; 26 percent to Vietnam. These cuts
flatly contradict the administration's statement of commitment
to the region.
It is my belief that the budget puts America and our
standing in the region at risk. While administration officials
have stated that we remain committed to Asia, our words have to
be backed up by our deeds. This budget does not reflect that
commitment. So, I really do worry that we jeopardize our
relationships in Asia.
Our support for our allies and partners in Asia increase
global and regional stability. And better stability there means
better security here at home.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I appreciate my colleague's remarks.
We will next go to Mr. Connolly from Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
I want to echo our chairman, Mr. Yoho's, comments about the
draconian nature of the budget cuts proposed. This isn't a
reduction, this is gutting. To cut almost half of the aid to an
entire region, the biggest cut in the world outside of Europe
and Eurasia, speaks volumes. You don't make a country great
through retreat; you make a country weak through retreat, and
you hand over assets and dynamics to China in this region. That
is the consequence.
You cannot cut 46 percent and fight terrorism. You cannot
cut all foreign military financing and fight terrorism. You
cannot cut huge amounts of money from the Philippines and
Indonesia when you are worried about ISIS-affiliated
organizations suddenly resurfacing or surfacing in those
countries. That is contradictory. It shows a complete lack of
understanding of what we do through the foreign assistance
program. And, Ms. Thornton, I hope you will take that message
back.
On one final point, Ms. Steele, I saw you went to Maryknoll
College in the Philippines. I went to Maryknoll College in
Chicago, Illinois. So you need a promotion.
Mr. Yoho. The gentleman yields back.
And with that we are thankful to be joined today by Ms.
Susan Thornton, Acting Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of
East Asian and Pacific Affairs at the U.S. Department of State;
and Ms. Gloria Steele, Acting Assistant Administrator of the
Bureau for Asia at the U.S. Agency for International
Development.
As our meetings in the past, what I encourage you to do is
be engaging. These guys will be, this panel will be. It is the
ideas that you give us here that will form policy to help bring
some, hopefully, some diplomatic responses or actions so that
we can have peaceful resolve of what is going on in the Asia-
Pacific theater, whether it is North Korea with the threats of
nuclear weapons, or the aggression of China further creating a
hegemony in that area.
So I appreciate it. Ms. Thornton, if you would go ahead and
just for house cleaning make sure you turn your microphone on.
You will have 5 minutes. We are going to ask members to
respectfully try to stay to the 5-minute time limit. I can't
tell you how much I appreciate you being here and thank you.
Ms. Thornton, go ahead.

STATEMENT OF MS. SUSAN THORNTON, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
BUREAU OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
STATE

Ms. Thornton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am very
happy to be here with you today to discuss the budget situation
for FY 2018----
Mr. Connolly. Excuse me, Mr. Chairman. Could I ask Ms.
Thornton to pull the microphone closer to her so we can all
hear?
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
Ms. Thornton. Is that better? Can you hear me now? Okay.
Well, thank you again, Mr. Ranking Member, members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before
you today to testify regarding the President's fiscal year FY
2018 budget request for East Asia-Pacific.
The Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs is responsible
for engaging a region that represents a quarter of the world's
population in GDP, some of the world's fastest growing markets
and, as you said, Mr. Chairman, four of our top ten trading
partners. Despite all of its dynamism and promise, we do,
however, face serious challenges to our security interests and
we must address these to keep the United States, our allies,
and our partners safe.
The FY 2018 budget request supports the President's vision
to meet four key challenges: Addressing the North Korea threat,
maintaining American leadership and influence in the East Asia
region, defeating ISIS and combating transnational crime, and
creating jobs and other economic opportunities for Americans.
The most pressing threat that we face today, of course, is
North Korea. The DPRK's continued pursuit of nuclear weapons
and the means to deliver them is not new, but the regime has
accelerated its development of new capabilities over the past 2
years. To address this growing threat we are stepping up our
global pressure campaign in coordination with allies and
partners around the world to convince the DPRK regime to return
to serious denuclearization talks.
Maintaining American leadership in Asia requires us to work
with our allies and partners on a range of challenges. Our
budget request allows us to bolster Southeast Asian cooperation
on maritime security and the rule of law which underpin
regional security and economic stability.
We support peaceful resolution of the contested maritime
claims in the South China Sea. Destabilizing actions such as
Chinese land reclamation, construction, and militarization of
disputed features makes it harder for the region to resolve
these disagreements peacefully.
Effective public diplomacy is another key ingredient for
American leadership in the region. We use educational,
cultural, and digital exchange programs to communicate U.S.
policy perspectives to foreign governments and influential
members of their publics, including media, emerging leaders,
thought leaders, legislators, and civil society across Asia.
Our FY 2018 request requires improved efficiencies in U.S.
public diplomacy that will enhance our ability to remain this
dynamic region's partner of choice on a wide range of shared
challenges. Even as ISIS faces battlefield losses in the Middle
East, the siege of Marawi City by an ISIS-affiliated group in
the Southern Philippines demonstrates the group's lingering
appeal in Southeast Asia.
Our FY 2018 EAP foreign assistance request includes
resources to support efforts to defeat ISIS and to counter
transnational crime--a funding source for ISIS, of course--
across Southeast Asia. Our law enforcement and judicial sector
programs have enhanced recipient countries' capacities to
identify, prosecute, and effectively isolate terrorists and
other criminals.
Regionally, our border security and information sharing
programs prevent foreign terrorist fighter transit, trace
illicit financing, and counter trafficking in goods and people.
These programs help to ensure that Southeast Asia's
economic integration does not leave it more vulnerable to
terrorism, cyber attacks, or other transnational crimes.
Finally, the FY 2018 EAP foreign assistance request will
support economic diplomacy to level the playing field and
reduce trade barriers for U.S. businesses. Multi-lateral work
with APEC and ASEAN will lead to truly free and fair trade with
the region's more than two dozen economies, while bilateral
U.S. economic programs in Vietnam, Indonesia, the Philippines,
and Burma will hopefully lay the groundwork for high quality,
free and fair trade with these key partners. We will take the
lead in setting and raising trade standards across the region,
supported by the negotiation of bilateral trade agreements, as
appropriate.
Thank you for inviting me today to testify. And I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thornton follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Yoho. Ms. Thornton, thank you.
And, Ms. Steele, if you would go ahead. And don't forget to
push the red button. Thank you, ma'am.

STATEMENT OF MS. GLORIA STEELE, ACTING ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
BUREAU FOR ASIA, U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Steele. Chairman Yoho, Ranking Member Sherman,
distinguished subcommittee members, thank you very much for
inviting me to testify today to talk about USAID's role in
advancing U.S. foreign policy priorities in East Asia and the
Pacific Islands.
Asia-Pacific economies are deeply intertwined with our own.
Asia is a leading destination for American exports, which
support some 3.4 million jobs here in the U.S. By 2030 Asia
will become home to more than half of the world's consumer
class. Asia's growing market potential presents tremendous
opportunities to create U.S. jobs and support regional and
global prosperity. However, complex development challenges
threaten to derail this trajectory.
Asia's income inequality gap has drastically widened over
the past two decades. Asian countries are under pressure to
provide essential services on an unprecedented scale. And, as
mentioned earlier, ISIS is increasing local attacks and
recruiting foreign fighters. A host of other development
challenges hold the region back, ranging from pandemic threats
to human trafficking.
The President's fiscal year 2018 budget request for USAID's
foreign assistance in this region is approximately $235
million. This request will enable USAID to continue its vital
role in addressing key development challenges in the region
while strengthening our national security, advancing U.S.
economic interests, and asserting U.S. global leadership and
influence.
On national security, USAID helps to counter threats to the
U.S. before they mature, then keep a focus on preventing
radicalization to violence by addressing its underlying
drivers. It also includes leading regional efforts to combat
human and wildlife trafficking. It includes working to prevent
health threats from reaching our country by addressing them
abroad.
We help to reduce non-tariff trade barriers, protect
intellectual property rights, and support the emergence of a
consumer class that can buy American goods and services. We
also support ASEAN and APEC in achieving these objectives.
We are leading the world in improving global health,
particularly maternal and child health, malaria, and
tuberculosis. We are also demonstrating leadership that
reflects our core American values through lifesaving
humanitarian assistance.
Next I would like to provide a brief overview of our
programs in key countries.
Indonesia. Indonesia shares our concern about evolving
threats from extremists. In response, we are reorienting our
programs and designing new ones. Our focus is on strengthening
moderate voices, bolstering community resilience to
radicalization, and developing the capacity of Indonesian
institutions to break the link between corruption and
extremism. We are also improving access to justice for
marginalized communities.
Our work in Indonesia strengthens democratic governance and
improves market access for American businesses, including
Indonesia's $16 billion renewable energy market. Our efforts
also include reducing maternal and child deaths and
strengthening Indonesia's ability to contain infectious
diseases.
In the Philippines, where I grew up, the budget request
supports programs to counter violent extremism, foster
inclusive growth, and control tuberculosis. USAID is
intensifying ongoing programs to address the threat of ISIS in
Mindanao. In addition, we are helping citizens engage with
government and bolster economic opportunities, especially among
the youth. We will intensify our efforts to improve the court
system's efficiency in order to strengthen the rule of law.
The request supports our continued partnership with the
Philippines to stimulate inclusive economic growth. USAID has
helped advance reforms that benefit the Philippines, as well as
the U.S., including liberalizing foreign investment laws,
establishing an antitrust body, and modernizing customs
procedures.
The Philippine budget also includes assistance that we
provide to the Pacific Island countries, 12 of them. And they
are focused on disaster preparedness.
In Burma, USAID will continue efforts to foster national
peace and reconciliation, and maintain the momentum for
democratic and economic reforms, as well as improve the lives
of the people of Burma. We will continue to respond to
humanitarian needs of vulnerable populations, including the
Rohingya, and will continue working toward a solution to
violence in Rakhine.
In Vietnam, our assistance focuses on strengthening the
U.S.-Vietnam partnership. We are also helping to level the
playing field for U.S. businesses in Vietnam by helping it to
become more market-oriented and committed to good government.
And, finally, in Cambodia we have helped to significantly
drive down malaria, TB, infant and child mortality. The budget
request supports our efforts to build on these gains.
We have a regional program that is based in Bangkok which
will focus on activities that combat human and wildlife
trafficking, and illegal and unregulated fishing.
Mr. Chairman and committee, investing in development in the
East Asia-Pacific is not only good for our allies and friends
in Asia, but it remains in our national interest. In helping
build more stable, open, and prosperous societies overseas we
enhance our own prosperity and strengthen our security.
Thank you. And I look forward to your counsel and
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Steele follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Mr. Yoho. Thank you both for your great testimony. We will
look forward to talking with you.
Ms. Thornton, you were talking about North Korea is
probably the most urgent thing. I think we are all in
agreement. I think we are all in agreement that the expansion
and the aggression of what we see with China in the South China
Sea, declaring the South China Sea as sovereign, building
islands initially as peaceful navigational purposes that have
morphed into militarized islands with weapon systems on there,
radar systems, landing strips. So, the rhetoric doesn't match
the actions.
And we have seen this over and over again. If we can go
back to the agreement between Great Britain and Hong Kong when
they made the agreement and passed the control of that back,
there was a 50-year plan. In that 50-year plan there was
supposed to be freedom of speech, democracy, and all those
things were supposed to be left in place. Yet, here we are 20
years and we see it is not true.
So we have kind of seen this story over and over again.
And, you know, with us cutting the budgets at State to save
money--and we do, we need to be fiscally responsible because we
have our own tsunami coming if we don't change course in this
country and focus on the things that are the drivers of the
out-of-control spending--but to cut the budget to State to save
money in the hopes of strengthening our presence and growing
strategies, and make stronger alliances in that area reminds me
of the old veterinarian who was a cow rancher. He would
always--he never had the best gates or the best fences, but
would say you can't starve a profit into your cattle. But he
would feed them and he would take care of them, he would
nurture them.
It would be like planting a garden and hoping to have a
bountiful crop or harvest, but you don't want to fertilize it.
We need to make sure that what we do we get the biggest bang
out of our buck for the American people so that we can have
peace in that area, we can have strong alliances, we can focus
on economics, on national security, on trade, and cultural
exchanges.
My question to you, an America-first foreign policy is the
goal, but I fear it will become increasingly difficult to
obtain if we lose our influence in the Asia-Pacific to China.
How does the administration plan to adapt to ensure that the
United States remain a regional power?
I have a follow-up question if you guys would tackle that
one.
Ms. Thornton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think what I would say first is that the budget that we
have presented does reflect hard choices. But we should also
remember that for the East Asia-Pacific region we have
traditionally been less than 2 percent of foreign assistance
spending globally. That means in the East Asia-Pacific region
we have always gotten a lot of bang for our buck on what we
have spent in the region.
I think one of the ways that we do that is whether it is an
America-first foreign policy, we are always doing it with
America not alone. We are leveraging our money with other
partners in the region, with the private sector. And what we
are going to be doing and what we are going to be having to do
with this budget is to be doing that even, even more
efficiently and effectively going on in the future.
One of the things that many of the members raised was the
issue of security in East Asia. The U.S. has traditionally
provided a lot of the security and stability in this region,
which we have all come to treasure, and which has underpinned
the economic dynamism and prosperity of the region. Of course,
our U.S. military contributes a lot to that security. We have
over the years built up great partnerships with our five treaty
allies in the region and with a number of other partners that
were mentioned by the Mr. Congressman Sherman.
So, I think what we want to do is continue those
partnerships, continue to work with others in the region to
build up this network. We have invested a lot in these
relationships already. We are working with the Department of
Defense to make sure. We have a steering committee that has
been set up at the direction of Secretary Mattis and Secretary
Tillerson to make sure that we are well coordinated on all of
the needs that we see out there for security assistance, for
example, and that we are working together, both departments, to
come up with the necessary funding for that.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. And I appreciate that. I look forward to
getting more of that out.
Ms. Steele, if you have got--would like to weigh in, you
have got about 40 seconds.
Ms. Steele. I would just----
Mr. Yoho. Your microphone.
Ms. Steele. I would just like to add that over the years
what we have done is work with our partner governments to make
sure that they begin to mobilize their own resources to
contribute and provide leverage to ours.
Mr. Yoho. And I appreciate you saying that because, you
know, I came up here, I was one of the guys that wanted to get
rid of foreign aid. But when you learn the process, I agree
with General Mattis, cut foreign aid, buy more bullets; there
is a balance in there.
So our goal, and the mantra that comes out of our office,
is go from aid to trade. If you look at historically our top 15
trading partners, 12 of those were recipients of foreign aid.
That is what we want to do. I think you guys have done a good
job if you are only getting 2 percent of the foreign aid
budget.
I look forward to the suggestions that come out. I am out
of time and we now turn to the ranking member Mr. Sherman from
California.
Mr. Sherman. I agree with Mr. Chabot that the key on North
Korea is to persuade China to change its policy. The easy way
to meet our political objectives here in Washington is to say
we can get China to change its policy without doing anything we
don't feel like doing. All we have to do is fly over to China,
show them a picture of Kim Jung Un, show them a picture of his
dead uncle, show them a picture of his dead half-brother, and
persuade them to change their policy because, after all, China
doesn't understand Asia near as well as we do. And if they just
listen to us they will change.
This is absolutely absurd. China is not going to change its
policy toward North Korea till we change our policy. We have
one of two choices: Either make it plain to China that they
cannot have access to our markets and continue their current
policy toward North Korea, or we can build civil defense
starting in Los Angeles.
Ms. Thornton, back in the day, North Korea wanted a non-
aggression pact with the United States. Chaney vetoed it
because he wanted to invade and then commit to Russia against
North Korea. I realize this isn't a hot issue now, but what is
the official U.S. position whether we should have a non-
aggression pact with North Korea?
Ms. Thornton. I think what, what we are doing on North
Korea, and I think it is----
Mr. Sherman. If you don't know, if we don't have an
official policy just let me know.
Ms. Thornton. Well, on a non-aggression pact----
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Ms. Thornton [continuing]. I mean I think----
Mr. Sherman. Are we interested in negotiating a non-
aggression pact with North Korea?
Ms. Thornton. Not----
Mr. Sherman. Yes, no, or?
Ms. Thornton. Well, we are not interested, yeah, we are not
interested--I mean we are interested in peacefully resolving--
--
Mr. Sherman. Okay. But----
Ms. Thornton [continuing]. The issue on North----
Mr. Sherman. But we don't have a specific strategy on a
non-aggression?
Ms. Thornton. Well, we are not, we are not going for regime
change, and we are not trying to have a collapse.
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Ms. Thornton. And we don't want military conflict with
North Korea, so.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. I believe that Ms. Steele has commented
on the trade relationship. We have trade deficits with China of
340; Japan, 69; 83 billion with Southeast Asia.
Now, people often come here and they say things are
wonderful because we have exports. But, of course, the exports
are dwarfed, and increasingly dwarfed by the imports. What
matters is the net trade. Getting 5,000 jobs while you are
losing 10,000 jobs is not the way to build the U.S. economy.
Ms. Thornton, does the administration have a policy that
you are confident will reduce our trade deficit with East Asia
by a significant amount over the next few years?
Ms. Thornton. Well, I think what we are trying to do is----
Mr. Sherman. Do we have a policy that will----
Ms. Thornton. Yes.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. Achieve those objectives?
Ms. Thornton. I think we do have a policy.
Mr. Sherman. So you are confident that when you come back
here 3 years from now our trade deficit is going to be
substantially less than it is now?
Ms. Thornton. I am, I am confident that we are working in
that direction, yes.
Mr. Sherman. Working in. But and how is this direction
different from the last 3 years?
Ms. Thornton. Well----
Mr. Sherman. Because if we didn't achieve that in the last
3 years, what are we doing different now?
Ms. Thornton. Well, we are trying to grow the entire Asian
economy but cut, enforce better the trade mechanisms that are
in place and pursue agreements with countries where we have
trade imbalances to try to write restrictions on market access
and also try to fight----
Mr. Sherman. And you are saying that wasn't true in 2014?
Ms. Thornton. We have been doing----
Mr. Sherman. We did it then, we are doing it now, we are
going to keep doing it. The definition of insanity is to keep
doing the same thing we did then and expect a different result.
The budget that the administration has proposed, does it
save from the axe those diplomats that are working to push
American exports, agriculture, and manufacturing? Or does it
cut our efforts in the State Department to promote our exports?
Ms. Thornton. I don't think that the budget that we have
presented reflects those kinds of cuts to our personnel, no.
And we are certainly, one of our----
Mr. Sherman. So we are going to slash the State Department
but those officers that are promoting exports are not going to
be slashed? Everybody else is going to be slashed a little bit
more?
Ms. Thornton. So I think, are you talking about the cuts to
ops? Cuts to our operations----
Mr. Sherman. Yeah.
Ms. Thornton [continuing]. That have been proposed are not
that significant actually, so to personnel and things like that
there is not a major reduction there.
Mr. Sherman. Islands----
Ms. Thornton. Not in the commercial promotion area.
Mr. Sherman. Ms. Steele, why are we slashing our aid to
islands that are so incredibly strategic and have received
almost no aid but now we are going down to zero for the
Marshall Islands and Micronesia? Why do--why shouldn't we at
least continue our $500,000 a year aid to those two?
Ms. Steele. The President's budget request includes--we
support the Pacific Island countries, which includes Marshall
Islands and Micronesia, through a regional program that is run
out of the Philippines. And we--the President has requested $5
million to support the countries in the Pacific. So we will
continue supporting them.
Mr. Sherman. Is that a higher or lower rate of support than
we had last year?
Ms. Steele. It is lower.
Mr. Sherman. In spite of their strategic significance.
So we are going to spend hundreds of billions of dollars to
fight with China over little islets that we claim have
strategic significance but really don't, and we are going to
ignore the chance to spend a tiny, tiny fraction of that on the
islands that are in the middle of the Pacific and dominate that
area.
I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. We will next go to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of
California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
congratulations on your assuming the chairmanship. We
appreciate it, look forward to working with you in the years
ahead.
Let me just note that we have just ended 8 years of
disintegration of major western bulwarks throughout the world
against various elements that are hostile to the United States,
whether we are talking about what is going on in Turkey, the
Philippines, or what is happening in North Korea where it
didn't start off as one of our bulwarks but now is threatening
one of our bulwarks, which is South Korea and Japan.
As far as American foreign aid, there are many people who
believe that just giving money to people or trying to provide
money and resources to promote various cultural elements of our
society is a waste of American resources.
I know that if we take a look very closely at some of the
expenditures that we have left that has been described, I don't
necessarily believe that they are going to make things safer
for us or better for those countries. So, I am pleased that
President Trump has kept his promise and is moving forward with
a theories based on what he believes and what some of us
believe are--is best for the American people rather than trying
to buy off other people in other countries.
In terms of North Korea, I was disappointed in your answer,
but I do believe your answer reflects a policy that we don't
have. I would just suggest that the little, I will refrain from
using a pejorative phrase to describe the leader of North
Korea, is so, so much--is easy to make fun of, but the fact is
that this human being is a murderous, treacherous man who has
murdered his own friends and family. We cannot afford to have a
nuclear weapon at his disposal that could hit the United
States.
I would suggest that we owe Ronald Reagan a great debt
because Ronald Reagan insisted on moving forward in an
aggressive way to build a missile defense system. I remember
him being belittled for saying that we can have a rocket that
can--a bullet that can hit a bullet. Oh, it is impossible. He
was belittled for that. The fact that we went ahead, full steam
ahead and have developed such systems now gives us some
leverage in dealing with this maniac. It was never intended to
try to prevent us from preventing a major exchange between
major powers of nuclear weapons, but it was just specifically
for a case like this. And thank God he had the vision to move
forward over and above being ridiculed for doing that.
My recommendation to this administration is our policy in
North Korea should be that if indeed it appears that, again,
this unstable--and that is a generous way of describing this
dictator's personality--an unstable character like this looks
like he is going to launch a rocket, again, another missile
with capabilities of threatening the United States, we should
shoot that missile down. If it continues, we should use our
cyber capabilities to basically turn everything off in North
Korea.
That is what I would recommend. I hope we have a President
now that instead of trying to buy loyalty or thinks he is going
to buy peace, that we have one who I think will step up to the
plate. And we will wait and see.
In terms of--let me ask one question. It seems that I gave
my spiel here.
Is there any indication, we have Burma and Vietnam, which
Burma has supposedly made some progress. We have Aung San Suu
Kyi now in a place where no one would have dreamed about 10, 15
years ago. We all worked so hard to get her there. I was part
of that team. But in Vietnam, is there anything in Vietnam that
would suggest to us that there is a democratic liberalization
going on at all? If not, why the heck are people so anxious to
set up a trade treaty with a country that hasn't had that
progress?
Whoever wants to answer is fine with me.
Ms. Thornton. Okay. Thank you very much.
On Burma I would say, yes, we are working very hard to
consolidate the gains there and to support governance in Burma.
There are some issues still to work on there. Obviously, a lot
of ethnic problems and unrest. There is a peace process which
Aung San Suu Kyi has sponsored and which we have supported and
that we want to see continue to be successful.
We also are working very hard to make sure that the
continued civilian governance over the military is proceeding
in that country.
On Vietnam, Vietnam is the fastest growing U.S. export
market in the world. They are a significant economic partner of
the United States. We have had a growing partnership and
relationship with Vietnam on security in the East Asia region,
particularly in Southeast Asia, and have found them to be
partners in various areas of U.S. interest.
We have not, unfortunately, made the gains that we would
have hoped to in the human rights situation in Vietnam. But we
do continue to work on that and have had a human rights dialog
going with them and continue to press them on those issues.
I will let maybe Gloria Steele respond as well.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Let me just note that the fact that you
were unable to really specify any real progress toward
democratic government in Vietnam indicates that the first
things that you mentioned are not in our interest to start
opening up. I do not believe, as I never believed with China,
that just as we were going to open up our markets and have an
economic relationship, which has built this monster that China
is today, that that is in the interests of the United States if
it does not couple with democratic reform.
And we were promised it would be, but it never happened in
China. There has been no democratic reform. Now we have created
a monstrous threat to democracy.
Mr. Yoho. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Steele, I will come back to you. But we want to go on
to Mr. Connolly right now.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. And my friend, who also
worked for Ronald Reagan when I was here on the Hill during the
Reagan years, and my job was to authorize the foreign aid
budget, let me just say I knew a little bit Ronald Reagan.
Donald Trump is no Ronald Reagan.
Ronald Reagan never cut the foreign aid budget by 46
percent. Ronald Reagan understood strength meant you go
forward, you don't retreat. You don't create a vacuum in which
your adversary can readily and smartly and enthusiastically
step in.
There is an Orwellian quality to this hearing. And I am
going to challenge both of you. Let me stipulate for the record
in case, so you don't get in trouble. You're loyal officials of
the United States Government defending the indefensible, the
Donald Trump foreign aid budget and State Department budget.
But, okay, we will stipulate you have done that.
Ms. Thornton, you said to Mr. Sherman that there weren't
really going to be significant personnel cuts. So let me talk
about your boss. Your boss said otherwise. Your boss said, Mr.
Tillerson, Secretary of State, 2,300 jobs will be cut. He even
specified how they will be cut: 700 through buy-outs, and 1,600
through attrition. You, you think that is not significant?
Because that is how you answered Mr. Sherman.
Ms. Thornton. I think I was speaking to the operational
budget----
Mr. Connolly. Well, how do you know,----
Ms. Thornton [continuing]. For the East Asia----
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. If there was that level of cuts,
Ms. Thornton, how could you possibly sit here and testify that
you don't, that that won't affect operations? How would you
know that?
Ms. Thornton. I only know what is happening in the East
Asia-Pacific Bureau fixed----
Mr. Connolly. Have these cuts happened yet?
Ms. Thornton. Not that I am aware of.
Mr. Connolly. No. So you don't know what the impact is
going to be. And, frankly, your answer to Mr. Sherman is
nullified. You don't know whether in fact it would affect
people who are in charge of exports from running U.S. exports.
It could, in fact, have an appreciable effect, couldn't it? We
don't know yet.
I assume by your silence you acquiesce.
Ms. Thornton. I mean that is not an area that we are--I
mean that is a priority area that we would look to.
Mr. Connolly. When this----
Ms. Thornton. Because I would look to----
Mr. Connolly. If Secretary Tillerson isn't understating the
number of cuts, you don't know the impact yet. That is really
the answer to Mr. Sherman's question. It is not a gratifying or
reassuring answer.
Ms. Steele, you talked about $235 million that will
strengthen our vital programs. Now, I went to Maryknoll, too,
so I read George Orwell and I think you did too. That is a 46
percent cut.
Have you in AID notified all of your contractors, all of
your non-profits, and your own hands-on work to prepare for a
46 percent cut? And are they doing that? Are they developing
plans to absorb that cut?
And, oh, by the way, did you tell them by doing this we
will strengthen our vital programs?
Ms. Steele. Yes, we are in constant discussions with our
implementing partners.
Mr. Connolly. I am sure you are. But I didn't ask that
question.
Have you given them instructions to absorb a 46 percent
cut? And have you told them, by the way, that will make you
stronger, not weaker?
Ms. Steele. We have been talking to them about coming up,
coming up with their share of the program budget.
Mr. Connolly. You mentioned the progress--I am sorry I am
being, but I only----
Ms. Steele. Sure.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Have 1 minute and 40 seconds.
Ms. Steele. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. You mentioned Cambodia. I have been to
Cambodia. And malaria is a huge problem in Cambodia. Getting it
under control, wonderful thing for them in terms of
productivity, tourism, and the like. Are we a 2 percenter in
the malarial prevention and eradication program in Cambodia or
are we a major player?
Ms. Steele. We are a major player.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Ms. Steele. And have helped them significantly.
Mr. Connolly. Right. So we are not, this isn't like, well,
we are kind of a bit, you know, bit player. In malaria in
Cambodia we are actually a big player.
Ms. Steele. Right.
Mr. Connolly. And to absorb a 46 percent cut, I mean, the
Cambodian Government said, great idea, that will make us
stronger; we like that?
Ms. Steele. Actually, Congressman Connolly, we told them
right from the start, and they have agreed, that they will
begin to assume the costs of our supporting them.
Mr. Connolly. Begin to assume.
Ms. Steele. In 2020----
Mr. Connolly. This 46 percent cut doesn't phase in, it
happens in this fiscal year if it is adopted.
Ms. Steele. And there will be--they have significantly
achieved, they have achieved significant gains.
Mr. Connolly. So your testimony to this committee, you are
absolutely going on record reassuring us that there will be no
step backward in the malaria eradication program in Cambodia,
or anywhere else in the region for that matter?
Ms. Steele. Our, our studies have shown that they will be
able to eradicate malaria.
Mr. Connolly. But you do understand the other side of your
testimony is, therefore we have been over-paying and over-
appropriating USAID all these years because apparently we could
have done with almost half of what we have been doing with no
material effect. And these countries really could have been
picking up the slack, they just didn't do it because we didn't
cut it in half?
Ms. Steele. No, sir. The costs are up front. We are
developing their capabilities and their institutions. And right
from the beginning we tell them we will be phasing out; they
have to be able to assume the costs.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. Steele, I understand that.
Ms. Steele. And they have agreed to do so.
Mr. Connolly. But that begs the question of an abrupt and
draconian cut as is proposed that the chairman pointed out to
us. To try to absorb that is massive, just I have to assume
disruptive, as someone who managed programs myself. And for 10
years had oversight responsibility for AID in the United States
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. I have never heard
testimony like that. Never from the Ronald Reagan
administration.
My time is up, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you and I appreciate it.
But I want to add in here before we go to the next--Ms.
Gabbard, if you will indulge me just a minute.
Austerity cuts are coming to this country. We know that. I
thought it was very pertinent of what you said that they
realize that they are going to have to step up.
I was in the Congo about a year-and-a-half ago and we were
sitting at the foreign ministry cabinet. The President of the
DRC would not meet with us. And we have given them hundreds of
billions of dollars for years. I asked very pointedly, what do
you do for social programs? And their eyes kind of widened,
they were like, what do you mean? I said, for housing, for
education, for medicine, insurance?
And they said, we have you.
That is not a good foreign policy. And we have spent all
that money in the past so things have to change. We are being
forced into a situation. I think some of those times tough
love, it may--and I am not saying it is the best way--but in
certain situations, especially in our economic downturn that we
have, we need to make some changes.
I am going to go to Ms. Gabbard from Hawaii right now.
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both for
being here.
The administration has come before our committee and spoken
publicly about their focus and efforts on a diplomatic solution
and resolution to the North Korea threat and crisis. With China
mobilizing its military along the North Korea border, stepping
up its surveillance, it does not appear that serious diplomatic
efforts are either working or continue to be underway beyond
saying, well, we think Russia and China need to comply with
sanctions.
I wonder if you can talk about how this budget actually
supports a serious diplomatic strategy in resolving the threat
from North Korea and, if so, what is it?
Ms. Thornton. Thank you very much.
Yes, I think the budget, obviously we don't have assistance
programs in North Korea, but it reflects the operational costs
of our prioritization of the North Korea issue in our Bureau. I
think what our strategy is looking like at the moment, we have
made this the highest foreign policy priority of the
administration. I think it is, that is a change from previous
practice.
We have opened up a global pressure campaign in which we
are asking other countries to step up to the plate and do more
on pressuring North Korea. What happens when you try to squeeze
off North Korea's proliferation networks, and economic and
financial networks, is they go, they go elsewhere. They go to
Africa. They go to Southeast Asia. They go maybe to Latin
America.
And we are trying to have a global network and a global
consciousness-raising surrounding upping the pressure of both
sanctions but also diplomatic isolation vis-a-vis the North
Korean regime, trying to build up a pressure campaign so that
they can change the calculation that they have made surrounding
the cost-benefit analysis of their weapons programs and their
missile programs. And----
Ms. Gabbard. So what happens, what happens next beyond
that? What happens next after you pick up the pressure?
Ms. Thornton. So we have just started building the global
pressure campaign in, basically in April. We have been talking,
of course, to the Chinese and the Russians and other major
players.
The third change from previous practice is that we have
really put the onus on China to do a lot more than they have
ever done before.
Ms. Gabbard. And are they?
Ms. Thornton. And they are doing more than they have ever
done before. They have----
Ms. Gabbard. It seems like they are preparing for something
other than a diplomatic solution at this point.
Ms. Thornton. I would, I would not necessarily go quite
that far. I think they are very much focused on a peaceful
resolution. They do agree that there needs to be an increase in
pressure on the North Korean regime. And they want that to
happen in a way that brings the north back to the negotiating
table as quickly as possible.
The problem is that right now the north doesn't seem to be
very inclined to come back to the negotiating table with any
kind of serious attitude or proposal. So, what we are doing is
continuing to sort of squeeze and close the vise, and hope that
that brings about a reckoning----
Ms. Gabbard. Thank you.
Ms. Thornton [continuing]. And fear that they are paying
too much for their weapons programs.
Ms. Gabbard. Thanks.
I would like to get one more question in here specifically
about organizations like the Asia Foundation, the East-West
Center, both of which have for decades provided great
contributions to engagement, formation of policy, building
relationships within the region.
This year the administration's budget completely zeroes out
funding for both of those organizations. We have been told that
this was done because the administration believes they receive
outside funding and no longer need any assistance from us. I am
wondering what specific evidence went into making that decision
making process. Specifically, were these organizations engaged
directly? Did you hear directly from them?
Because I can tell you I have met with them year after year
after year, and while they are making progress on leveraging
the funding that they are getting, they are not able to
continue to function if this administration continues to
eliminate and zero their funding completely.
Ms. Steele. I have not been involved in the analysis that
went into deciding whether Asia Foundation or the East-West
Center gets funding. We do know, though, that we have had to
make tough prioritization of the programs that we would be
funding.
Ms. Gabbard. So the justification that we got, though, was
the administration's assessment that they could operate,
continue to function purely on outside funding. But you don't
know how that conclusion was reached or if there was any input
or engagement with these organizations?
Ms. Steele. I was personally not involved in the
discussions on funding for Asia Foundation.
Ms. Gabbard. So this is, I mean you, but you guys are the
people to talk to in the State Department about the Asia-
Pacific where these organizations are focused. So if it wasn't
you then--and your input was not sought in this direction, then
whose was?
Ms. Thornton. Well, we engage regularly in the Bureau with
both Asia Foundation and the East-West Center. And so I think
we have been keeping up a constant communication with them in
recent years about the need to do more to wean themselves off
of government funding. I know that in particular East-West has,
has changed its management and raised their capital campaign,
et cetera. So we are aware of all of those activities.
The Asia Foundation, we also talk frequently with them. We
are well aware of their programs in various countries. But I
think in the prioritization this year, I think that was one of
the hard choices that was made.
Ms. Gabbard. Okay. Again, I have had these same
conversations encouraging them to continue to build their
outside support. But to go from I think it was East-West Center
had $16 million or $17 million last year to zero, you are
setting up these organizations up for failure.
Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. I thank the lady's questions and the responses
you guys are giving.
I would like to move on to a second set of questions, if it
is all right with you, if you guys can tolerate us.
You know, I guess one of the biggest things I see is we are
going to go through these cuts. And how many people are in
State? Do you have a number of how many people are in the State
Department total around the world?
Ms. Thornton. I think the total number is, that I have
heard the Secretary mention recently, something like 70,000.
Mr. Yoho. Seventy thousand. So a 10 percent cut would be
7,000; 5 percent would be 3,500. So we are looking at less than
a 5 percent cut if we cut 2,300.
We don't want to be forced to cut but I think sometimes we
do need to shrink down some things. And, again, going into
austerity measures that we see, we are teetering on them, we
need to make sure that we are getting the most out of the money
we are giving and the most results.
Saying that, did you know how the process went where they
decided what programs they were going to cut? You guys have
said in the beginning a lengthy career between you. So you have
had a lot of experience. Were you able to weigh in and say
these programs are good, these are bad?
Ms. Thornton. Yes, very much so. We have a very elaborate
budget development process that takes in all levels of the
State Department and AID, input from the field, built up from
there, that we have sort of our top level officials that have
to make some hard decisions in consultation with us. And we
have to make some choices.
Mr. Yoho. All right. So you do get to weigh in on that?
Ms. Steele. Yes, we do, sir.
And, in addition, we look at where they are in the
implementation, what progress they have made, what achievements
they have made. And in making selections we look at those that,
those that have been successful and no longer need any support
from us because either someone else in their country will pick
it up or the government itself will, as in the case of the
health sector in Cambodia. Then, you know, we begin to phase
out.
But we do have involvement. It is data-based. We monitor
and evaluate our programs. And I will get rid of programs that
are not producing and continue those that are showing a lot of
progress. Then those that have achieved what they have to
achieve, then we then phase them out.
Mr. Yoho. When I was practicing as a veterinarian we had
the economic downturn in the 2007 roughly, we had to go through
and we had to trim budgets, we had to, you know, cut back
overhead. And it is good to see that you guys are doing that,
that you get to weigh in and you get to say these are the
effective programs, these aren't.
I think that is a lesson to be learned. That is one of the
ways that we are going to have to make these changes so that we
can get a hold of our spending so that we are not forced in
really draconian cuts that would be much worse than this that
we have seen in other countries.
Saying that, knowing that Cambodia has got an election
coming up in this next year, to assure free and fair elections
we have heard time and again that the robust election
monitoring is needed. Will this budget support these needs, in
your opinion? Because I see a 74 percent cut in the change for
Cambodia between 2016-2018.
Ms. Steele. Yes, sir. We still have funds that are
available. We are supporting two organizations in Cambodia. One
is focused on working with civil society organizations to
increase the participation of the youth and women. And the
other organization is working with the National Election
Commission to improve their performance so that they can be
more transparent and credible.
We do have funds at this moment, at this time to support
them.
Mr. Yoho. All right. That's good to know.
I want to move on to when it comes to countering China's
growing influence--and this is something, if anything keeps me
up late at night, this is something I worry about probably more
than anything, or am more concerned about and I think we really
need to pay more attention to--but when it comes to countering
China's growing influence, what programs do you believe give us
the most bang for our buck in terms of empowering our partners
in the region to defend their territorial claims against
China's growing aggression? Would it be the foreign military
financing, support of governments? What are your thoughts on
that, if I could hear from both of you?
Ms. Thornton. Yes. I will just speak very briefly on this.
But I think that the most important programs are
diplomatic, economic, and security programs, mostly the
capacity building that we do in Asia, with all of our Asian
partners to improve governance, to improve their capacity to
conduct international trade, to promote their integration with
other partners in the region, to support regional organizations
like APEC and ASEAN, and also to make sure that they have the
capabilities that they need, of course, military and else,
otherwise, law enforcement, et cetera, to protect their borders
and defend their sovereignty, so.
Mr. Yoho. Let me get Ms. Steele to weigh in on that.
Ms. Steele. In the development area we work with them to
strengthen their democratic institutions, work with them on
fighting corruption in order to level the playing field, and
which China would have a hard time dealing with.
And then we provide a real, much better, more responsible
and sustainable alternatives in all the other areas: In health,
and in the area of trade, looking at the regulations and making
them more transparent.
Mr. Yoho. All right, thank you.
Now we will turn to Mr. Sherman for another round.
Mr. Sherman. Ms. Thornton, this is really kind of a
worldwide question, so a step above your pay grade, but does
the President's budget involve a cut in broadcasting and other
Internet, other Voice of America and similar activities?
Ms. Thornton. I can't speak to the worldwide budget for
that. But we do have money for broadcasting in Asia. And----
Mr. Sherman. And how much money would you have under the
President's budget versus how many you spent in the most recent
year?
Ms. Thornton. Well, I think we are actually continuing and
maybe even enhancing some of our broadcasting area in Asia,
specific to the North Korea challenge.
Mr. Sherman. But overall, for the entire region that you
are here representing, your Bureau, up or down?
Ms. Thornton. Probably----
Mr. Sherman. Or if you just want to furnish the----
Ms. Thornton. Yes, I can take the question and get back to
you. I am not totally----
Mr. Sherman. Okay.
Ms. Thornton [continuing]. Sure about the overall.
Mr. Sherman. In particular we have an ideological battle in
the Muslim world. ISIS is reaching out, trying to recruit
terrorists in the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar. I
would like you to specifically provide answers on whether your
budget is going up or down in those Muslim majority or signi--
or Muslim minority countries.
Now, one issue that comes before us is this whole
ratcheting up, war fever almost, regarding these little islets
off the shores of China. We are told that we either should
perhaps just spend hundreds of billions of dollars over the
next few years gearing up our whole military and spending more
on our military to confront China, or maybe we should go to
war. I mean, if we avoid an actual fighting war, we will at
least have a cold war over these islets.
We are told these islets are of critical significance,
first because trillions of dollars of trade go close to those
islands. Yes, it is all in and out of Chinese ports. So if the
Chinese control these islands they would be in a position to
blockade their own ports. There is some trade that is oil
tankers from the Gulf to Japan that could get close to these
islands or could just as easily stay hundreds of miles away.
So, the other reason we are given that we have to deploy
our military and increase it is that we are incredibly,
intensely concerned about maritime disputes, making sure that
they are handled fairly. But there is no islet--there is no oil
under these islets. They are so useless that no one has chosen
to live there in all of recorded history.
But there is a maritime dispute that is significant, that
is the one between Australia and East Timor. Ms. Thornton, do
we spend much time at the State Department worrying about that
dispute?
Ms. Thornton. Well, we actually, we actually have worked on
the East Timor-Australia dispute----
Mr. Sherman. I know you have worked. But I mean compare the
national obsession with the islets I talked about to the level
of staffing that goes on in your Bureau with regard to this
dispute.
Ms. Thornton. But the difference is that they are in
dispute resolution mechanism and have peacefully agreed to do
that, willingly by both sides. Whereas, the disputes in the
South China Sea are actually----
Mr. Sherman. Well, I mean it will obviously be peaceable
because East Timor could not go to war against Australia. But
whether they agree to a new dispute resolution or not depends
upon, depends upon Australia. So it is these islet--well, I
have taken enough time. We were just going to do a short, a
short second round.
So I will yield back. I will say simply that there are 40,
at least 20, perhaps as many as 40 maritime disputes around the
world. We don't have our ships going eyeball to eyeball with
the second most powerful nation in the world over any of these.
I couldn't even name for you the third most significant
maritime dispute in the world. I give myself credit for knowing
of the East Timor one, which I believe is the second if you
skip oil matters.
So the idea that the United States always must spend
hundreds of billions of dollars to involve itself in each and
every maritime dispute is not always true.
And I yield back.
Mr. Yoho. I thank the gentleman and I thank your responses
on this.
But I am going to comment on that because there are a lot
of maritime disputes around the world, but how many of them
have 10,000 foot runways? How many have military barracks? How
many of them are militarized with both offensive and defensive
weapons and radar systems?
I will agree there is a lighthouse on there for peaceful
navigational purposes. I think this is something, because we do
see an aggressive China. We have seen what they have done with
Taiwan; they are boxing them in. We have seen what they have
done with Hong Kong. I think this is something, it is like
anything else in life, if you have got a problem, if you ignore
it it is not going to go away, it will get worse, and it is
going to be worse to deal with and more expensive and more
costly.
And we know----
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Chairman, if you will yield.
The disputes involving Cyprus, its offshore natural gas
fields, islands between Greece and Turkey, have also involved
military preparations involving two NATO countries we might
have an even greater interest in. And, yet, we are not pivoting
toward the eastern Mediterranean in an effort to prove to
Turkey or Greece that we are going to be involved in that
dispute.
But I realize that not only has the United States wildly
exaggerated the importance of these islands, it also meets
political needs in Beijing to wildly exaggerate their
importance. And building an air field is just one way of
pandering to excessive nationalism in China.
Mr. Yoho. I will look forward to having more debates on it
because what I see is a nation like China has claimed
sovereignty to areas that the rest of the world says is not
yours. And they went to the World Court. Vietnam challenged
them. They lost the case. They ignored that.
And we see them doing what they are doing. We have seen
also some of their trade practices that are not conducive to
open trade and honest trade. And I think it is something that
we need to pay attention to.
And I agree, I am not willing to--hang on just a minute--I
am not willing to enter another conflict. I don't want to. I
don't know anybody that wants that. And I am not wanting to
bolster this by ourselves or try to offset this by ourselves.
But when you look at the ASEAN nations, there are ten, the ten
ASEAN nations, that is 633 million people roughly, $2.5
trillion in GDP, if we create a vacuum we know the rules of
nature--nature abhors a vacuum--it will be filled by somebody.
And it is something we need to come together. And that is
why it is so important that the cuts in foreign aid through
State Department that you guys redirect the aid that you do
have so that we form those strong alliances, as we said in the
beginning of this meeting, that we form those strong
partnerships in economic and trade, and we focus on aid not
trade--I mean trade not aid, so that we can wean countries off
and so that they can enter that realm of those countries. Those
top 15 countries that we trade with today, the 12 of them that
were recipients of foreign aid, so that these other countries
can move into that and that we can wean these off, creating
stronger alliances.
Do you have anything else you want to add, Mr. Sherman?
Mr. Sherman. Just that if instead of deploying the U.S.
Navy to worry about these islets you want to deploy it to
protect our ports from unfair Chinese imports, you may have a
partner in that.
Mr. Yoho. I look forward to having that discussion. And I
think we could agree on that.
Ms. Thornton, I thank you for your testimony, for the
questionings you went through. Ms. Steele, I thank you for your
time here. I thank you for your service to our nation.
And with that--with no further comments or questions, this
meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:11 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Record
