- COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS IN AFRICA

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS IN AFRICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 7, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-103

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
27-755PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   AMI BERA, California
PAUL COOK, California                LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
Wisconsin                        ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 TED LIEU, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia
JOHN R. CURTIS, Utah
As of
12:44 pm 11/29/17 deg.

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESSES

The Honorable John J. Sullivan, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department
of State.......................................................     4
The Honorable David J. Trachtenberg, Acting Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy, U.S. Department of Defense.................     9

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable John J. Sullivan: Prepared statement...............     7
The Honorable David J. Trachtenberg: Prepared statement..........    11

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    56
Hearing minutes..................................................    57
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Bradley S.
Schneider, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois:
Identification of Counties Pursuant to the Child Soldiers
Prevention Act, U.S. Department of State, June 21, 2017......    59
Dissent Channel: Concern Regarding the Secretary of State's
Decision to Exclude Afghanistan, Burma, and Iraq from the
2017 Child Soldiers Prevention Act (CSPA) List...............    67
Material submitted for the record by the Honorable Ted Lieu, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California:
Letter addressed to the Honorable James Mattis, Secretary of
Defense, dated March 10, 2017................................    71
``On the Eve of Congressional Hearings, New Evidence About
Alleged U.S. Massacre in Somalia,'' by Christina Goldbaum,
December 6, 2017.............................................    78
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    86
Written responses from the witnesses to questions submitted for
the record by:
The Honorable Edward R. Royce, a Representative in Congress
from the State of California, and chairman, Committee on
Foreign Affairs..............................................    88
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York........................................    97
The Honorable Brad Sherman, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California......................................   118
The Honorable Lois Frankel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.........................................   119
The Honorable Bradley S. Schneider.............................   121

COUNTERTERRORISM EFFORTS IN AFRICA

----------

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2017

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order. And before
we begin I would like to welcome Representative John Curtis of
Utah to the committee. He is a successful mayor and
businessman, and he will serve on the Subcommittee on Europe,
Eurasia, and Emerging Threats, and on the Subcommittee on the
Middle East and North Africa. So welcome, John.
Today this hearing is on counterterrorism efforts in
Africa. And we examine U.S. counterterrorism efforts across the
continent. This committee has long advocated for strong,
sustained relations between the United States and the countries
in Africa. And from the Electrify Africa Act and the
reauthorization of the African Growth and Opportunity Act to
the End Wildlife Trafficking Act, we have worked on a
bipartisan basis to provide the tools for greater engagement
with a continent that is home to some of the world's fastest
growing economies, but also some major security challenges.
As I said in our May hearing on U.S. interests in Africa,
for our efforts on the continent to succeed, we must help our
partners confront the threat of radical Islamist terrorism.
From Al-Shabaab in Somalia, to Boko Haram in Northern Nigeria,
to al-Qaeda and ISIS in Libya, and their affiliates across the
Sahel, terrorists seek to destabilize governments by
threatening vulnerable communities, often by exploiting local
grievances. This committee and Congress as a whole has
supported our uniformed men and women in this fight, including
by voting last year to require a strategy to defeat Boko Haram.
The death of four U.S. soldiers in Niger in early October,
and a Navy SEAL in Somalia last May are stark reminders of the
danger inherent in these efforts. This is why the War Powers
Resolution requires notification to Congress when forces
equipped for combat are deployed abroad.
AFRICOM is working with the FBI and other agencies on an
investigation into what happened in Niger, which military
officials expect to be completed in January. After the grieving
families are briefed on the findings, Congress will be eager to
ensure that appropriate steps are taken to lessen future risks
to our forces.
This hearing will take a broader look at U.S.
counterterrorism efforts across Africa. While the Department of
Defense often plays the most visible role in these efforts, the
State Department is charged with developing the overall
strategy. State also plays a significant role in security
assistance, providing countries like Niger with armored
vehicles and other equipment that they need to confidently take
the fight to the enemy.
In recent years, DoD funding for security assistance in
Africa has surpassed that provided by State. However, thanks to
a bipartisan effort by this committee, most of these
authorities now require State Department concurrence, as well
as joint development, joint planning, and joint implementation.
Many also require efforts to bolster democratic values of
partner forces, including civilian control of the military.
Combating terrorism and building stability is as much a
political as military challenge, so the State Department must
lead on these efforts.
It is important for members to understand that while
successive administrations have used the 2001 AUMF to conduct
strikes in Somalia and Libya, the majority of U.S.
counterterrorism operations in Africa are carried out under
other authorities that Congress has provided. Together these,
as we call them, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance,
and train and equip, and advise and assist missions build the
capabilities of our partner forces while helping them to take
on current threats.
Of course, military efforts alone cannot defeat radical
ideology. Severe poverty, lack of education, local grievances,
and weak governance provide the ideal context for this hateful
ideology to take hold in the first place. As AFRICOM's first
commander told the committee in May, it is in our best interest
to focus on sustained development engagement, just as we focus
on sustained security engagement. That is a long-term
commitment but one in our security interests. And I look
forward to hearing how both departments are working to support
the development of strong, resilient African governments that
deny terrorist groups room to grow.
And let me turn now to our ranking member, Mr. Eliot Engel
of New York.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
this hearing and thank you for leading CODEL to Africa. This
committee realizes how important Africa is and I am glad that
we are having this hearing this morning.
Countering the terrorist groups in Africa is a clear
foreign policy priority and it deserves this committee's
attention. Mr. Deputy Secretary, Mr. Acting Under Secretary,
welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Around the world hotspots are burning and American
leadership is needed, but in the State Department with all the
vacancies and all the cutbacks it seems the strategies are
muddled or seem muddled, senior posts are vacant, partners and
adversaries view the United States with uncertainty. So I hope
you can both shed some light today on this phenomenally complex
issue.
I have a number of concerns about how we are dealing with
terrorism in Africa, and the first is our military involvement
there. As the chairman pointed out, the recent deaths of four
American service members in an ambush in Niger thrust this
issue into the spotlight. There has also been an increase in
the number of American air strikes in Somalia. For those
strikes the administration uses the same legal authority to
justify military action as it and other administrations have
for many other counterterrorist operations all over the world,
which is the post-9/11/2001 AUMF, Authorization for the Use of
Military Force.
I don't think any of us who voted on that measure--and I
did 16 years ago--envisioned that it would be used as a blank
check to justify sending our men and women in uniform into
harm's way whenever a terrorist threat emerges. We need a new
AUMF. We need to have a serious debate about how, when, and
where our military is currently fighting.
And I need more answers about those four fallen heroes. I
cannot help but wonder what happened to that thirst for
oversight we saw a couple of years ago when several Americans
died on the African continent in circumstances shrouded by
uncertainty. Yet, our military's role in dealing with these
extremist groups should be only one aspect of our approach to
fighting terrorism.
I agree with the many national security experts who say our
strategy must go far beyond fighting fire with fire. We must
also look at the root causes that allow terrorism to take hold
in these countries. The places in Africa where terrorists
operate often face a underlying level of instability.
Governments are unresponsive and ineffective in providing for
the needs of their citizens.
Some of our closest partners in this effort, Cameroon,
Chad, and Uganda, are led by men who have clung to power for
decades. In one recent study more than 70 percent of Africans
surveyed reported mistrust of the police and military. And that
is no great surprise given the behavior of some of our
counterterrorism partners: Arbitrary arrests, forced
disappearances, and torture in Cameroon; 1,000 protestors
killed and another 11,000 detained in Ethiopia; and in Uganda,
Kenya, and Burundi civilians speaking up for their rights and
demanding accountable leadership are met with violent
crackdowns, bloodshed, and killing.
These are the things that drive people toward violent
extremism and that attract terrorists seeking to exploit
vulnerable populations. When human rights, the rule of law, and
justice systems are weak Al-Shabaab, al-Qaeda, and others find
safe haven. And that is what we need to focus on. A military-
heavy strategy means that we are pushing back against these
groups after they are already established. Of course that is
important and we should continue doing that, but we must also
work to deny these groups the opportunity to flourish in the
first place.
The State Department and USAID have the expertise to do
that. Our diplomats in development professionals work to
promote justice and the rule of law, to build more inclusive
societies through better education, healthcare, and economic
opportunity, encouraging full participation in societies rather
than withdrawing into extremism. These are indispensable tools
in the fight against terrorism.
That is why I am baffled that the administration wants to
cut the budget for these agencies by a third. Frankly, I am
frustrated that the State Department appears to be descending
into dysfunction. Not the fault of anybody here, but if you cut
back and don't fill senior positions what else do you have? As
we are reading day after day after day about the dysfunction.
Foreign policy leaders, from former Secretaries Madeleine
Albright to Ambassadors Nicholas Burns and Ryan Crocker, are
all sounding the alarm. So I would like to hear how slashing
the State Department and USAID helps us stop violent extremism.
How does gutting vital efforts help us get at the root
causes of this problem? Why would we cut resources for
democracy promotion, for human rights, for foreign assistance
when we know that these cost-effective investments will help us
grapple with the problem of terrorism?
What I don't want to hear and I won't accept is that we
can't afford it. The President is ready to sign legislation
that will blow a $1.5 trillion hole in the budget to give tax
breaks to corporations and billionaires, so ``we can't afford
it'' line doesn't pass the test anymore. If we are serious
about fighting terrorism, let the military tackle the security
threats, but let's make a serious effort to stop it before it
starts.
Gentlemen, I look forward to your testimony. I thank you,
Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
This morning we are pleased to be joined by a very
distinguished panel. Mr. John Sullivan is the Deputy Secretary
of State. And prior to this position he was a partner at the
Mayer Brown law firm where he co-chaired its national security
practice. Prior to that Mr. Sullivan served in senior positions
at the Justice Department, Defense Department, and Commerce
Department.
The Honorable David Trachtenberg was confirmed by the U.S.
Senate on October 17th. Dr. Trachtenberg is Principal Deputy
Under Secretary of Defense for Policy. And he is currently
serving as the Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.
Prior to his work in the executive branch and private sector he
served on the staff of the House Armed Services Committee. So
it is good to see him again.
And without objection the witnesses' full prepared
statements are going to be made part of the record. Members
here are going to have 5 calendar days to submit any statements
or questions to you, or any extraneous material for the record.
And if you would, Mr. Sullivan, please summarize your
remarks. We will start with you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN J. SULLIVAN, DEPUTY SECRETARY,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Sullivan. Good morning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Engel, members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak with you about U.S. counterterrorism
efforts in Africa.
Last month, Secretary Tillerson hosted an Africa
Ministerial that included delegations from 37 countries, the
African Union, and members of the private sector and civil
society. Advancing our deep and expanding counterterrorism
cooperation on the continent was a major focus of the
ministerial, along with increasing trade, good governance, and
protection of human rights.
To reinforce these priorities, at Secretary Tillerson's
direction I traveled to Sudan, Tunisia, and Nigeria 2 weeks ago
to engage our willing and increasingly capable counterterrorism
partners.
In Sudan, senior leaders stressed their interest in working
with the United States to strengthen regional security, and
promote greater peace and stability throughout the region and
the world. We are encouraged by the Sudanese Government's
willingness to work with us to eliminate the threat posed by
ISIS and other terrorist groups operating in the region, as
well as the government's commitment to cut all military and
trade ties with North Korea.
In Tunisia, I met with both the Tunisian and Libyan
Governments. Tunisia, like Morocco and Algeria, has made
significant strides in preventing the spread of ISIS and other
terrorist groups within its borders through the implementation
of military and paramilitary operations, greater law
enforcement cooperation among allies and partners, and improved
measures to reintegrate returning foreign terrorist fighters.
Libya is perhaps our greatest counterterrorism challenge in
Africa. ISIS and other terrorist groups have sought to exploit
political instability and find safe haven in Libya's vast
ungoverned spaces, making the country both a source of and
destination for foreign terrorist fighters. We continue to
empower the Libyan Government to address these challenges.
Libyan Prime Minister Fayez al-Sarraj's government and its
aligned forces have been reliable partners in countering these
threats, and are in regular communication with the
administration and with our Ambassador Peter Bodde.
President Trump and Secretaries Tillerson and Mattis met
with the Prime Minister just last week to discuss a range of
issues, including counterterrorism. We also strongly back the
efforts of U.S. Special Representative Salame to facilitate a
political solution and prevent a civil conflict.
Nigeria was the last stop on my trip, and it is a crucial,
a critical U.S. partner that faces a number of threats. Nigeria
leads the regional fight against Boko Haram, ISIS-West Africa,
and other terrorist groups that continue to fuel one of the
worst humanitarian crises in the world. Since 2009, terrorist
groups in the region have killed more than 20,000 people and
abducted thousands of women and girls, causing at least 2
million people to flee their homes. This instability has
affected the larger Lake Chad Basin region, prompting the
creation of a Multinational Joint Task Force comprised of
Benin, Cameroon, Chad, and Niger, all partners that have asked
for U.S. assistance to root out terrorism.
We consider it in our national interest to support Nigeria
and its neighbors in this fight. To ensure our continued
cooperation, we have also underlined to these partners, and
those across the continent, that their security forces must be
professionalized, brought into an accountable chain of command,
and held responsible for human rights abuses.
These principles are also the backbone of our engagement in
Somalia, where we are committed to helping Somalia reform its
security sector and improve governance, with a focus on
reducing corrupt practices and increasing transparency and
accountability. In coordination with that effort, U.S. forces
are committed to using all authorized and appropriate measures
to protect Americans and to disable terrorist threats such as
Al-Shabaab and ISIS.
Somalia is also a prime example of how we are working with
the African Union, the United Nations, and other multilateral
organizations to counter terrorism, promote stability, and
support post-conflict peace building. Regional cooperation has
clearly produced results, as we have seen in the creation of
the G-5 by Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, and Niger in
2014. Last month Secretary Tillerson announced our commitment
to provide an additional $60 million in support to the G-5
Sahel Joint Force countries. This is in addition to the more
than $800 million in bilateral assistance we have provided to
G-5 countries since 2012 to help develop effective security
forces.
In closing, I want to underscore a message that I made
clear during all my stops on my trip: While the United States
is the largest supporter of peacekeeping and counterterrorism
across Africa, the Secretary and I firmly believe that
traditional counterterrorism efforts alone are not enough.
Economic reform, good governance, and a respect for human
rights must be prioritized to establish and maintain peace and
security throughout the continent.
We will continue to support our partners' efforts to
strengthen democratic institutions; improve citizen security
and justice; respect human rights; stimulate economic growth,
trade, health, and investment; and promote development and
education. The United States continues to emphasize respect for
human rights as a fundamental part of our counterterrorism
strategy, which includes thorough Leahy vetting of our security
force partners.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak with you
this morning. And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sullivan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you.
David.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DAVID J. TRACHTENBERG, ACTING UNDER
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Trachtenberg. Good morning, Chairman Royce, Ranking
Member Engel, and members of the committee. Let me begin by
thanking you for the opportunity to appear here with Deputy
Secretary of State Sullivan. This is my first testimony since
assuming my position just a few weeks ago as the Principal
Deputy and the Acting Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.
But as a former House committee staffer, I am keenly aware of
the important oversight role Congress plays on national
security issues, and I appreciate being here today.
Before I go any further, I want to express on behalf of the
entire Department of Defense our deepest sympathies to the
families of the soldiers killed in the Niger ambush: Staff
Sergeant Bryan Black, Sergeant La David Johnson, Staff Sergeant
Dustin Wright, and Staff Sergeant Jeremiah Johnson. We also
hope for the continued speedy recovery of both Captain Michael
Perozeni and Sergeant First Class Brent Bartels.
We honor the service and sacrifice of these Americans, and
we owe it to them, their families, and their fellow soldiers to
investigate the events of October 4th thoroughly. The death of
any service member is something that has a profound effect on
all of us at DoD, and the investigation is proceeding with due
diligence and care.
As we have briefed you and other committees, the
investigation is ongoing. And we do not want to provide
inaccurate or incomplete information. We must, therefore, wait
for the investigation to be completed by AFRICOM before we can
have the full picture of what happened. However, we will inform
Congress on the conclusions of the investigation as soon as
possible after the families are briefed.
That said, we must remember that our efforts in Africa are
vitally important. Today our African partners are confronting a
complex and growing threat from multiple terrorist groups,
including ISIS and al-Qaeda affiliates, and other extremist
groups like Boko Haram. These groups exploit instability, weak
governance, vulnerable populations, social media, and vast
spaces to establish safe havens, spread their toxic ideology,
and attack all who do not subscribe to it.
While DoD maintains expert counterterrorism forces, the
best in the world bar none, capable of conducting precision air
strikes and complex raids to protect our interests, we are
focused principally on helping our partners build their own
capabilities and expand their capacity to fight these terrorist
organizations and stem further violence and instability.
Secretary Mattis has placed a significant emphasis on
building and strengthening partnerships to both lessen the
demand for U.S. forces and to ensure sustainable indigenous
solutions to these problems. In the simplest terms, DoD seeks
to work by, with, and through our partners in Africa to find
African solutions to African problems. This means that military
operations against terrorist organizations are conducted by
host nation forces. U.S. forces work with our partners to
train, equip, advise, enable, and accompany them on operations
and improve their effectiveness and professionalism. And
through this cooperative relationship, the United States and
our partners in Africa achieve our shared strategic objectives.
As we work to build partner capacity I want to note that we
are not simply looking at military effectiveness, but we also
place a high value of professionalization of our partners'
militaries and, specifically, to improving their adherence to
norms for respecting human rights.
In addition to bilateral partnerships we also seek to work
closely with regional organizations like the African Union and
the G-5 Sahel Joint Task Force. We also partner with other
nations like France, who have committed thousands of troops to
share burdens on this vast continent. And, of course, our most
important partners are the other departments and agencies of
the United States Government.
There is no purely military solution to the terrorism
threat in Africa, and DoD is committed to promoting whole-of-
government solutions. This requires that we leverage the full
range of resources, talent, and expertise to address these
problems. This is particularly true of our colleagues in the
Department of State and USAID. And we are committed to working
together with them to protect the United States, our citizens,
and our interests in Africa.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify to this committee
on a topic of such critical importance. The Department of
Defense appreciates your leadership and oversight in this area,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Trachtenberg follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Thank you, David.
Let me just say to Deputy Secretary Sullivan that we are
very eager to hear about your trip to Tunisia, to Sudan, to
Nigeria. All three of these countries are important in terms of
our counterterrorism efforts. And while you were over there I
know that Secretary Tillerson had several dozen African foreign
ministers here for meetings in Washington.
We also had the opportunity on the committee to sit down
with Nikki Haley, Ambassador Haley, after her visit to Africa.
And we ourselves on the committee have been engaged. We have
been to these countries in order to discuss these issues as
well.
So we are very glad you made the trip. I think this high
level engagement is important. But one point I would make is it
can't substitute for the day-to-day efforts of our Ambassadors
on the ground there. And as you know, Ambassadors have
expressed, and members here have expressed concerns about the
redesign. So we, we want to maintain a robust presence
overseas, including Africa. And having diplomats on the ground
strengthens our counterterrorism efforts there.
Can you and Under Secretary Trachtenberg walk us through
the Department of State and Department of Defense on how you
work together to build capabilities for our African partners?
If you would explain some of that.
And then maybe the other thing that I would like you to
focus on is the greatest challenges that you face when working
with African militaries and African governments.
I will give you the floor.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, the Department of State and the Department of
Defense, and in particular AFRICOM, General Waldhauser, and our
Ambassadors in the 51 countries on the continent of Africa have
developed a very close working relationship. I can give you a
particular example that I spent a lot of time focused on during
my trip, and that is the cooperation between our Ambassador to
Libya Peter Bodde and General Waldhauser on not just
counterterrorism but political and economic development, and
stabilization in Libya.
If I could for a moment just to address the concern you
raised about having Ambassadors in the field, I will be the
first to concede, as I have done before this committee, that we
have not done enough to get appointees in place in positions at
the Department and Ambassadors into posts. But in Africa we
actually have 90 percent of our posts have Ambassadors in
residence at posts, or they have been confirmed and are en
route. So, 44 out of the 51 countries in Africa have an
Ambassador.
So that is what I can't describe as a good news story for
the Department across all regions, for Africa we do have 90
percent of our Ambassadors at posts.
I will defer to Under Secretary Trachtenberg for further
comment.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Yes, Mr. Chairman, let me echo what
Secretary Sullivan has said. In terms of the relationship
between the Department of Defense and the Department of State
on this particular issue the cooperation and coordination is
extremely good.
What I want to emphasize here is that in many respects the
Department of Defense plays a supporting role to the Department
of State and other agencies because the problems of terrorism
that we are talking about on the African continent deal with,
at their very heart, some of the issues that you mentioned in
your opening statement: The issue of weak governance in some of
these countries; poverty; exploiting local grievances.
Our work within DoD and working with our partner nations is
to help provide those partner countries with the capacity
themselves to be able to, to be able to defend themselves
against extremist organizations in terrorist capacities. But
that is, of course, not the end of the story. And so that is
why we work very closely with our State Department colleagues
to make sure that once security is provided, effective tools
can be put in place to improve governance and deal with some of
the underlying issues that give rise to some of these violent
extremist organizations in the first place.
Chairman Royce. My time has expired. I will go to Mr. Eliot
Engel.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sullivan, I appreciate all your hard work and your
efforts at outreach. I sincerely do. And I think that you are
doing an outstanding job. And I appreciate your contact with
the committee and your accessibility. But, as you know, and as
we have discussed, and as I just mentioned before you cannot
pick up a newspaper these days without seeing a headline about
how Secretary Tillerson is hollowing out the State Department,
and particularly the Foreign Service.
Mr. Secretary, when you testified before the committee in
late September you acknowledged that morale at the Department
was low. Let me ask you the same question, how is morale today?
And what will you do to improve morale and better utilize our
country's diplomats?
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Congressman Engel. Morale hasn't
improved. It is not something that I am proud to say. But it is
a problem that the Secretary and I have spoken about. He is now
on a trip to Europe. He is getting back later this week.
We will be coming up here to brief members of this
committee and other Members of Congress and Senators on an
update on the redesign which I have testified about previously,
and also have a town hall with the employees, the women and men
of the State Department to describe the work that has been done
on the redesign in the 2 months since I last testified before
this committee, but to renew his commitment to the Department.
I think one of our greatest failings has been a lack of
communication, communication particularly with our own career
professionals, both at State and in the field, and a
rededication to do a better job of that.
And I, of course, with this committee commit that to you as
well that I am committed both to communicating with our men and
women about our plans and their value to us, and also to you
and the members of the committee.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. As I have mentioned before, and I
want to say it again on the record that I am very troubled by
the redesign. I am worried that the redesign will be used as an
excuse to cut back. And I don't think that we should be cutting
back at a time like this when, hopefully, we use diplomacy to
prevent wars. And no matter where you go, no matter where you
travel around the globe, Africa and any place else, people will
pull you aside and tell you how demoralized they are, how they
really feel that the administration is sort of going after the
State Department. And it really bothers me a great deal.
Those of us that have been on this committee for decades
appreciate the good work that our diplomats do and that our
people do all around the world, as I am sure you do. But you
can't cut back, in my opinion, at the rate that the
administration has announced it would like to and have an
effective workforce. It just can't be done.
So I raise this because I want to raise it every time
because I am hoping that there will be policies that will be
rethought and the cutbacks as, you know, we described on this
committee, and it was on both sides of the aisle, there was
chagrin about the cutbacks. So I just wanted to raise that with
you, so.
I am concerned about the imbalance between military and the
non-military approaches to countering terrorism in sub-Saharan
Africa. For one, expanding use of air strikes in Somalia
obviously increases the possibility of civilian casualties,
which runs the risk of creating more terrorists than we are
able to eliminate in the first place. I said that in my opening
remarks.
In addition, while security assistance funding to sub-
Saharan Africa partner nations has doubled in the past 5
years--though again 31 percent cut that has been proposed,
cutting the budgets at the State Department and USAID on the
agencies best positioned to help prevent the emergence of
terrorism in the first place, so it's almost like no
counterterrorism. And, you know, we worry that the redesign can
be used as an excuse to just simply cut back. And that is what
we are concerned about on both sides of the aisle. I don't want
to put words in anybody's mouth but I have been here and know
what our joint concerns are.
So please tell me about slashing funding. I know you didn't
personally make this decision, but slashing funding for the
State Department and USAID obviously doesn't help us address
the drivers of terrorism and violent extremists in the long
term, so I would like to hear how we can fit one into the
other?
And what measures are we taking to improve civilian
protection and reduce the risk of civilian casualties while
conducting air strikes and other military operations?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, Congressman Engel, I would agree with
you that the root causes of counterterrorism, the situation we
find ourselves in today, particularly on the African continent,
the problems we see are not going to be solved by military
action alone. In fact, I think Secretary Mattis has testified
and made clear, as has Secretary Tillerson, that a focus on
good governance, human rights, training for partner militaries
are extremely important.
Your question about how we are going to do that with our
funding, we will do all we can with the funds that we have
available. We advocate for the resources that we believe are
necessary within the administration to meet our mission. We
will do all we can to meet that mission, to develop those
policies, support our partners and allies with the
understanding that good governance, economic development,
humanitarian assistance ultimately--and I will give you one
example, Libya. We believe that solving the serious challenges
we face in Libya is ultimately a political question. It is not
going to be solved by military action or by counterterrorism
alone.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. My time is up. But I will submit some
other questions to you. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
your testimony and leadership, gentlemen.
Time is obviously very short, so I am going to focus on
Ethiopia, South Sudan, and Nigeria. Ever since the Meles
government, Ethiopia has asserted its role in combating
terrorism as a cover for the ongoing systematic abuse of human
rights. After a seriously flawed election in 2005 I met with
President Meles in Addis Ababa and, as predicted, he just
rolled out the terrorism card as cover, as to mitigate
criticism, mine and many others, particularly human rights
organizations, for the killings in the streets, the use of
torture, the jailing.
In response, I introduced the Ethiopia Human Rights Act. It
was killed by lobbyists, frankly, and was not looked at
favorably by the State Department even though the findings were
accurate when Don Payne, my ranking member, and I introduced
it. When the Democrats took control he took the lead on the
bill and I was his co-sponsor. But there was also that pushback
and people said, well, they are good on terrorism but awful on
human rights.
So, what are your thoughts on how, where, how often do we
raise human rights with Ethiopia? We have a resolution pending
now which probably may come up on the House Floor, I don't
know. But it seems to me, you know, they can't say, oh, we are
doing well over here while they abuse their own people and
torture them.
Secondly, twice in the last 15 months I have been to South
Sudan, joined most recently by my good friend and colleague
Karen Bass, and we raised with Salva Kiir his horrific record
and his killings. And I am wondering, are we really pressing? I
know the leadership, especially our Ambassador to the U.N., has
really raised it very robustly. Kiir is a grave disappointment
to everyone. What is being done there? Because I think that the
potential and the reality of violence is very real.
Finally, on Nigeria, I held a whole series of hearings,
went there many times, kept saying why aren't we training more
of those who could be Leahy vetted? As a matter of fact, at one
of my hearings the Department said at least half of the
Nigerian military would gain muster under the Leahy process but
very few were trained. If you could give an update how well or
poorly we are doing in terms of training Nigerian military?
It took years to get an FTO designation for Boko Haram. I
held hearings on it and introduced a resolution. The day we
were marking it up the Department reverses itself and says, oh,
we are going, we are going to go ahead and do an FTO
designation. Days late, years late and a dollar short. But how
well is that working as well?
Thank you.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you, Congressman Smith.
First on Ethiopia, I met with the Ethiopian foreign
minister in June on his trip here. It was one of my first
meetings as Deputy Secretary of State. I raised with him human
rights concerns in Ethiopia, specific cases of detainees, the
state of emergency that has been declared, the need for it to
be lifted. I specifically raised it with him. I will always
raise those issues with you, sir. I guarantee it.
Mr. Smith. I deeply appreciate that.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you. When I was in Sudan we are getting
great cooperation from the Sudanese on counterterrorism. I
raised human rights issues, religious liberty issues with
Sudan, gave a speech on religious liberty at the largest mosque
in Khartoum. It was not well received. Had a very unflattering
press statement by an imam affiliated with ISIS that made some
threats about me. I will always raise those issues. We, the
Department and I, are committed to it.
On South Sudan, as you know, Ambassador Haley was there
before I. We sort of split responsibility: I went to Khartoum,
she went to Juba. She has raised those issues in Juba. I raised
concerns about Sudan's influence in South Sudan with the
government in Khartoum. Very important issue for us.
Nigeria, I don't know if Under Secretary Trachtenberg has
more statistics to give. We are focused on Leahy vetting for as
many of the forces as we can at the brigade level on down. The
threat posed by not just Boko Haram but ISIS-West Africa in
Northeastern Nigeria is acute. And we need to support those
forces that can be trusted that are trained by us to meet that
threat.
I know that time is limited, so I will turn it over to my
colleague.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Thank you, Congressman Smith. The only
thing I would add to that is to say that the Department of
Defense is no less committed than the Department of State is to
ensuring that human rights practices are followed. We very
strictly adhere to the Leahy law. We hold our partner forces,
the partner forces that we engage with, to our same standards
and expectations.
We include human rights training in our security assistance
programs. And we would cease providing----
Mr. Smith. And that includes--if you don't mind me
interrupting--that would also include human trafficking where
militaries so often are complicit?
Mr. Trachtenberg. It includes various elements of human
rights----
Mr. Smith. Including trafficking?
Mr. Trachtenberg [continuing]. Involving human rights, sir.
Mr. Smith. Including trafficking?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I believe that is correct.
Mr. Smith. If you could get back to us on that?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Absolutely. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Mr. Trachtenberg. But in the event there are human rights
abuses we will then, we will stop under the Leahy law that
training activity.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
But just in terms of that dialog, my hope is that we are
robustly raising the trafficking issue as well included in that
program.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Oh, absolutely. And I will be delighted
to get back to you with the information.
Mr. Smith. I would appreciate it. Thank you so much.
Chairman Royce. Greg Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, welcome back. Let me ask a quick question. I
was just concerned or confused, and maybe you can have the
answer. On November 28th there was an event at the Wilson
Center where Secretary Tillerson said that President Trump's
draconian cuts to the international affairs budget were
``reflective of an expectation that we are going to have
success in some of these conflicted areas.''
This to me, I don't know, seemed extraordinarily naive. But
can you tell me what specific conflicts do you think will be
resolved in the coming year?
Mr. Sullivan. I don't have a crystal ball to give you a
precise answer, Congressman. I take the thrust of your question
about our prospects for being able to achieve success in Syria,
Yemen, all of those places. I don't think that that is
something that is going to happen any time soon.
We need to be focused on doing all we can to support our
partners, our allies, and our military in the military fight
but all the things that we can support on that we have
discussed the non-military aspect.
Mr. Meeks. And I couldn't agree with you more because that
is why, you know, going on what Ranking Member Engel had talked
about because if we are going to resolve some of these it is
not going to just be militarily, we need to do it
diplomatically also. And that is why I think on a bipartisan
way we are disturbed when we see the draconian cuts and the
reduction of personnel because we can't do it without you at
the State Department. I mean, if we are going to do this thing
we need you and we need the people there. And that is my point.
And I know you are under constraints but we need you.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, and to give you a very precise example,
Congressman. In Syria, in Raqqa; in Iraq, in Mosul where the
military in supporting our partners and allies have done the
job of defeating ISIS militarily, it is now up to the State
Department to come in. We are not going to take over governance
of those areas, but we are going to provide basic stabilization
support for water, safety, getting internally displaced persons
back; a key element for us.
We could very easily lose the fight on those grounds that
the military has done such a great job in winning on the
battlefield for us.
Mr. Meeks. And I always salute the men and women of the
State Department and the job that you are doing. And I hate to
hear your honesty when you come back and talk about the lack of
morale there. But they are serving our country in a very big
way, in a most important way. If we are going to get through
some of these conflicts it is going to only be with the help of
the men and women of the State Department. So I take my hat off
to them.
Let me just ask another question because I want to know
whether or not there is a connection. I am deeply disturbed
when I hear about slave trafficking in Libya. And I am
wondering whether there is a tie-in some way where there is a
link to the exploitation tied to terrorists and terrorism with
some of the slave trading that has been taking place in Libya
today. Is there any tie-in that you see there?
Mr. Sullivan. I believe there is. The reports of what is
happening in those camps where migrants, refugees are being
abused, exploited, and slave traded are shocking. It is
happening in areas of Libya that are largely ungoverned, which
is why we are working hard along with the U.N. for a political
solution to the situation to get more control over those areas.
But in those ungoverned areas where ISIS and other terrorist
organizations are able to operate they make money by engaging
in activities like that.
Mr. Meeks. And you touched on this earlier, too. Because
there was a recent survey that was conducted by the United
Nations Development Programme that found that 71 percent of
respondents pointed to an adverse interaction with state
security forces as the factor of the tipping point in the
decision to join a terrorist organization. So, and I know Mr.
Smith talked about the Leahy vetting, and we talked about human
rights training, are there other ways that the administration
can or is seeking to ensure that the partner militaries that
are accused of human rights violations pursue tangible measures
of accountability for such actions?
Mr. Sullivan. Two tracks, and you have highlighted both.
One is through DoD and with the State Department's support
vetting those organizations, military organizations that we are
going to work with and provide funding and support to.
But second, working with the governments to provide that
there is accountability, there is investigations, prosecutions,
and accountability is a key component.
It is similar with our approach on human trafficking,
trafficking in persons. One of the pillars--there are several
pillars--one is breaking up the networks. But the second is
working with governments to make sure that those who are
engaged are investigated, prosecuted, held accountable, and
punished.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Royce. We go to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher of
California.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. And thank you for
your testimony today. And I know Chairman Royce has had a very
keen interest in Africa since the day he arrived in the United
States Congress, along with broadcasting. So we are actually
paying more attention to Africa today because of his
leadership.
I would admit my limited knowledge of Africa. And but let
me just note after, my response to what you are saying is that
I am wondering how all of this fits in with an overall strategy
of how you deal with the world. I would hope that the United
States, I don't think we will ever be able to afford what
appears to be the development of an idea that we have a Pax
Americana, that we can go all over the world and wherever there
is problems we are going to come in and try to solve those
problems. We are going to go broke if we try to do that.
I mean just there was a Pax Britannica, and that was able
to last a short period of time. And a Pax Americana will last a
short period of time if we did that.
We, for example, can we by being the grand decision makers
end up making, yes, some good decisions and trying to help? We
are good-hearted people trying to do the best. But, for
example, Mr. Sullivan, do believe now that you just came back
from Libya, do believe that it was right for us to break that
compromise that had been reached with Qaddafi, for example.
Would it have been--are we worse off today or better off today
because America came in and decided we are going to get rid of
Qaddafi and sided with the rebels who they wouldn't have
succeeded without our help? Is Libya better today or is the
world better because we got rid of Qaddafi?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, in my remarks, comments to Congressman
Meeks I spoke about the ungoverned areas in Libya. Libya is
certainly today a place that has a significant focus of our
counterterrorism for that very reason. What we don't want is a
place where, as there was in Sudan in the 1990s, or Afghanistan
in the late '90s, early 2000s, places where terrorist
organizations can plant root, flourish, plan attacks against
the United States. That is what we want to eliminate, in
addition to supporting governments in the region.
Mr. Rohrabacher. And when we had Qaddafi there, you know, I
think the greatest mistakes, there were two great mistakes made
by the United States in my lifetime. One was to send combat
troops into Vietnam, and the other is to send combat troops to
get rid of Saddam Hussein. And Saddam Hussein was just
benevolence; we had to bestow democracy on those people. And it
has unleashed all of this chaos.
I don't believe that we can have a Pax Americana. We have
to be really a little bit more thoughtful. For example,
Congressman Smith just talked about Ethiopia where I have
constituents who were ripped off by the Ethiopian Government,
and the corruption there and the oppression now, even though we
have been friendly to the Ethiopian Government. But there is a
player in all of that that I see and I would like to ask you
about, and that is money.
These people who run these dictatorships, and also these
groups that are terrorist groups, but mainly the authoritarian
leaders in Africa, do they not have bank accounts someplace in
the world? And can we prevent them--our bankers, we have got
global bankers who are basically partners in the rip-off of the
world's poorest people. And we just never seem to focus on that
part of the criminal element, the bankers. Could you?
Mr. Sullivan. That is an extremely important point and
relevant to my trip to Nigeria where the Nigerian Government is
focused on recovering billions that has been looted from that
country.
We work with the Justice Department. When I was there 2
weeks ago with our Justice Department, our Embassy, and the
Nigerian Government trying to get back to the Nigerian
Government that money that was in the United States that we
could get control of. It is a small fraction.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I don't think I am just talking about
United States banks. We have an international banking system.
And quite frankly, the gang that runs Ethiopia----
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. Have bank accounts somewhere
to the tune of billions, probably hundreds of millions of
dollars. But that is true throughout Africa.
Mr. Sullivan. Absolutely.
Mr. Rohrabacher. I think that if we are going to help,
rather than just trying to be holier than thou about human
rights violations, that this is our stance, let us agree and
try to help them develop. We have got to prevent them from
being ripped off and having the wealth sucked out by their
corrupt leaders in partnership with banks.
Mr. Sullivan. You are absolutely right. And it is banks
outside the United States----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. That is right.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. That are principally the focus.
We try to establish trust with the government by saying
that money which we can immediately access here in the United
States we are going to get back to you, but also work with them
in other countries for those other banks elsewhere where we
don't have as much--we don't have jurisdiction, frankly, but
working to get that money back.
It is a huge problem and a priority for those governments
that are focused on good government.
Mr. Sullivan. We will be happy to work with you. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go to Mr. Albio Sires of New
Jersey.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sullivan, I just want to first thank you for your
service to this country. You have served in many capacities and
now you have got a real difficult job, and I thank you for your
service.
But I do not agree with you that the State Department
morale is improving. I still see qualified people leaving. I
still see the President still insisting on a 30 percent cut.
The Secretary seems to be a little distant from everything. So
I don't know if I really agree with you that things are really
improving there.
You know, until we stop losing all these good people that
have worked there so long and have given so much to the State
Department, you know, it is going to be a job for you.
So, go ahead.
Mr. Sullivan. I was going to say that I don't think I said
that morale was improving, if I did I misspoke. I testified
here----
Mr. Sires. I thought that is what you said.
Mr. Sullivan. No, I said it hasn't improved.
Mr. Sires. It hasn't improved.
Mr. Sullivan. It has not.
Mr. Sires. It must be my English then. I'm still learning
it.
Mr. Sullivan. It's my Boston accent. I'm sorry.
Mr. Sires. But, Mr. Sullivan, one of the things that I
always pride myself on is freedom of speech. You know, I have
been an advocate here for a long time, since I have been here.
And I am disheartened by the President's unrelenting effort,
the State Department's efforts to defend freedom of speech
around the world. What is the rationale behind the
administration's putting money toward free press programs
in places like Hungary, but yet when it comes to Cuba we
cut
it, when it comes to Venezuela we cut it? Who determines
where this money goes? How is that, you know, for promoting
free press in these countries?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, it is certainly the case that Secretary
Tillerson and I in the Department are strong advocates for
freedom of the press. I raised this issue on my travels in
Africa 2 weeks ago.
With respect to specific allocations, I would have to get
back to you on Cuba and Venezuela. It may have to do with
partners that we were supporting there.
I am aware of the program in Hungary to which you
reference. But I would be happy to get back to you on more
specific information with respect to Cuba and Venezuela.
Mr. Sires. That would be great.
And how concerned are you that the Libyan situation is
going to spill over into Tunisia and Morocco?
Mr. Sullivan. Very concerned, as are the Tunisians in
particular. We spent a lot of time focused on border security
for Tunisia. We work in partnership with DoD and AFRICOM on
border security, and not just the land border but the maritime
border as well. Very important. Tunisians are concerned about
it. We are devoting a lot of resources to it.
Mr. Sires. And Morocco?
Mr. Sires. Morocco as well. Same situation.
Libya is, as I said in my opening remarks, both a magnet
for foreign terrorist fighters and a source. So we are doing
all we can. And I would defer to Under Secretary Trachtenberg
if he has other thoughts to offer. But border security for
those North African countries on either side of Libya is
extremely important.
Mr. Trachtenberg. I would agree with that, Congressman,
absolutely.
Mr. Sires. Do you see the hand of Iran in all these
efforts?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I think Iran is definitely a challenge,
certainly regionally. And, yes, there are a number of malign
activities that Iran is engaged in that we are focused on that
I know the State Department is also focused on. And I do agree,
we need sort of a whole of government approach for dealing with
some of these issues. But definitely I would agree with you on
that.
Mr. Sires. And I just read an article on Politico regarding
Hezbollah, their increasing efforts in the Western Hemisphere.
And I don't know if you saw the article but it would be great
if you could look at that because it really talks about how
they have increased their presence in Central America and South
America and in Venezuela. So I was just wondering if you can
comment on that?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, I can in fact. The administration is
working on specifically a Hezbollah strategy. And there are
various aspects to it. There's Hezbollah in Lebanon which has
become in a sense a local governing entity in southern Lebanon
in addition to a terrorist organization that are influencing
events in Syria. But they are also projecting their malign
influence elsewhere including, unfortunately, in this
hemisphere. You are absolutely right. And this administration
is aware of it and focused on it.
Mr. Sires. And I would like to apologize for not hearing
correctly what you said before at the beginning.
Thank you.
Mr. McCaul. [Presiding.] The Chair recognizes myself for
questions.
I chair the Homeland Security Committee and so I have been
a student of counterterrorism for quite some time. Was a
Federal prosecutor as well. I know Osama bin Laden was in
Khartoum and Afghanistan. I saw the rise of ISIS and the
Caliphate during the tenure of my chairmanship, unfortunately.
We have crushed the Caliphate, and we have defeated ISIS in
Iraq and Syria.
But now I am seeing a new phenomenon. I went to Egypt and
the Sinai and we saw the explosion in the mosque, the downing
of the Russian airliner. I was in Tunisia, met the Libyan team.
It is in chaos.
Boko Haram is taking over in parts of Africa, AQIM and
other terrorist organizations.
What I am worried about is that as we squeeze the balloon
they are going to pop up somewhere else. And Africa seems to be
the safe haven. They seek chaos. They seek ungoverned
territories and safe havens. And so I see if we are trying to
look in the future it is actually happening now that Africa is
going to be the spot. This is going to be the hotspot.
There is a Trans-Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership that
includes 11 African countries. I know State has worked very
diligently on this. And, Mr. Secretary, I was just hopeful you
could give me maybe an update on how that partnership is
working.
Mr. Sullivan. Well, the phenomenon you described is quite
accurate, Congressman. And we are--and I will defer to Under
Secretary Trachtenberg on this--but we are very focused on
where those terrorist fighters that are leaving the Caliphate,
what is left of it--and there isn't much--in Syria and Iraq,
where they are going. Certainly Africa, parts of Africa, Libya,
Northeastern Nigeria, elsewhere seems to be a landing place.
But we are also seeing that in other areas, in South Asia
and in the Pacific as well, in the Philippines.
Mr. McCaul. Right.
Mr. Sullivan. So it is a priority for us to not win the
fight against the Caliphate in Syria and Iraq but lose track of
where all those, where all of those foreign fighters are going.
Unfortunately, Libya has been an attractive place for them
because of the ungoverned areas that I described earlier, and
that you mentioned and know so well.
But I defer to my colleague Under Secretary Trachtenberg.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Congressman, I think you put your finger
on the crux of the problem here when you talked about victories
in certain areas but yet leading to problems in others.
I tend to look at this, the problem of countering terrorism
and extremist organizations, as something like a balloon, if I
could use that analogy. If you squeeze the balloon in a certain
place you will narrow it and take the air out of that place,
but it will also balloon in other area, will expand in other
areas. I think to a certain degree that is what we are seeing
by the flow of foreign terrorist fighters from one area to
another.
I think our job is working by, with, and through our
partners, and working with our colleagues at the State
Department and elsewhere is to deflate the balloon in order to
solve the problem of terrorists and extremist groups moving
simply from one location to some other ungoverned space where
they feel they have freedom of, more freedom of action.
Mr. McCaul. Can you comment on the role of NGOs? I was at
the Munich Security Conference. I met with Bill Gates, the
Gates Foundation; they do some great work in Africa. Bono and
the ONE Campaign. Is that helpful, Secretary?
Mr. Sullivan. NGOs are not just helpful but essential. We
partner with them everywhere, particularly for humanitarian
assistance. PEPFAR relies on partnering with NGOs. Really key,
key for us.
Mr. McCaul. That may be key to stability. I think what we
need is stability.
Mr. Sullivan. Stability.
Mr. McCaul. And it is very fragile and unstable.
Mr. Sullivan. Good governance, health, economic
development, humanitarian assistance. Basic stability issues
that we need in places like Raqqa or in Mosul for just water,
sanitation, demining, medical services, all key things that
need to be restored in places that have just been decimated.
Mr. Trachtenberg. I agree with Secretary Sullivan on that,
sir. It is true again, again what DoD is doing is basically
attempting to work with our partners in the region to establish
the security conditions that will allow these other priorities
to be put into place in order to deal with some of the
underlying reasons for the rise of terrorists and extremist
activities. So absolutely concur.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you. I agree and thank you for that
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California Ms.
Bass.
Ms. Bass. And let me just say I appreciate your questions
about NGOs. I am hoping that somewhere down the line we can
look at how we do foreign assistance because I think in some
instances some of the countries could do for themselves, and
maybe we need to focus on infrastructure like electricity and
roads and things like that. So I look forward in the future to
working with you on that.
A couple of quick questions. Mr. Sullivan, there were a few
times that you kept referring to 51 African countries. Why? Is
that because we are involved in 51 as opposed to 54? But why?
Mr. Sullivan. Fifty-four posts where we have, have
Ambassadors.
Ms. Bass. Oh, I see. There is three countries where we
don't?
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Ms. Bass. I see. What is that? Eritrea?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes, Eritrea----
Ms. Bass. That is okay.
Mr. Sullivan. Sudan we have a Charge because we can't deal
with Bashir, the President. And there is a, there is a third.
Ms. Bass. Well----
Mr. Sullivan. So there are three where we don't. But I will
get, get those for you.
Ms. Bass. Okay. And since you mentioned Sudan, since we
are, you know, in the process of changing our policies there,
what is the trajectory? Do we see having more than a Charge or?
Mr. Sullivan. I don't see that. That is not a near-term
development that I foresee.
Ms. Bass. You don't see that changing?
Mr. Sullivan. My hope is that it will. I am not counting on
that. My visit there was to discuss all the work that we have
to do with Sudan going forward.
We took one step,----
Ms. Bass. Right.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. As we discussed in October.
There are a lot more things that need to happen before we have
full, normal relations with Sudan.
Ms. Bass. And maybe in another setting I could hear some
more details about that. I think that would be helpful.
Mr. Sullivan. As we discussed before my trip,----
Ms. Bass. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. I would be delighted to come
talk with you and give you a little more detail.
Ms. Bass. All right. And I, so I am wondering if you can--I
wasn't here when my colleague asked questions about Libya, but
tomorrow representatives of the Congressional Black Caucus are
meeting with the Ambassador from Libya, deeply concerned about
the whole situation that CNN exposed regarding the slave trade.
And in general, I mean once Qaddafi was overthrown the sub-
Saharan Africans that were in Libya were mistreated from the
beginning because they were viewed as pro-Qaddafi forces.
And so I was just wondering if there is anything you might
offer us in preparation for that meeting with the Ambassador
tomorrow, what is your view on this, specifically around the
slave trade that has been exposed?
Mr. Sullivan. Meeting with our Ambassador, with Ambassador
Bodde?
Ms. Bass. No. No, no, no, no, no, meeting with the Libyan.
Mr. Sullivan. The Libyan. Oh, I am sorry, the Libyan
Ambassador.
Ms. Bass. With the Libyan Ambassador tomorrow.
Mr. Sullivan. Oh. So, two aspects of it, two really. One is
the camps themselves in Libya which are difficult for us to get
to because they are in, as I have discussed, in ungoverned
areas for the most part where neither the GMA, the government
in Tripoli, Prime Minister Sarraj, or the Haftar group in
Eastern Libya really have access to. So that presents a real
problem for us in trying to directly address the problem.
The larger issue for us, though, is the countries that
those migrants, those refugees came from and addressing the
situation in those countries, why they left, why they left
Nigeria----
Ms. Bass. Right. Right.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. In the first place.
Ms. Bass. And, you know, on another note I want to ask you
one more question before my time runs out. But maybe there is
something that we can do with the E.U., especially with this
whole policy of sending people back and not knowing where they
are going back to.
I wanted to ask you a question about Chad. Chad's decision
in October to withdraw troops from the Multinational Task
Force, some analysts believe that that is one of the things
that led to the instability along the border and the attack on
our Special Operation Forces. And I wonder if Mr. Trachtenberg
can make a comment in that?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Thank you, Congresswoman. We, from a DoD
perspective, we have not seen any impact, operational impact in
terms of our ability to work with the Chadian forces as part of
our partnership, counterterrorism partnership activities.
Ms. Bass. Did we figure out why they were included in the
Muslim ban, considering that they were our allies?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I, I do not have an answer. Do not have
an answer.
Ms. Bass. I mean that is what led to them pulling out of
the Multinational Task Force isn't it?
Mr. Trachtenberg. All I can tell you, Congresswoman, is
that at least operationally we see no impact in terms of our
ability to work with them as partners.
Ms. Bass. So you don't think that had anything to do with
the attack on our Special Forces?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I cannot--that is a question I would have
to take for the record. I can't, I can't answer that.
Ms. Bass. One last question. Do you know how many troops we
have on the continent? I mean, after that attack that really
raised a lot of questions because we thought it was a few
hundred. How many U.S. troops are there on the continent of
Africa?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I think the issue of the troops that we
have, the actual numbers and their locations is an issue that I
would prefer not to address in an open session.
Ms. Bass. Okay. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Mr. Curtis [presiding]. Thank you.
We now go to Representative Ted Poe, chairman of the
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And congratulations on
being chair of this committee in such a few months.
Thank you, gentlemen, for being here.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you.
Mr. Poe. I am not going to let you respond.
I do want to comment on something the gentlelady Ms. Bass
made a comment earlier. Just for the record, the committee has
passed, and the House has passed, and it is the law of the land
that there will be an audit of foreign aid. And we will have
that, supposedly, audit in January to see what all those NGOs
are doing all over the country, all over the world, whether
they are working or not working. I think it is long overdue.
So, I look forward, as you do, to that information.
And I also want to follow up on the issue of Libya
specifically. The United States in my opinion recklessly
intervened in Libya in 2011. We toppled the regime. We all
thought we were doing such a great thing. But Libya turned into
a failed state. Another failure in American foreign policy to
topple a regime and then let it go into disarray. And because
of that, now we have Libya with all of its different tribes,
and groups, and governments all in Libya trying to control the
Government of Libya. And a lot of these groups, in my opinion,
are terrorist groups.
And now we know that Libya is a center point for people who
want to get out of their situation in Africa being fooled to
think that they can get to Libya and then go across the
Mediterranean, primarily to Italy. And people are being lied to
that they will be smuggled, and get a job, and all of those
things that we have heard about for years. And they are lied
to, primarily women and children, and all of a sudden they are
in the slave trade.
They are being kidnaped by modern day slave masters. They
are turned into slaves. They are sold on the marketplace of
slavery and human trafficking, some for $100. And bad things
only happen to them.
Now it is not just the western part of Africa where the
smuggling route takes place, it is taking place from many
different areas of Africa, folks just trying to have a better
life and then they are in the slave trade.
I wouldn't say that the United States is at fault of this,
but we destroyed the regime. And it is chaos in Libya. I have a
couple of questions.
Specifically what terrorist groups are involved in the
slave trade?
Mr. Sullivan. I would have to get back to you for a
specific answer. I can speculate.
Mr. Poe. All right.
Mr. Sullivan. I will have to get back to you with a--I want
to give you a precise answer. If I could take that for the
record, because I don't want to speculate.
I don't know if the Under Secretary may have more relevant
information.
Mr. Trachtenberg. No. I would also, I would also want to
take that for the record.
Mr. Poe. Okay. Well, we will hold you both accountable for
that because we want to know who those, who those bad outlaws
are and then develop a continuous policy of going after them.
What is the United States' foreign policy regarding Libya
today? After all these years since 2011 tell us what our policy
is? What is our goals? What are we trying to do? Who do we
support in Libya?
Mr. Sullivan. We deal with Prime Minister Sarraj who is the
head of the GMA, his government in Tripoli. There is a Libyan
political agreement in place that has been negotiated by, as
you have mentioned, all the relevant tribes and entities.
There is a process in place, led by a U.N. representative,
a representative of the Secretary-General. The United States
supports that political process to bring all those disparate
elements together, to come up with a political solution so that
we can have elections, which are scheduled next year, and have
a legitimate government in Libya that we can deal with.
Mr. Poe. Okay. Mr. Secretary, just to reclaim my time since
I am just almost out of time. Now that we know about the slave
trade and that Libya is a hub of the slave trade, what are we
doing about that specific issue regarding Africans who are
smuggled through Libya into Europe in the slave trade?
Mr. Sullivan. Two things. We have got a preexisting
program, Trafficking in Persons. Libya has become a key focus
of that. Trafficking in persons is a global problem. This is an
acute problem we have to address in Libya. That is first.
Second, we need to address the political and economic
situations and support the governments in countries like
Nigeria where those people are fleeing, leaving themselves open
to be abused in camps in Libya.
Mr. Poe. I will look forward to that list of terrorist
groups. Thank you, gentlemen.
I yield back.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for that
shout out as well.
The Chair recognizes David Cicilline from Rhode Island.
Mr. Cicilline. Thank you. Thank you to our witnesses for
being here.
Mr. Sullivan, I want to begin with you. The President has
declared his support for a tax bill that will add $1 trillion
to the national debt, yet he, Secretary Tillerson, you, and
others in the administration continue to use the deficit as an
excuse for the deep cuts that have been proposed to the State
Department and foreign assistance. So I am just wondering
whether in light of this development whether your position has
changed or whether you think it is still necessary or desirable
to support a 30 percent cut in USAID and the State Department?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, as Secretary Tillerson has testified,
we believe we can perform the mission of the State Department
with the budget----
Mr. Cicilline. So it is still the position----
Mr. Sullivan. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cicilline. Your position hasn't changed though. We are
going to add $1 trillion to the deficit for this tax bill but
that we still need to make these devastating cuts to the State
Department and USAID because of the deficit? Okay, your answer
is yes?
Mr. Sullivan. My--I didn't take the position on the tax
bill. I----
Mr. Cicilline. No, no, but you take the position that the
deficit----
Mr. Sullivan. On the budget.
Mr. Cicilline [continuing]. So the reason that we are
making a 30 percent cut in the State Department and USAID that
you support as Assistant Secretary?
Mr. Sullivan. I support that budget. Yes, I do.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Now, and you don't think there is any
concern that our allies and partners around the world might not
believe us next time we say we want to disengage from a program
because we don't have resources? You don't think--do you think
it has any impact on the perception of the world about U.S.
leadership and global engagement?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, the Department, the President has made
the case that we believe that it is important for countries
that haven't stepped up for these programs that they step up
their commitment.
Mr. Cicilline. So I take it the answer is no.
We are here to talk about counterterror operations in
Africa. And you mentioned that 90 percent of our Ambassadors
are in place now, which is terrific. But I think you will agree
that counterterrorism operations in Africa and the Middle East
are inextricably linked. And my first question is do you think
you can achieve, or we can achieve our goals for the region
without an Ambassador in Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Jordan, Qatar,
Yemen without an Assistant Secretary for Near Eastern Affairs?
Mr. Sullivan. I am sorry, can we keep our policies----
Mr. Cicilline. Can we achieve our objectives without these
positions even being in place, doing the work that is required
of each of those Ambassadors and each of those Secretaries?
Mr. Sullivan. Each of those positions is filled and we are
doing the work. We could do it better if those positions were
filled with Senate-confirmed individuals.
Mr. Cicilline. But they are not filled with Ambassadors,
they are filled with acting individuals; correct?
Mr. Sullivan. Charges.
Mr. Cicilline. So, we have 50 percent of the positions in
the State Department and USAID where an individual hasn't even
been nominated for the position; correct?
Mr. Sullivan. I will take that number, yes.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay.
Mr. Sullivan. I believe that is roughly accurate, yes.
Mr. Cicilline. 50 percent. That includes the, all of the
Ambassadors I just mentioned and a number of additional
positions. Fifty percent. You know, we keep hearing, oh, it is
because the Senate is slowing down. The administration hasn't
submitted half the people for these positions that are
necessary. What is the delay?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, the delay in part is----
Mr. Cicilline. And how are we expected to do, advance the
work of the United States, and the national security interests,
and the diplomatic work? We can't engage in robust diplomacy
without diplomats. Do you agree?
Mr. Sullivan. I would agree with that. We have----
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. So I hope you will do everything you
can to encourage the President to actually appoint people to
these very important positions that the rest of the world is
wondering what we are doing and why we are not engaged. I hope
you will take that message back.
Next I would like to ask you about a very serious issue
with respect to child soldiers. There is serious concern in the
Congress over reports that Secretary Tillerson acted in
contravention of the Child Soldiers Prevention Act by not
listing Afghanistan, Iraq, and Burma among those countries who
use child soldiers. We know that the State Department's legal
advisor, every relevant office and bureau, and even our
Embassies abroad believe that these three countries were
required by statute to be listed but they were not.
As you know, the Child Soldiers Prevention Act requires the
State Department to list any country, even if it is believed
the countries were making progress, that used child soldiers
during the year, without exception. Can you tell me why
Secretary Tillerson chose to ignore the advice of so many State
Department experts and the framework of the Child Soldiers
Prevention Act and not list these three countries?
Mr. Sullivan. Based on the advice he got, he applied his
judgment applying the statute to the facts that were presented
to him, and made that decision----
Mr. Cicilline. So the advice he got was to the contrary, it
was to list the three countries. Do you know why he didn't?
Mr. Sullivan. I, he, as I say, he applied his judgment,
applied the law to the facts.
Mr. Cicilline. What does that mean?
Mr. Sullivan. That means that he applied his judgment based
on the recommendation he got, the materials that were presented
to him. It was his judgment to make.
Mr. Cicilline. Okay. Next, Mr. Sullivan, could you tell me,
I recently visited the Central African Republic and saw the
important work of the U.N. peacekeepers there. And I would be
interested to know what we can do to better support the U.N.
peacekeeping mission. I think in that particular place we are
at a very sort of tipping point, and that mission we want to
make sure is successful. And what can we be doing, what can the
United States be doing to better support U.N. peacekeepers to
be sure that they have both the training and the equipment that
they need to be successful?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, CAR in particular has been an important
topic for Ambassador Haley at the U.N. in working with the
Secretary-General to improve both the efficiency and
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations generally, but in CAR
in particular. It is a very important mission for us.
Mr. Cicilline. And my very last question, Mr. Sullivan.
A recent survey conducted by the U.N. Development Programme
found that 71 percent of respondents pointed to an adverse
interaction with state security forces as the factor that was
the tipping point in their decision to join terrorist
organizations. Aside from Leahy vetting and human rights
training, in what ways is the administration seeking to ensure
that partner militaries accused of human rights violations
pursue tangible measures of accountability for such actions?
Mr. Sullivan. As I testified earlier, accountability, not
just vetting of the organizations, the particular military
units or police units, but accountability, investigation,
prosecution, and accountability by the government of those
units is a key part of our program to ensure we are not
enabling organizations that violate human rights. And not only
just completely counter to our mission, which is to eliminate
the terrorist threat rather than create, as the statistics you
cite, having organizations that abuse people creates more
terrorists rather than reducing the number of terrorists.
Mr. Cicilline. I thank you very much. And I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Royce [presiding]. Thank you. We go to Adam
Kinzinger of Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I appreciate both of you being here today. I know it is
probably the joy of your week to look forward to coming and
testifying in front of Congress. But we love having you here,
and thanks for your service to your country.
A couple of quick points and then I will get to my
questions. The issue of Libya was brought up earlier by my good
friend. And I do want to make the point because I think it is
lost a lot. People say, well, look at Libya, intervention in
Libya failed. I think it was the post-Libya intervention that
failed. I think when you take out leadership and then you
basically walk away from a country there is no doubt you are
going to have issues with governance.
But I do like to point out the fact that compare Libya to
Syria. In Libya, as difficult as it is right now, and as
challenging as it is, there is not \1/2\ million dead Libyans
right now. And there is not a generation that is being churned
into refugee camps to the great extent that Syria is.
So I think when you compare the idea of intervention and
you look at Libya and you look at Syria, I would much rather
have Syria look like Libya than Libya look like Syria. I think
it is an important point. It doesn't mean we didn't fail at
follow-up. I think follow-up we did fail. We basically walked
away and said, here, fix it.
The other point I think, and I know it is kind of a
aggressive way to say it, but I think it is important. I think
this fight on terror, this war on terror is basically the
equivalent of a low grade World War III. And we are fighting an
enemy all over the world. We have been--I am a veteran of the
wars and so that, you know, I have been in the military now 13
or 14 years, and I expect that probably the next generation to
follow me is still going to have to fight this war to some
extent.
So, Mr. Sullivan, my question on that is when we look at
Africa and we look at the Iron Curtain of poverty, which I call
it, and you look at this kind of lost opportunity, today there
is 15 countries in sub-Saharan Africa where half of the
population is under the age of 18. And combined with that
tremendous youth bulge is the fact that about 60 percent of
Africa is unemployed or under the age of 25. And that
demographic represents the prime recruiting pool for terrorist
groups like Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab.
I was in Kenya and saw a USAID project where we built a
milk co-op and, frankly, gave villages opportunity and hope.
And they were extremely excited to meet me. They had never seen
Adam Kinzinger, but they knew I was a guy from the United
States Congress and they knew that we had changed their lives.
And it is in villages like that where you will never, ever be
able to recruit an enemy against the United States.
And so, Mr. Sullivan, that is where I consider your job
especially important is conflict mitigation, in denying
terrorists recruits around Africa. Given that this
administration has placed a huge priority in fighting
terrorism, how is the State Department working to address
underlying causes of radicalization, including lack of
political opportunity, political marginalization, economic
opportunity?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, it is extremely important for all the
reasons you say. And one thing that I would point out and
emphasize a point you made which is for our support--and I am
focused, I am thinking now of particularly in programs in Iraq
now--for large areas of Iraq that have been recovered from,
from ISIS we found that the most effective programs are the
small, are really small scale.
Large-scale projects we have wasted huge amounts of money
in Iraq, Afghanistan, elsewhere. Smaller scale projects on the
village level. And we have got a number of projects, a large
number because they are small but they total almost $150
million, for areas of Iraq that we need to contribute to
stability so that internally displaced persons can go back. But
the focus has to be on the local level.
These large macro projects, in my opinion, where we invest,
have invested billions it leads to corruption, graft, all of
that. Focusing on the local level where there is a real impact
on individual lives, that is where we need to be.
Mr. Kinzinger. That is why I hope maybe the State
Department can do a better job of, in essence, bragging about
those achievements because, look, I am fighting people in my
own party, some that want to zero out the entire State
Department; right? And I think on the other side of the aisle,
my friends over there sometimes think that any budget cut is
going to lead to chaos all around the globe.
What we want to do is have a State Department that is
efficient and effective. And so I think those small-scale
projects, conflict mitigation, a fight in a village in Iraq,
for instance, that never happened because we brought two sides
together and they learned to kind of live together is the stuff
that we need to talk and brag about.
Because I love DoD. I am a member of DoD as a reservist. I
just want to use them less. And because when you have to use
DoD it gets really expensive and people lose their lives. And,
frankly, me and my fellow pilots are kind of tired of having to
deploy all the time, but they are really good at what they do.
So, I want to thank you both again for being here. And I
would just encourage you to always think, in the State
Department to always think in terms of, and frankly anybody
listening, there is a lot of conflicts that are mitigated that
we never hear about. And I think it is extremely important that
you guys get that message out so the folks here sitting behind
can support it.
So thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Royce. We go to Lois Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Thank you. And thank you to the witnesses for
being here.
My concerns that I want to talk to you about today is the
impact on the women of the world--and I know specifically we
are talking about Africa--with some of the current action or
inaction of the State Department. And just to pick off, pick up
where Mr. Kinzinger, some of his comments which was that the
population of Africa over 1 billion, 60 percent under the age
of 25, 40 percent living in poverty, and obviously the poor
governance, corruption, economic exclusion. And I want to pick
up on the weak health systems. All which lead to terrorism and
the recruitment of especially young men to be terrorists.
And my concern is that there seems to be an obsession on
the Republican side and our President with abortion. And
because of that obsession and the failure to recognize that the
Federal Government does not fund abortion that we have taken
the gag rule too far, we have taken, we have defunded programs
at the U.N. which are cutting off health, reproductive, access
to contraception, access to AIDS prevention to the women of
these countries, which has large impact on what goes on. I am
sure you would agree with that.
So, my question to you is what are you doing about that?
You, I think you were here one time, or Secretary Tillerson was
here, he said there was going to be a review of the global gag
rule to include assessments of any harm caused by the politics
to women and the girls that receive U.S. global health
assistance.
I think I asked you about, I'm sorry, Mr. Sullivan, I asked
you about the downgrading of the Office of Global Women's
Issues. We still don't have an Ambassador and I still am
concerned about that. So I would like to have your comment on
those issues.
Mr. Sullivan. I will have to get back to you on the effect
of the gag rule. I will take that for the record and I will get
back to you.
We have--the process for selecting the Ambassador, we
identify the person but then they have to go through vetting.
It takes a while. That position is going to be filled. You have
my word on that.
Ms. Frankel. Okay, well, I appreciate that. In the
meantime, what about downgrading the office? You serve the
office--you report directly to the Secretary; is that correct?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Ms. Frankel. And now that position is going to be
downgraded?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, there were almost 70 offices, all of
which reported directly to the Secretary. So we have tried to
rationalize the system so that each of those offices is placed
in a bureau that would provide support to that office because
the Secretary, the Office of the Secretary is small, it is one
person. So we don't characterize it as a downgrade.
Ms. Frankel. Well, my concern will be the ability of that
bureau that you are talking about, the issues that involve
women are so diverse you can't, it is very hard to just put
them in one little pocket. And you are dealing with economic
issues. You are dealing with gender equality. You are dealing,
obviously, with health issues, with child marriage, with sex
trafficking, labor trafficking, all those issues that go across
a lot of different components of the State Department. I want
to be assured that this bureau is going to be able to access
all of those areas.
Mr. Sullivan. Certainly. And on my trip to Africa, in
Nigeria I saw all those issues. I went to a hospital, to a
clinic, a PEPFAR clinic that was HIV positive women with babies
born to them and because of PEPFAR their babies are not HIV
positive.
Economic empowerment, Secretary Tillerson has discussed
that. The value of a dollar invested in a woman yields so much
more that it is, it is really money well spent.
All those issues you raised are extremely important, and
particularly for our subject here which is Africa and
counterterrorism in Africa.
Ms. Frankel. All right. Well, just to let you know, we are
going to be watching that and hope for some good progress.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Okay. Mr. John Curtis of Utah.
Mr. Curtis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There has been a theme today expressed by a lot of my
colleagues about human rights. And I don't want to burden us
with further questions other than to express my own personal
concern and interest in this. And appreciate your efforts along
these lines.
I would like to ask Dr. Trachtenberg quickly, in your
opening remarks you said African solutions to African problems.
And I found myself wishing you had just a little bit more time
to expand on that. Would you take just a minute and tell us
what you meant by that?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Sure, Congressman. I think clearly it is
not our role, certainly not the role of the Department of
Defense to determine the outcomes for other countries in terms
of governance, in terms of some of the issues that have been
talked about here that serve as the underlying issues that lead
to radicalization or terrorism.
What we can do, and what we should be doing and what we are
doing is working with these countries to help provide a secure
environment so that they can then develop and establish the
forms of governance and society that are important to their
growth economically, politically, and what have you. We are not
trying to impose our solutions on others is really what I meant
there.
Africa is a diverse, large and diverse continent, over 50
countries there. It is, it is absolutely huge. And the history
of those countries, the cultures are all different. So what we
are trying to do is we are trying to get at the problem that we
are talking about here, countering terrorism and extremism in
order to provide a security setting where others like the
Department of State can come in and help assist those countries
develop their own indigenous solutions, keeping in mind that
each starts from a different place historically, culturally,
and what have you.
That is really what I meant. We are not trying to impose a
solution on them.
Mr. Curtis. All right. I think it caught my attention
because I think that is frequently an error we make in lots of
problems, and I wanted to emphasize that.
Thank you. I yield my time.
Chairman Royce. Okay. We have Ted Lieu of California.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for calling this important
hearing. I appreciate it. And thank you, Secretary Sullivan and
Secretary Trachtenberg for your service.
Did I pronounce that right, sir?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lieu. All right, thank you.
I would first like to start off asking you, Secretary
Trachtenberg, in your written testimony you stated that we need
a whole of government approach to defeat terrorism. Does that
include a State Department?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Lieu. And I just want to say that the proposed massive
cuts by Secretary Tillerson to the State Department, as well as
President Trump's failure to nominate individuals for high
level State Department positions have hurt U.S. national
security. If those things are not corrected it will further
hurt U.S. national security.
So, Mr. Chair, I would like to enter for the record a
letter to Secretary Mattis dated March 10th, 2017.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
This letter is from national security experts and former
government officials from across the political spectrum. And in
it they state that ``even small numbers of unintentional
civilian deaths or injuries, whether or not legally permitted,
can cause significant strategic setbacks. For example, civilian
deaths from U.S. operations can cause partners and allies to
reduce operational collaboration, withdraw consent, and limit
intelligence sharing, increase violence for militant groups,
and foster distrust among local populations.''
I support the Department of Defense operations around the
world to go after terrorists. I served on active duty in the
military. When it comes to terrorists, I believe we should hunt
them down and kill them. But we should also protect civilians
because it will harm our U.S. national security if we don't. So
I have seen troubling rises in civilian casualties across DoD
operations such as, for example, in Operation Inherent Resolve.
This is not a partisan issue. That started under the Obama
administration, civilian casualties started rising. It
continues today. The New York Times did a very large expose on
that.
And I have before me two Daily Beast articles I would like
to enter for the record as well at the appropriate time. And
the first one is dated November 29th, 2017. It is titled
``Strong Evidence that U.S. Special Operations Forces Massacred
Civilians in Somalia.''
The second is dated December 6th, 2017, saying ``On the Eve
of Congressional Hearings New Evidence about Alleged U.S.
Massacre in Somalia.'' And what the Daily Beast articles say is
that they did an investigation and they state that U.S. Special
Forces killed unarmed civilians in Somalia on August 25th. We
have been in contact with Africa Command. They deny that. And
they say they have done an assessment. Their assessment is that
those casualty figures are incorrect, that everyone that was
killed was essentially an enemy combatant.
So my question for you is is there going to be any further
investigation or assessment or is that, is that it? Is there
going to be any further?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Congressman Lieu, my understanding of
that incident and AFRICOM's response is precisely the way you
have described it.
I do want to make clear that we in the Department of
Defense take any accusations of civilian casualties very
seriously, and we work to avoid them at all costs. You are
correct, AFRICOM recently conducted and concluded an assessment
into this particular incident. The key finding from that was
that the only casualties suffered were those of armed enemy
combatants who had fired upon U.S. and Somali forces, and that
the allegations of civilian casualty, the charges of civilian
casualties were not credible.
I will be happy to look into your question in terms of will
there be a follow-on to this. But the information I have as of
this time supports the conclusions of AFRICOM that you have
mentioned.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
So, in light of this new Daily Beast article dated December
6th where they provide additional evidence, I strongly urge the
Department of Defense to conduct a further investigation as to
what actually happened on August 25th.
Mr. Trachtenberg. I will take that back.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you.
I have limited time remaining, so let me just again say
that I want to thank both you and Secretary Sullivan for your
public service and appreciate your being here today.
Chairman Royce. Congressman Darrell Issa of California.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Sullivan, I am
going to direct my questions primarily to you.
Currently, to use a term, you are dual-hatted. You have got
the management portfolio and the conventional deputy; correct?
Mr. Sullivan. That's correct.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And in your opinion--well, let me rephrase
that. The continent of Africa and its billion people have a
number of problems we have talked about today, including a
number of terrorist groups who now are aligning themselves with
ISIS, obviously human trafficking, and the like. It was
mentioned in opening statements that the Department of
Defense's budget to combat this is roughly equal to your
budget.
This is an area of great threat. It is larger than the
United States, meaning that relief efforts for our men and
women, your men and women of the State Department and
affiliated organizations basically, it is tough. Benghazi was
the closest point to Europe practically, and the relief effort
took more than 13 hours.
So I want to go through a couple of questions related to,
if you will, your management hat as deputy. I was recently,
Thanksgiving weekend, in Zimbabwe for the change that you only
get once every 37 years, so you take it when you can. And I
want to thank the State Department for working so hard to make
that mission possible.
I also toured the new facility there, a $220 million
facility arriving on time later next year. But I noticed that,
first of all, it is an expensive facility. It was built at
twice the size of our existing facility. And it was built based
on a decision made during the last administration, which was to
give up the standard design, in other words builds that are
cookie cutters that allow for faster and less expensive
facilities.
Since this committee and the appropriators give you a
limited amount of money, that facility, which took a long time,
cost $220 million, is an exception to the otherwise aging
facilities that don't meet Inman standards, that are not safe,
and they are, many of them, are in Africa. And although this
structure is beautiful and it has architect--by the way, it has
completely curved walls, continuously curved walls which turns
out to be really hard to do and a little bit impractical.
So, what will you be doing to return to a process in which
the dollars the American people invest specifically in
facilities and security go further, particularly in dangerous
areas like Africa?
Mr. Sullivan. A very important question, Congressman Issa.
And it is a phenomenon that we have seen, I have seen in the 7
months that I have been in office where the length of time it
takes for an Embassy to be--site to be picked, plans developed,
built, and so forth, our mission will often change.
For example, in Iraq we built an enormous Embassy in Iraq;
much of it we don't need now. So there is a lot we. We have had
a----
Mr. Issa. I was also in Baghdad----
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. A couple weeks earlier. And what
you, what you need is an overhead cover from things dropping
into that Embassy.
Mr. Sullivan. So it is very important. It is part of the
Secretary's redesign looking at OBO and our planning for
Embassies. It is a huge amount of money as a part of our budget
that we spend. And I have spoken to our IG about this, IG
investigations and how we have been spending money. Very
important issue, particularly if, as we have discussed a lot
today, the State Department budget getting cut or whether it
will, making sure that those dollars we spend on our Embassies
are spent effectively to promote the safety of our women and
men, but also that we have the right-sized Embassy, right size
building for the post we need.
Mr. Issa. So it is fair to say that one of the challenges
is these lead times under these custom designs is so long----
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. That often what you end up with is
not what you need by that time?
Mr. Sullivan. Eventually, that is right.
Mr. Issa. Obviously you are still looking at Britain. We
will talk offline at the problems of that billion dollar-plus
facility.
But one of the other last questions is would you consider
bringing to this committee for authorization a revised grand
plan of how you get to where every facility, at least in what
we would call high-stress or dangerous areas, can be upgraded
in a timely fashion?
In other words, I know with your budget you are looking our
decades and, you know, where Papua New Guinea is getting one,
places in Africa are not, would you consider bringing to us a
comprehensive proposal and then allowing that increased speed
with which you will be able to do it if you return to a
standard design platform so that this committee could consider
the additional funds leaped ahead to get us from a very
dangerous area in which the next Benghazi could happen at any
time, to an area in which the men and women who go around the
world on behalf of us could be secure?
And, Chairman, I appreciate the time but I would hope the
Secretary could answer.
Mr. Sullivan. Yeah, not only would I consider it, I would
welcome it and look forward to having that conversation with
you and members of the committee, including on our Embassy in
London.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Adriano Espaillat.
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Engel. Thank you for coordinating this hearing on the U.S.
efforts to counter terrorism in sub-Saharan Africa. I am glad
both the State Department and the Department of Defense are
here today.
Given the October ambush of U.S. military personnel in
Niger which took the lives of four U.S. soldiers, including
Army Sergeant La David Johnson, David Johnson whose body was
found days after the attack, as well as the expansion of Boko
Haram across Nigeria's borders, and even the current slave
auction crisis in Libya, I think that all these warrant a more
robust approach, more funding, more efforts both by the State
Department and Department of Defense to expand its regional
counterterrorism assistance programs in Africa.
We need to be investing more in our peacekeeping operation
and other State Department efforts like USAID. This is
necessary not just in Africa but in the rest of the world as
well.
Yet, we have seen the Department of Defense expand its own
engagement in sub-Saharan Africa and has spent over $1.7
billion for counterterrorism purposes in the past 10 years.
Secretary of Defense Mattis said if we don't fund the State
Department fully then we need to buy more ammunition
ultimately. And that is beginning to play itself out as we
proceed with these major proposed cuts. And we see that there
is plenty of truth to that statement. And so why would the
State Department cut its own budget?
I want to, Mr. Sullivan, go right straight to a question
which has really been troubling me for a long, long time,
because this crisis, the kidnap of the girls by Boko Haram
which--and I must commend Congresswoman Wilson for sort of
keeping the eye on the ball on that issue--once it left the
media has somewhat been buried. And what is the status of these
girls that are still held captive by Boko Haram? How many of
them do we know there's a possibility to rescue them, to get
them back? What is the current status of these girls kidnaped
by Boko Haram?
Mr. Sullivan. It was a topic, an important issue for my
trip to Nigeria, at our Embassy in Nigeria. And it may have
left the front pages of the newspapers here in the United
States but it has certainly not left the Embassy in Nigeria
which is focused very acutely on this.
There were, as you know, approximately 300 young women who
were abducted, some of whom have been rescued or released or
escaped. But there is a huge number that are still unknown. We
don't know where they are. We suspect that they are still held
captive. They may have been given as brides.
It is something that both the United States and the
Nigerian Government is focused very acutely on. I met with our
security staff at the Embassy. I met with our local staff,
local Nigerians who came up to me when I did a town hall to
tell me how important it was to them that we are not forgetting
about them and we are still working to track them and do all we
can to rescue them.
Mr. Espaillat. It just baffles me that we can probably put
a man or a woman on Mars soon and we can't find out where these
girls are. I am just very concerned that maybe too little too
late when we get to them. So, I would encourage both the State
Department and the Department of Defense to continue robustly
looking for them.
On the slave auction matter which is a horrible modern
slave trade story, is there anything you can share with us on
that? What is the magnitude of it? Who is involved in it? Who,
who are the slave owners in this?
We want to know who is engaged in this. Is there any, any
country or any sector of our society in a country that is
acutely and vigorously involved in this and benefitting from
this?
Mr. Sullivan. So, the focus is in ungoverned areas in
Libya. And I have already committed to get back to the
committee with a report on more intelligence, specific
intelligence that we could provide in a closed setting on what
we know about those who are, are involved.
But I would say the central problem is that these camps are
in ungoverned areas, in enormous countries with ungoverned
areas. And that also may explain why, to our first point that
we discussed about the young women who are still missing, there
are ungoverned areas where we don't have a lot of access or
intelligence. So it is something we need to work on.
Mr. Espaillat. What about our allies? For example, Italy
seems to be very concerned with the outlawness of Libya. And
they are having a serious migration issue in Italy, and across
Europe I may add because Italy will be the port of entry for
that migration coming from Libya. Do they have any
intelligence, do they have any information about this?
Mr. Sullivan. I have met with the Carabinieri, actually the
head of the Carabinieri to discuss the immigration problem from
Libya. This was several months ago. Italy has a very close
relationship with a number of groups in Libya and what is I am
sure a source of intelligence that we can rely on.
Chairman Royce. We need to move to----
Mr. Espaillat. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time.
Chairman Royce. Thank you very much, sir.
We need to move to Tom Garrett of Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to go
relatively quickly. Unless I address you, Mr. Trachtenberg, I
apologize, my question is directed to the Deputy Secretary. I
would hope that you would appreciate the fact that I have a
finite amount of time. And if it is a yes or no question, give
a yes or no answer.
On the Sudan, I have also been there, I would commend this
administration for the progress made in that country. And I
point out that by virtue of the fact that we have heard so many
doom and gloom stories from those who don't understand the
Vandenberg concept that politics stops at the water's edge. Has
Sudan historically in the last 30 years been a kind of bad
actor?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. And so, have they also been listed on the
State Sponsors of Terror List?
Mr. Sullivan. They still are.
Mr. Garrett. At some point they were accused of harboring a
guy named Osama bin Laden; correct?
Mr. Sullivan. They did indeed.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And they harbored FBI bomb plotters as
well back in the '90s; correct?
Mr. Sullivan. Many bad actors, yes.
Mr. Garrett. And so when I was there I had the opportunity
to meet with Mr. Atta, who heads NISS there, a very powerful
man. I was encouraged by some of the words and deeds. And while
there is a long way to go yet, we are making progress at
advancing human rights, religious freedom, and reducing their
role in terror in the Republic of the Sudan. Is that a fair
assessment?
Mr. Sullivan. That is.
Mr. Garrett. And so would you say that is a success story
of this administration on foreign policy?
Mr. Sullivan. Partial success, yes.
Mr. Garrett. Sure, there is a lot left to do.
And so you have also spoken to the reduction in funds as it
relates to the success of programs on small scales, things like
school feeding programs, and water purifications in villages;
correct?
Mr. Sullivan. The need for those and the small scale
programs are the most effective.
Mr. Garrett. It is a lot easier to lose money when we spend
lots of it than it is when we address a specific issue;
correct?
Mr. Sullivan. Well said.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And so I have been a champion of things
like school feeding programs. I would point out and ask you if
you agree that there is a reduction in long-term radicalization
when we see women get educations. Is that an accurate
statement?
Mr. Sullivan. I don't think anybody could deny that.
Mr. Garrett. And there is an increase in economic
achievement where we see school feeding programs and
articulate, educated women as well; correct?
Mr. Sullivan. I would think so.
Mr. Garrett. And these are things like McGovern-Dole
feeding programs that aren't massive programs but that we
should spread out as small programs. They work; right?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. So this is just a history for me.
I spoke briefly earlier of Arthur Vandenberg. Are you
familiar with Arthur Vandenberg?
Mr. Sullivan. I am.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And so you are aware that Mr. Vandenberg
was the chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and was
running against Truman we thought when he was encouraged to
attack Mr. Truman on foreign policy matters. Are you familiar
with the story?
Mr. Sullivan. I am.
Mr. Garrett. And Mr. Vandenberg said, ``I simply won't do
that because politics should stop at the water's edge.''
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. I am disheartened by the fact that that
doesn't appear to be the case today. I was taken aback, and in
fact wrote down the words verbatim of a member previously who
said, and I quote, ``Wherever you go anywhere in the world
people from State pull you aside and tell you how upset they
are, how they feel like the administration is really going
after the State Department.''
Did you hear that testimony earlier? Does that sound
familiar?
Mr. Sullivan. I believe a member said that, yes.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. What I would submit is that this is
actually the State Department going after the administration.
So let me ask you this: The people in State who are complaining
that the administration is going after them, who elected them?
Mr. Sullivan. Employees of the State Department are Civil
Service and Foreign Service.
Mr. Garrett. So they are not elected by the people of the
United States.
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Garrett. And who are they held accountable to?
Mr. Sullivan. They are held accountable to the Secretary.
Mr. Garrett. And he works for?
Mr. Sullivan. The President of the United States.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And is policy making vested in the
individuals who complain about how they are being treated by
the administration?
Mr. Sullivan. I----
Mr. Garrett. They are not policy makers, correct, they are
executioners of policy?
Mr. Sullivan. It is hard for me to answer that because of
defining who a policy maker is.
Mr. Garrett. Well, I will submit this: I wore the uniform
of the United States military for a number of years and
oftentimes I was told to do things that I didn't necessarily
agree with on my ideological scale, but so long as they were
lawful orders that didn't violate the international laws
governing the actions of military force I executed those orders
without complaining to Members of Congress when they showed up,
say for example, in the dining facility at Camp Dobol in
Bosnia-Herzegovina.
And so I would ask you if you would be willing to convey to
the members of the State Department that they were not elected,
that they are not policy makers, that they are executioners of
policy, and so long as the policy that they are asked to
execute does not violate international laws that they should do
their jobs or find some other place to go.
Now, I say that with respect and regard to the fine
professional individuals from the State Department who helped
me extract nine Christian refugees from the Republic of the
Sudan earlier this year. There are wonderful people at State.
But when an administration changes it is not your job to grab
us by the sleeve and complain that you don't think the
President is treating you well. It is your job, as Tennyson
said, to do your job.
And, finally, are you familiar with the statement made
earlier in this hearing where an individual said it seems to be
a Republican obsession with abortion? Do you recall that test--
that question, line of questioning?
Mr. Sullivan. I believe so, yes.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. I would submit that perhaps it is not an
obsession with abortion but an obsession with protecting the
preeminent, God-given, human right which is the right to life.
And I would submit that the obsession is on the part of those
who believe that U.S. foreign policy hinges on funding
abortions of people in the developing world.
And so, candidly, I thank you for the good work you are
doing. I appreciate the progress we are making in places like
the Republic of the Sudan. I appreciate the great help that we
receive from people in the State Department. But if you don't
agree with the policies coming out of the administration,
please convey to the members of the staff that might disagree
they should run for President.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
We go to Mr. Bradley Schneider of Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. And again thank you to the
witnesses for spending your time with us today and sharing your
perspective. I am, likewise, going to spend most of my time
with you, Mr. Sullivan. No disrespect to Mr. Trachtenberg.
There are many reports out that say there are many
vacancies within the State Department. Just as an example, the
Ambassador to South Korea is vacant. There are reports out that
morale is low. And you are hearing it from former policy makers
who would know and have a perspective.
We are managing in a world at a time when there is ever-
increasing danger, ever-increasing complexity managing a
larger, growing, significant number of priorities with a
smaller staff and a requested smaller budget. So my question to
you, Mr. Sullivan, is as you look at the world, as the State
Department looks at the world as you are trying to manage your
resources, what priorities have had to be moved to the outer
ring or the back burner?
Mr. Sullivan. Our priorities, defining our priorities----
Chairman Royce. Mr. Sullivan, are you sure the button is
pushed, sir?
Mr. Sullivan. My apologies. It is my first--I usually
forget to do that more often in a hearing. This is my first
error. I apologize.
We have defined our priorities as protecting the United
States, promoting security of the United States, and also
promoting U.S. economic prosperity, two principal, two
principal goals of this administration. Everything else flows
from that: Supporting our allies; working to address threats,
whether it's the DPRK----
Mr. Schneider. So let me reclaim my time. And I appreciate
that and protecting the United States' interests----
Mr. Sullivan. Yes.
Mr. Schneider [continuing]. I would posit is more of a
mission statement than priorities.
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Schneider. Within those priorities are there places
around the world where we are going to dedicate more resources,
whether it is working to make progress in Sudan, which I
commend you for the progress that has been made. But we have
concerns about what is happening in North Korea. We have
concerns about losing ground to Iraq--or to Iran rather in
Syria and Iraq and Yemen. We have concerns about what is
happening in Latin America.
The best way to fail is to try to do everything all at once
with unlimited resources. We don't have unlimited resources. We
are pulling back resources. And so I would hope that within the
broad context of the world with increasing challenges, we are
putting at the top of the list the most significant, most
important priorities, but with limited resources some have to
drop.
So, my question is what priorities are being pushed down
the list because of loss of personnel, lack of resources,
decisions to say that this is not where we are going to put our
resources today?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, there is a process that is managed by
the White House, the National Security Council, to prioritize
our security and our foreign policy. And that process is
ongoing in this first year of the administration.
It is hard for me to say. There isn't a, there isn't a
process that says we are not going to do X, Y, or Z. And it is
hard for me sitting here to say we are not going to do
something because we do have posts, you know, we are in 190
countries. We cover the world. So, we do cover everywhere.
Mr. Schneider. Right.
Mr. Sullivan. So it is difficult for me to answer.
Mr. Schneider. I hear you.
Mr. Sullivan. But the thrust of your question----
Mr. Schneider. I mean, the concern, and I think this has
been shared by many others with far more experience in foreign
policy than I have, including former Secretaries of State, is
that with the decision not to fill spots, with the decision not
to commit resources we are putting at risk some of our
interests and putting at risk America.
But I want to change gears for 1 second and go back to a
conversation you had with my colleague from Rhode Island. He
asked you about the report in the context of the Child Soldiers
Prevention Act. And you asserted to Mr. Cicilline that the memo
and the decision to exclude three countries, Afghanistan, Iraq,
and Burma followed that. But there is a, through the proper
channel, the dissent channel, a memo that says that that was
not correct, that these three countries, Afghanistan, Burma,
and Iraq have recruited, have used child soldiers.
And if it is okay, I would like to have this included in
the record. But could you touch on that a little bit?
Mr. Sullivan. Sure. I am aware of the dissent channel
message that you have mentioned. My description was the process
that the Secretary went through 6 months ago when that decision
was made, what he did. There has been a subsequent dissent
channel message which you have which the Department responds
to.
And I don't know, given the timing, whether the Department
has submitted a response to that. But the usual process is that
there is a response from the Department when a dissent channel
message comes in because we take those very seriously.
Mr. Schneider. Okay. And, again, just emphasize the concern
that the Secretary is not listening to some of the people who
are in the field who have an understanding. This was a broad,
this wasn't just a few people, there were many people who
signed on to this dissent memo. And without objection I would
ask that this is included in the record.
Chairman Royce. Without objection.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Royce. Thank you.
Mr. Steve Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I first of all want to apologize for not being here for
most of your testimony here today. We had the FBI Director in
Judiciary; had to be over there for that and came back.
But since she is still here, I would like to give credit to
my colleague from Illinois Robin Kelly for introducing, along
with myself, some legislation awhile back, the Protecting
Girls' Access to Education Act, which passed this committee
thanks to Chairman Royce here, and went to the Floor and passed
the full House of Representatives. And the Senate is
considering it right now. We hope we will get this to the
President's desk.
And in essence what this does is it says that in conflict
areas, and God knows we have those in Africa, obviously Somalia
comes to mind and others, it seems like a good idea to
prioritize education and emphasizing that for children,
especially girls but boys as well, so that we are able to give
them the opportunity, alternatives to the extremism that
exists, obviously oftentimes radical Islamic fundamentalist
extremism, but other extremisms as well, and abuse that occurs,
a whole range of abuses. And so I think it is great legislation
and I want to once again publicly thank Ms. Kelly for her
leadership on that issue.
And would just ask the State Department are you aware of
the legislation? Are you considering the implementation of it
once it is passed by the Senate and signed by the President?
And are there other education initiatives that the State
Department currently has that could be beefed up in conflict
areas to help too? And obviously, you know, this is only one
small aspect when you are talking about the overall battle
against extremism. But, Mr. Sullivan, if you could just
comment?
Mr. Sullivan. I am aware of the bill. I don't know that
there has been a SAP or an administration or even a Department
view on it. It sounds like a terrific idea to me. But that is
just me speaking.
Be happy to take that back and seek more formal views for
that for both of you.
Mr. Chabot. Yes, we will make sure that our personal staffs
and the committee staff get with the State Department folks to
make sure that you are ready when it passes. I understand that
there is lots, thousands of bills that get----
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Chabot [continuing]. Introduced all the time. This one
actually made it through the Floor. It is bipartisan. I think
it has a great chance over in the Senate.
Mr. Sullivan. Sure.
Mr. Chabot. And would be, at least play small role.
Mr. Espaillat before was talking about a couple of things
that I have also over the years been concerned about, and I
know the public has been. Seems that there is an ebb and flow.
When the media is interested in it people find out about it,
they think it is horrible, they want to do something about it.
You hear it for a few days or a few weeks and then it kind of
goes away. And one of those is, obviously, Boko Haram and the
kidnaping of the 300 girls.
And you already talked about it at some length. But I, I
share his frustration on this. And you expressed that also, Mr.
Sullivan, so I am not going to again go into it in great
length. But there are things which happen in Africa which are
just horrific. The Lord's Army with Joseph Kony is another one
that got the attention of people on the Internet for a while
there. But ultimately what happened? Did they bring the guy to
justice? Did they destroy the army, et cetera?
And there was a military aspect to this. So I don't know
if, Mr. Trachtenberg, if you wanted to talk a bit about what we
are doing relative to these types of groups that are a danger
not only to those countries but can, because they do cooperate
with terrorist groups, whether it is ISIS or anybody else, if
you could just talk about how our military forces are engaging?
And maybe we are more active on that than perhaps we once were.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Well, Congressman, just generally let me
reemphasize the point that our engagements with partner
countries are done to bolster, primarily to bolster their
capacities to provide for their own security and to deal with
situations such as the one you described. I would say that what
DoD does and how DoD operates, we are essentially an enabler.
And I say that, in fact I would say we are a double enabler.
On the one hand, our operations with partner countries are
designed to enable their forces, their militaries to provide
security and to deal with the threats that they face. I say we
are a double enabler because on the other hand I think what we
are doing and attempting to do helps to enable our interagency
partners as well, including the State Department. And the issue
of NGOs was mentioned earlier. But that is critically
important.
And I think the one thing that I am taking away from this
hearing so far is the clear emphasis on the need for and sort
of an intergovernmental approach to dealing with these issues.
It is crystal clear. Our role is a part of that at DoD but in
no means an exclusive, an exclusive role.
Mr. Chabot. Exactly right. If I could just conclude, that
is why it is so important I think that our military folks and
our State Department work together. And ultimately is what is
in the best interests of the U.S., and that generally is we get
constituents that will communicate, why do you care about fill
in the country? You need to be working here.
Those things that happen over there can affect us right
here. And oftentimes when our military is involved it is a
relatively small number of people and we are working to make
those indigenous forces able to handle the terrorism so that it
is over there and dealt with and not here on American soil.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Chabot. I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Robin Kelly of Illinois.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to my
colleague.
I did want to follow up on what my colleague said because
we had a meeting with Ambassador Haley and she talked about
despite all the suffering, the hunger, the sexual assaults, and
on and on and on, when they ask the, particularly the young
people what they want and they say an education. So they see
that as their ticket out of that situation.
The United States and the Government of Niger recently
agreed upon a memorandum of understanding that would allow the
DoD to arm U.S. drones currently stationed in that country. And
yet AFRICOM has stated the U.S. military does not have an
active, direct combat mission in Niger. There seems to be a
disconnect in some way.
What is the time line for arming U.S. drones in that
country? And how and under what authorities will they be used?
And either one or you or both of you can answer.
Mr. Trachtenberg. I cannot address the specifics of that
question here, Congresswoman, but I would be happy to take that
one for the record.
Ms. Kelly. Okay, thank you.
And then, Mr. Sullivan, many of the security cooperation
programs and activities include State Department involvement in
the decision making process. Given all the vacancies that we
have talked about over and over in the State Department, do you
feel that State is having its voice heard during the
interagency process? Do you feel like there is enough people
there to speak at the table?
Mr. Sullivan. Yes. And to address your question in two
ways, first, specifically at post where there is coordination
between the Ambassador, the Chief of Mission, and the U.S.
military in Africa would be AFRICOM. There has been
extraordinary cooperation between, for example, our Ambassador
to Libya and General Waldhauser.
So, at post I think there is--and it is something that both
Secretary Mattis and Secretary Tillerson stress a lot to
everyone who works for them, so I think that is filtered down
through the chain. Our voice in the interagencies here in
Washington is something that I am largely responsible for,
participating in the deputy's committee meetings at the, at the
White House, along with my colleague and partner here Under
Secretary Trachtenberg.
But the question, your question really gets to why we need
those positions filled. And I want to correct a misimpression.
We in this administration, we in the State Department didn't
set out to leave these positions unfilled. We haven't done a
good job of filling them for a number of reasons, including
slow in picking nominees, slow in getting them through the
vetting process. And then we run into the challenges with the
Foreign Relations Committee.
So, I discussed with another member earlier, I forget who
asked or cited a figure that 50 percent of the slots are
unfilled. I would say probably of that 50 percent, 40 percent
we have a person identified. For example, I can't announce the
person's name because the person hasn't been announced yet, but
we have a person picked to be our Ambassador to South Korea.
But they haven't gone through the clearance, and they have been
in the clearance process it seems like forever.
Ms. Kelly. I wanted to ask specifically for the Trans-
Sahara Counterterrorism Partnership, is funding and attention
still being focused toward justice sector support, counter
radicalization programs, and public diplomacy efforts? And are
there any successes that you would like to share? Because I do
agree with what my colleague from Illinois said that we need to
hear more about, you know, the good things and the successes.
Mr. Sullivan. I will have to get back to you with that to
provide. I want to provide precise information, numbers and
facts, which I have an impression but I want to give you
precise information. So, if I could, I will take that for the
record and get back to you.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. And I yield back. And thank you very much.
Mr. Sullivan. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go to Dina Titus of Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for being
here.
In addition to being on this committee which I enjoy very
much and I value, I am a member of the House Democracy
Partnership. We work with our legislative colleagues around the
world in developing democracies, including Kenya and Tunisia,
to help build democratic institutions and encourage civic
engagement. Our work, though, has to be backed up by USAID and
the State Department. So when we see those programs being
diminished, that hurts what we are trying to do.
My colleague from Virginia seemed to suggest that the
people who are concerned about what is happening in the State
Department are just a bunch of carping employees. And that is
certainly not the case. I meet with diplomats and
parliamentarians from the around the world, and they
consistently, no matter where they are from, tell me how
concerned they are about the U.S.'s diminished role in world
diplomacy.
So, I want you to know that we believe those are real
concerns. And we are hearing them not just from the employees
of the State Department but from world leaders from all parts
of the globe.
I have a specific question though, and either one of you
can answer. And I appreciate it.
Earlier this year the U.S. decided to terminate what was
called Operation Observant Compass that was to counter the
Lord's Resistance Army in Central Africa. And I am curious to
hear if that decision has created a security vacuum in that
part of the world where U.S. military used to operate and if
that security vacuum has led to an increase in poaching and
illegal ivory trade and trafficking.
In November the President and our Interior Secretary Zinke
announced the administration's reversal of a ban on the
importation of ivory that came from Zambia and Zimbabwe. That
has been stopped, thank goodness. And I commend our chairman
for weighing in on that and thank him very much. But we know
that there has been shown a link between illegal poaching and
ivory trafficking to gain funds to support terrorism. I just
wish you two would comment on that and see if there is anything
being done about it.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Congresswoman, let me start on the
termination of Operation Observant Compass. There is little
that I can say to you on that other than it is my impression
that it has not created a security vacuum. But I do not have
the details here and would be happy to go back and try to
gather a little more information on that.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I would appreciate it.
Mr. Sullivan. I would just add that one of the factors that
we considered in our decision to partially lift sanctions on
Sudan was the Government of Sudan's cooperation in our pursuit
of the LRA. I would defer to DoD on where that stands.
But the other point I would make is transnational criminal
organizations, those that traffic the way you described, they
do support terrorism and they are a scourge. And we need to
address them.
Ms. Titus. Do you have any specific plans to do that?
Mr. Sullivan. Well, we have, for example, for narcotics
trafficking----
Ms. Titus. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan [continuing]. We have, in the Western
Hemisphere, we have a number of programs--INL, a bureau at the
State Department--a number of programs to address that. But in
sub-Saharan Africa wildlife trafficking is a problem that you
have identified. I can't say that we have devoted all that we
should to address it, but it is not just a crime and
participated in by transnational criminal organizations, but
that money finds its way to bad actors who harm us in other
ways.
Ms. Titus. Well, I would like to see you take a little more
effort to address that because I think it was, as you say, that
it is funding some of these terrorist activities, and you would
be doing well by doing good.
Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. We go to Mr. Brad Sherman of
California.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Sullivan, your department spends pennies
compared to Mr. Trachtenberg's department spending dollars, and
one of the major efforts of your department is that we don't
have failed states. When we are successful in that, then Mr.
Trachtenberg doesn't need to get involved. Which is why I would
point out that when it comes to our foreign aid we gave foreign
aid to Germany and France in the '40s. Today they are donor
countries. We gave foreign aid to Taiwan and South Korea in the
following decades. Seems like foreign aid might be a very good
investment.
The one thing I would like to focus on in foreign aid is
that in many countries--and I don't have a list in front of
me--if you want to send your kids to school you have got to pay
for the books. Now, that is the rule at American colleges, but
it is the rule in first grade in a lot of countries. And it
occurs to me, and I hope you will go back and look at this,
that if we paid for the books, first, we would have some say in
the content. I am not saying that you ask the San Francisco
School Board to tell you what the content should be but we
would have some say in the content.
And, second, it is kind of hard to steal a book, especially
in a country where due to the generosity of the United States
school books are free. What are you going to do if you steal
the book?
And then the third thing in foreign aid is what I call flag
on the bag. We often give bags of food. And often I have talked
to foreign aid workers and they say, look, you are giving food
to people, but 1 out of 20 people we are dealing with hate the
United States. If we put the flag on the bag we have got a
problem, we got this or that, so they hide it. Whereas, and of
course they shouldn't be doing that. If we are paying for the
books, you put the gift of the people of the United States
right there on the front page. You know, even if somebody
crosses it out, that just emphasizes it.
So I hope you will go back and look at that both in terms
of books is a good way to invest. And I realize that I am old
fashioned. I like books, paper. So the same concept would apply
with----
Mr. Sullivan. I was having that same thought.
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. I prefer books but they probably want
tablets.
Mr. Sherman. There are still millions and millions of
dollars----
Mr. Sullivan. Exactly.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. That people, poor people in
Africa are paying to buy paper books for this so their kids can
go to elementary school.
Let's see. Mr. Trachtenberg, the previous administration
publicly released both the presidential policy guidance
establishing procedures for approving direct action against
terrorist targets and a comprehensive report on the legal and
policy frameworks guiding the use of military force. Do these
documents reflect the current administration's policies? If
anything has changed, will you release updated versions of
these public documents?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Congressman, I appreciate the question. I
would like to get back to you, if I might, with a more
definitive answer on that.
Mr. Sherman. You are burdened by the fact that I have been
here a long time. And every time, almost every time someone
says that I get back a nonsense answer.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Well, I would----
Mr. Sherman. Something that says, Congressman, we want to
show you we are dedicated to helping the American people and
the world.
How comprehensive and clear and definitive is your future
answer going to be?
Mr. Trachtenberg. That is I understand the question,
Congressman. I do not have the information now to be able to
provide you with a detailed answer.
Mr. Sherman. Can you commit to a detailed, clear, and
definitive answer----
Mr. Trachtenberg. I can commit----
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. In a reasonable amount of time?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I can commit to go back and to find the
answer to the question and see what can be provided to you.
Mr. Sherman. You can see why asking me to accept your non-
answer is subject to some concern. I don't think that we
subpoenaed you here. I don't think we can force you to answer
the question. But I think the people in this room are aware
that you are refusing, that you are not willing to answer the
question now, and they will all be looking for your written
answer.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Part of it, Congressman, is I think what
you are asking for is a level of detail that I am not yet, that
I do not yet have a full understanding but----
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Now, what I----
Mr. Trachtenberg [continuing]. I would like to have an
understanding of.
Mr. Sherman [continuing]. What I hope that you don't do is
say, oh, it is classified, because you can get us a classified
answer, too. But I will point out that the Government of the
United States has officially released the fact that there are
5,000 to 6,000 U.S. troops in Africa. And there is a host of
other either widely reported by respectable sources or
officially reported.
So I hope can you get back to me within 2 weeks?
Mr. Trachtenberg. I am happy to work with you and your
staff to get back to you with a detailed answer, as detailed as
we can provide in order to address your question.
Mr. Sherman. I hope it is definitive. And we haven't worked
personally together. Just so many other people sitting in that
seat have failed to provide answers in the future. So I hope
you change, hope you restore my faith in that chair. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Mr. Gerry Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome to both,
welcome back, Mr. Sullivan.
Mr. Trachtenberg, I am following up on my colleague and his
concern that all too often we will have to get back to you for
the record translates into deflection, and not-on-your-life,
and it will be gobbledygook if it is anything at all. You were
asked by my colleague Karen Bass of California a reasonable
question, how many troops do we have in Africa?
Now, there are published reports that say 5,000 to 6,000.
Can you confirm that? And if not, is it classified?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Congressman, the public number is between
5,000 and 6,000. That is correct.
I think my earlier hesitation was based on the fact that I
didn't want to get into specific numbers vis-a-vis specific
countries.
Mr. Connolly. Okay.
Mr. Trachtenberg. But you are exactly right on that issue.
Mr. Connolly. All right. So the range is accurate?
Mr. Trachtenberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Sullivan, I had the opportunity to talk about terrorism
in the Maghreb at a speech I gave at CSIS this week. And it
forced me to come think about, well, what are the elements we
need in the counterterrorism strategy to be effective?
And I was very gratified at your opening statement or how
you closed your testimony by saying that we believe that
traditional counterterrorism efforts alone are not enough.
Economic reform, good governance, and a respect for human
rights must be prioritized. That was a very heartening thing to
hear.
And just to kind of engage you a little bit on that, one of
the things I really believe we have made a mistake on
historically as a country, arguably for what we thought were
better reasons, is that we ignore the need for pluralistic
political space. The Shah of Iran is a great example. So the
Shah says, ``I don't want you talking with the political
opposition,'' to our Embassy, to our intelligence people, and
we respect it. And as a result, you know, we haven't got a clue
what is really going on in the country. And the only
alternative to the authoritarian regime of the Shah is Khomeini
and his crap.
And had maybe we had a little more elbow room in order to
encourage other political expression, perhaps that wouldn't
have been the only alternative. And I think we repeated that
similar mistake during the Mubarak years in Egypt.
And we are looking now at the Maghreb, we are looking at
Africa, we are looking at a lot of strongmen governments, how
do we avoid making the mistakes of the past? What? Do you agree
that political pluralism is also part of that good governance
we have just got to foster and encourage?
Mr. Sullivan. Undoubtedly. It's the sign of strength in the
society of a culture. And you may not know this, I was smiling
when you described the Shah. My uncle Bill Sullivan was the
last U.S. Ambassador to Iran, so it may have been his failure.
I apologize on behalf of my family if we weren't doing as good
a job as we should have been.
Mr. Connolly. I think it was really a U.S. failure and no
one individual.
Mr. Sullivan. Right.
Mr. Connolly. And I think we were trying to respect a
strong----
Mr. Sullivan. Absolutely.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. Ally who was going to make the
Persian Gulf, you know, but we didn't see the Shia revolution--
--
Mr. Sullivan. That is right.
Mr. Connolly [continuing]. And the effect of it and how it
spread.
Mr. Sullivan. Exactly.
Mr. Connolly. And it is simply not in our interest to,
frankly, honor those kinds of requests.
So let's take Africa, which is what we are talking about
today. Any hopeful signs in this regard in terms of good
governance, civil society, political pluralism?
Mr. Sullivan. So two of the countries that I went to,
obviously mixed records but not all bad. Tunisia, serious
economic problems; they have got to get their economic house in
order. Budget deficit, they need a lot of economic help. But
their government, their commitment to democracy, it is real.
Nigeria, Buhari, the President has got health issues,
there, there are good prospects there. But there are challenges
as well.
Mr. Connolly. Yes.
Mr. Sullivan. Parts of the government and the military, as
you well know, where we have got issues.
There are bright spots. There aren't a lot but there are
bright spots. And we need to encourage them. We need to show
progress. And then we have precedents that we can cite to
others.
Mr. Connolly. There is one other thing I--I mean I have
other things--but the other thing that I would highlight just
for this purpose, I am running out of time and feel free, both
of you, to comment but I will address it first to you, Mr.
Sullivan, I am worried that we don't seem to yet have our arms
around the appeal on social media of the ISIS, al-Qaeda,
radical narrative. It seems beyond us that anyone would be
attracted to give up their whole lives and go fight and miss
their lives, and so forth, but they do, in the thousands.
And the only way to address that is to A) knock down the
narrative convincingly and have an alternative narrative that
is equally or maybe more attractive. I wonder if you could just
comment on how well do you think we are doing? What do we need
to do with respect to social media?
And with that, Mr. Chairman, of course I will yield back my
time. But I think it is a very important aspect of the
counterterrorism fight. We are not doing well.
Mr. Sullivan. Agreed. We have established a Global
Engagement Center to try to address this issue. We address it
in two ways. The mission has expanded. We haven't--it was
originally established to address the issue you have raised for
ISIS, al-Qaeda use of social media. As a result of what
happened with Russia and the impact on the election, it has now
been expanded to state actors as well.
So my concern is that we are broadening the mission of the
Global Engagement Center when we really haven't gotten it
focused on the more limited but extremely important topic of
ISIS, al-Qaeda, those terrorist organizations which are using
social media to recruit displaced, disadvantaged, disillusioned
people. And I would say--you said thousands, I would say tens
of thousands. A serious problem.
I would defer to my colleague.
Mr. Trachtenberg. Congressman, I would agree with
everything that Secretary Sullivan has said. And, in fact, his
citation of the Global Engagement Center I think is one of
those areas where both the State Department and the Department
of Defense have worked well and collaborated together. But I
would agree more work is needed.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Connolly, and Secretary
Sullivan and Under Secretary Trachtenberg for your testimony.
As we have heard, State and the Defense Department provide
critical training, equipment, operational support for our
partner forces in Africa. So coordination between your agencies
is going to be critical to success on these fronts. And our
development of those systems is essential.
The costs of our engagement on the continent in this battle
against Islamists and other terrorism can be high. And we
appreciate our servicemen and women and diplomatic personnel
serving in very difficult and risky circumstances. But the
threats are real, and our national security demands that we
don't ignore them.
As a reference here the comments made by my friend Mr.
Connolly, he mentioned governance. Well, we have an election
coming up in Liberia. It is critical that these elections be
free and fair. We all understand the cost in the past under
Charles Taylor of what happened in Liberia and West Africa. And
now we have an opportunity to build on some measure of success.
So this requires our engagement.
And again I thank you both. And the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:08 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
