- ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS AT THE UNITED NATIONS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS AT
THE UNITED NATIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-68

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/
or
http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-046 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

WITNESS

The Honorable Nikki Haley, U.S. Permanent Representative, United
States Mission to the United Nations, U.S. Department of State.     4

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

The Honorable Nikki Haley: Prepared statement....................     7

APPENDIX

Hearing notice...................................................    64
Hearing minutes..................................................    65
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York: Material submitted for the record.......    67
The Honorable Adriano Espaillat, a Representative in Congress
from the State of New York: Material submitted for the record..    68
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Virginia: Prepared statement..........    71
Written responses from the Honorable Nikki Haley to questions
submitted for the record by:
The Honorable Eliot L. Engel...................................    73
The Honorable Ted Poe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas...............................................    98
The Honorable Albio Sires, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New Jersey......................................   105
The Honorable Jeff Duncan, a Representative in Congress from
the State of South Carolina..................................   107
The Honorable Gerald E. Connolly...............................   110
The Honorable Ann Wagner, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Missouri............................................   113
The Honorable William Keating, a Representative in Congress
from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.......................   115
The Honorable Francis Rooney, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Florida.........................................   118
The Honorable David Cicilline, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Rhode Island...............................   120
The Honorable Ami Bera, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................   127
The Honorable Robin L. Kelly, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Illinois........................................   132
The Honorable Bradley S. Schneider, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Illinois..........................   133
The Honorable Adriano Espaillat................................   139
The Honorable Ted Lieu, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California..........................................   141

ADVANCING U.S. INTERESTS AT
THE UNITED NATIONS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 28, 2017

House of Representatives,

Committee on Foreign Affairs,

Washington, DC.

The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:00 a.m., in
room 2172 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Edward Royce
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Chairman Royce. This hearing will come to order. Today, we
consider the role of the United States at the United Nations.
In her first few months, Ambassador Nikki Haley has
approached her job with determination and purpose.
Chairing the U.N. Security Council in April, she
spotlighted the grave security challenges of North Korea and
nuclear proliferation and the threats that that poses to us.
She has castigated Iran and Hezbollah for their role in sowing
instability across the Middle East. And Ambassador Haley has
made it crystal clear that the U.N. Human Rights Council's
record of protecting dictators cannot stand. Indeed, as
Ambassador Haley has declared, the United States' role at the
U.N. is to ``show our strength, show our voice, [and] have the
back of our allies.'' I think that is well said, Ambassador.
The United Nations is charged with the ambitious mission to
``maintain international peace and security'' and to ``achieve
international cooperation in solving international problems.''
But, unfortunately, the organization all too often falls short.
U.N. organizations continuously debate issues--but too often
take no meaningful action.
As Ambassador Haley has eloquently described, U.N.
organizations like the Human Rights Council give dictators and
human rights violators a platform to attack Israel. In addition
to calling for the U.N. to end its bias against Israel, she has
made crystal clear that the international body can no longer be
used to promote anti-Semitism.
I was pleased to see Ambassador Haley recognize that
``human rights and conflict are directly connected,'' in her
words. From my standpoint, I think regimes that don't respect
the citizens over which they hold power--or visitors like Otto
Warmbier--won't respect their neighbors, and won't respect
international agreements.
Given its terrible human rights record, it is no surprise
that North Korea is determined to deploy international nuclear
ballistic weapons technology, and that threatens the region and
it threatens the United States. Meanwhile, companies and banks
inside China continue to provide critical hard currency to that
regime. The United Nations has passed good Security Council
Resolutions on North Korea--spurred by U.S. legislation that we
passed in this committee--but solid enforcement is needed.
As we will hear today, the President's budget proposal
includes significant reductions in U.S. funding of the United
Nations and its agencies. U.N. peacekeeping has played a
critical role over the years in advancing U.S. interests and
should be prioritized, in accordance with U.S. law. The recent
deaths of peacekeepers in South Sudan and in Mali remind us of
the dangers they face. But peacekeeping would find more support
if failing missions--some decades old--were closed and the
horrendous sexual abuses tackled head-on.
This committee has pushed to improve the U.N.'s
transparency and accountability, advancing protections of
whistleblowers and bringing U.N. peacekeepers that are sexual
predators to the bar of justice.
Ambassador Haley, we look forward to hearing how we can
support you working to improve transparency and accountability.
This committee stands ready to assist in your difficult tasks
ahead.
And I'll now turn to the ranking member for his opening
remarks.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Madam Ambassador,
welcome to the Foreign Affairs Committee.
I have watched you in the short months that you have been
Ambassador. I hope you are enjoying my hometown of New York--
best place in the world--and I have watched you with admiration
in terms of how you have been conducting yourself.
As I said to you in the room before we started, we pride
ourselves on this committee in being the most bipartisan
committee in the Congress. The chairman and I have worked very
hard to do that. Where there are disagreements, there are
disagreements but we all share the same goal.
And, of course, the United States is the world's biggest
superpower. We believe that we have a lot to offer the world
and want to continue to work with all the countries of the
world.
I was disappointed in the budget. I said this to Secretary
Tillerson as well. It cuts our support for key peacekeeping
efforts in the United Nations by nearly 40 percent.
Peacekeeping missions help people who have been driven from
their homes by atrocities in South Sudan. U.N. peacekeepers are
now protecting nearly \1/4\ million civilians in places like
Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire.
Missions are scheduled to closed soon because they have
been so effective in building stability and security. We have
traditionally invested a little more than the minimum required
in peacekeeping and that's what I think an indispensable power
should do, which is what we have done. That is to show the
world we are a big hearted country that wants to see people all
around the world live healthy, prosperous lives.
American personnel are not deployed by these efforts. Our
men and women aren't put in harm's way. These initiatives help
prevent and resolve crises so that we don't have to intervene
militarily and they do it for eight times less than it would
cost to send an American soldier.
So burden sharing--I know we talk about burden sharing. I
believe these efforts are the definition of burden sharing. The
administration is also seeking to completely eliminate American
support for the U.N. development program, for disaster relief
coordination, for U.N. Women, for the U.N. Population Fund, for
UNICEF support for children living in the most desperate
circumstances--100 percent reduction--I think that needs to be
changed.
The U.N. has its problems. No one disputes that. We talked
for a little while about some of them. I personally think the
way Israel is blamed and bullied by U.N. members is terrible.
As I told you before, the so-called Human Rights Council has
the worst human rights abusers on that council and it is the
epitome of gall, or chutzpah, as we say in New York, to think
that they can sit and look in judgement of anybody given the
fact that they have the most abysmal human rights records in
the world. It almost makes it a little bit like Alice in
Wonderland.
But I do think American leadership is urgently needed to
help shape Security Council resolutions and initiatives in
other U.N. bodies, and, when appropriate, use our veto to
counter this imbalance.
But walking away from our commitments isn't the right way
to affect the reform that we all want to see. I believe these
cuts would send a deeply troubling message to U.N. members that
the United States no longer wants to be a global leader on a
whole range of issues, that we are willing to cede the ground,
excuse me, to whomever steps into our place. And I can't
imagine a more harmful course.
If we want our values and our priorities to be the values
and priorities of other countries then withdrawing from
multilateral engagement is a grave miscalculation. And make no
mistake, Beijing, Moscow, Tehran, and plenty of others will be
more than happy to see us back away. So I am glad that Congress
will have the final word on the budget issues.
I remain deeply concerned about the number of other areas
where American foreign policy is going off course and how that
affects our ability to work with other governments through the
U.N. I hope your testimony will address some of these problems.
And let me say, as I told you before, I look forward to
working with you. You have approached this job with a zest and
a verve that has been refreshing. We will from time to time
have policy differences. But I think we all stand for the same
thing, obviously, and that's what we have tried to do in the
Foreign Affairs Committee.
So, welcome. I look forward to your testimony and I look
forward to your tenure as U.N. Ambassador.
I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Thank you, Mr. Engel.
I now yield to the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Jeff
Duncan, to introduce our witness today.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is a pleasure for me to introduce my friend, Ambassador
Nikki Haley, to my colleagues. A South Carolina native,
Ambassador Haley graduated from my alma mater, the 2016
national football champion, Clemson.
(Laughter.)
Mr. Duncan. I'm shameless, guys. Shameless.
Ambassador Haley made her career as a trailblazer. In 2004,
she became the first Indian-American to hold South Carolina
public office when she won a seat in the South Carolina
statehouse, where I served with her for 6 years.
In 2010, she was elected the first female as well as the
first minority governor of South Carolina. In her tenure as
governor of South Carolina, Ambassador Haley brought investment
and jobs from all over the world.
South Carolina now holds more than 1,200 operations of
international firms, which employ more than 131,000 South
Carolinians. A lot of this investment was directly tied to
Governor Haley's efforts, especially in businesses in Europe
and in Asia.
On November 22nd, 2016, the President-Elect, Donald Trump,
picked her to become the United States Ambassador to the United
Nations, where she continues to strongly represent American
interests on the world stage.
Ambassador Haley, welcome to Congress and we look forward
to your testimony. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. And welcome, Ambassador. Without objection,
the Ambassador's full prepared statement will be made part of
the record. Members will have 5 calendar days to submit any
statements or questions or any extraneous material for the
record.
And I would ask you, Ambassador, if you could summarize
your remarks.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE NIKKI HALEY, U.S. PERMANENT
REPRESENTATIVE, UNITED STATES MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Haley. Thank you very much. And to my friend,
Jeff--go, Tigers, and thank you for that introduction.
Chairman Royce, Ranking Member Engel, and distinguished
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss advancing U.S. interests at the United Nations.
Five months and three days ago, I was sworn in as U.S.
Ambassador to the United Nations. I came into this position at
a time when many Americans felt a deep sense of betrayal at the
U.N. in the wake of the passage of Resolution 2334.
At my confirmation hearing, I made the following promise.
If I am privileged to be the U.S. Ambassador, I will never sit
passively while America's interests and America's friends are
run down at the U.N.
Five months later, I can say that I haven't been quiet on
the issues important to the United States. And I can say this:
I have kept my promise. Our friends and our rivals know that
America has once again found its voice at the United Nations.
The international community is now very clear about what the
U.S. is for and what the U.S. is against.
It wasn't long after my confirmation that my promise was
put to the test. In early April, the Syrian regime dropped
chemical weapons on Syrian children. We forced the Security
Council to hold an open emergency session, which some member
states didn't want. We drew a red line. If the U.N. would not
act collectively, the United States would act alone, and we
did.
We have brought new accountability to the North Korean
regime. When North Korea continued its illegal missile tests,
we brought all the nations of the Security Council together,
including China and Russia, to impose new sanctions.
Even as we focus on North Korea's nuclear and missile
threat, we also continue to highlight the barbaric human rights
violations the regime is committing. Otto Warmbier's death
brought home to Americans the brutality that North Koreans have
known for decades.
The same clear voice we have used to take on our
adversaries we have also used to support America's values and
America's friends. Thanks to U.S. leadership, human rights are
at the forefront of the U.N. agenda. For the first time ever
during the U.S. Presidency of the Security Council we convened
a meeting dedicated solely to the protection of human rights
and their relationship to conflict.
We made the case that human rights violations and conflict
are directly related. History has played out that when
governments don't respect the rights and voices of the people,
conflict will soon follow.
We have also called out the U.N. Human Rights Council for
legitimizing human rights violators at the expense of their
victims. We have put forward reforms to make the council what
it was meant to be: A place of conscience for nations and
justice for victims. I traveled to Geneva earlier this month to
make it clear to the council that continued U.S. participation
is contingent on adoption of these reforms.
On a related note, the U.S. mission now refuses to tolerate
one of the U.N.'s most disreputable and dangerous habits:
Obsessively bashing Israel. We forced the withdrawal of a false
and biased report and we have steered the Security Council's
monthly debate on the Middle East away from unfairly targeting
Israel and toward the true threats in the region, such as Iran
and Hamas.
In the areas in which the U.N. has real value, we have
built on its good work. Peacekeeping is one of the most
important things the U.N. does. We are reviewing every one of
the peacekeeping missions with an eye toward ensuring that we
have clear and achievable mandates.
We are also working to ensure that troops are ready,
professional, and committed to the safety of civilians on the
ground. Troops in the U.N. peacekeeping mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, for instance, have long faced
charges of sexual abuse and other serious misconduct. We
inserted clear instructions into the mission's most recent
mandate to enforce performance standards for troops. There is
no place in any U.N. peacekeeping mission for predatory and
abusive troops.
Our peacekeeping reforms are aimed at producing more
effective missions for vulnerable citizens. We will hold
governments accountable to their responsibility to protect
their own citizens while also cutting down waste and
inefficiency.
We have adapted the mission in Haiti to changing conditions
on the ground and are on target to save at least $150 million
for the year.
We will continue our reform efforts when we take up the
peacekeeping mission renewal this month in Darfur, Sudan. Our
efforts will hold the government accountable to improve
humanitarian access.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for this opportunity to highlight
our efforts to reassert U.S. leadership at the United Nations.
It is hard to believe it has only been 5 months since I
moved my family to New York to begin this exciting and
challenging new chapter. I look forward to more progress in the
months ahead and I welcome your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Haley follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

----------

Chairman Royce. Well, thank you, Ambassador Haley.
Let me start with this point. This week, the White House
issued a firm statement, a warning to Syria, after it was
picked up that Assad, his regime was preparing, potentially,
for another chemical weapons attack.
You amplified that message yourself. Have we seen Assad's
regime take any steps in response to that warning?
Ambassador Haley. Well, I can tell you that due to the
President's actions, we did not see an incident. What we did
see before was all of the same activity that we had seen prior
for the April 4th chemical weapons attack.
And so I think that by the President calling out Assad, I
think by us continuing to remind Iran and Russia that while
they choose to back Assad, this was something we were not going
to put up with.
So I would like to think that the President saved many
innocent men, women, and children.
Chairman Royce. Let me ask you a question on the U.N.
Security Council resolutions that were passed with respect to
North Korea. We are a few years away from North Korea having an
ICBM capability that can reach the U.S. and we have this
question about enforcement.
We have a second bill in addition to the sanctions bill--
which I and Mr. Engel passed formally and that was signed into
law--we have a second bill to try to close any additional
loopholes.
Specifically, what we are trying to do is to stop the use
of forced labor by North Korea where they'll have workers sent
to the Middle East and other countries and instead of the
workers being paid, the money goes right back into the bank
account of the North Korean regime and is used on its nuclear
weapons program.
So we are trying to cut off that hard currency and trying
to cut off some of the hard currency that comes out of Beijing
that subsidizes the regime even with the sanctions that the
Security Council has passed.
Can you tell us, if we had enforcement, what would be the
impact on North Korea's regime and their ability to move
forward with this nuclear weapons program?
Ambassador Haley. The more pressure we put on North Korea,
the better. You are dealing with a paranoid leader who thinks
that we are trying to assassinate him, who thinks we are trying
to do regime change, who keeps his public in the dark, only
hearing what he wants them to hear.
And what we need to remember is that he is building a
nuclear program and you are more optimistic saying it is
multiple years before an ICBM comes forward. I think it is
going to happen sooner because they are on target to do that
and they continue to use their people for those violations.
So I would welcome any sort of pressure that you could put
forward to slow down that process of nuclear development.
Chairman Royce. Well, I think this is so critical.
Secretary Mattis has said that North Korea is the number one
threat, from his standpoint, and I think key also is to get the
Senate to take action now and I would suggest immediately. That
bill has been over there for some time.
I also wanted to ask you about the Human Rights Council and
how your efforts to change this system to competitive voting
rather than regional rotation in order to make sure that the
Human Rights Council ditches some of its old procedures and
ditches the anti-Israel focus.
I mean, we had 70 resolutions against Israel and very few
to touch on Iran, or rather, human rights abusers around the
planet. How is that going?
You sat down with many Europeans when you travelled over
there to make this pitch to those governments. Can you give us
an update on that?
Ambassador Haley. Yes, and I can give you an example that
will bring it very close to home.
We have seen terrible things happening in Venezuela and we
continue to be very, very concerned. And so I called for an
emergency session in the Security Council for Venezuela and my
colleagues were not appreciative of that because they said it
wasn't a peace and security issue and that it needed to be
heard at the Human Rights Council.
The problem is that the Human Rights Council never heard
this or condemned Venezuela because Venezuela sits on the
council along with Cuba and Saudi Arabia and China, and the
list goes on.
So I didn't want to send a statement from New York. I
thought it was important that I went in person. I explained to
them that this can't be a place bad actors go to to protect
themselves and point fingers at others. I told them the Agenda
Item 7 that picked on Israel, those issues can go to Agenda
Item 4. Many of them agreed that it discredited the Human
Rights Council. I do think we were heard and I do hope that
there's a change.
Chairman Royce. Thank you. My time has expired.
I go to Mr. Eliot Engel of New York.
Mr. Engel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to piggyback on the question about the Human Rights
Council.
First of all, let me say, Madam Ambassador, I heard your
speech at AIPAC and I thought it was a very fine speech. What
so aggravates me about the U.N. Human Rights Council is that
they have the nerve, as I said before, to try to sit in
judgement of anybody else.
People should be investigating them for the worst human
rights abuses and they do it to their own people as well.
The U.N. Human Rights Council has targeted Israel ever
since its creation. They have Agenda Item 7. It is a permanent
agenda item targeting Israel. It is the only country-specific
agenda item at the council. Obviously, it is ridiculous and
unfair and the membership of the council is an embarrassment to
the U.N. Some of the members engage in the worst abuses.
With all the problems of the council, I do recognize that
because of U.S. leadership the council has begun to shift its
scrutiny to some of the world's worst human rights violators.
According to the American Jewish Committee's Jacob Blaustein
Institute, U.S. participation has improved the council's
treatment of Israel to some degree and shifted some of the
council's focus to human rights violations in North Korea,
Iran, and Syria.
At the same time, according to Hillel Neuer of U.N. Watch,
the 2006 through 2009 U.S. boycott of the council, and I am
going to quote him, ``did nothing to prevent the council from
continuing to cause damage.''
So I have a couple of questions about this. What steps do
you propose taking to remove Agenda Item 7 from the council's
agenda and reform criteria for membership of the council? I
abhor conferring legitimacy on any entity which discriminates
against Israel or is so one-sided, but I worry, on the other
hand, if the U.S. withdrew from the council things could
actually get worse.
So I would like you to comment on that too--what would be
the impact of U.S. priorities, including the protection of
Israel, if the U.S. were to withdraw from the U.N. Human Rights
Council?
Ambassador Haley. Well, thank you, Mr. Engel, and that is
my dilemma, which is are we better off being on the Human
Rights Council with all of these bad actors where it is very
hard to give the council any credit or do we do our own human
rights fights outside of the council.
That is what remains to be seen. The reason I went there
was because I thought it was important.
In reference to Agenda Item 7, when I met with the like-
minded members of the council, they admitted that Agenda Item 7
was embarrassing. They admitted that it discredited the
council. They admitted that they thought it needed to come off.
What we found is there are three main groups that continue
to use Agenda Item 7. It is the Egyptians, it is the Saudis,
and it is Pakistan. So those are the three.
Everyone else has shifted to Agenda Item 4. We actually
think that the Palestinians would be okay if we shifted to Item
4 if we talked to those three groups. So that is my focus now,
trying to talk to those three groups to see how we can shift
them off of Agenda Item 7. The truth is if somebody wants to
bring Israel up for a violation that can happen under Agenda
Item 4.
But if you don't have an agenda for North Korea, you don't
have it for Syria, you don't have it for Venezuela, it really
is nothing more than abusive to have it on Israel, especially
with all the threats in the world.
And so I think they took this seriously. I am continuing to
have meetings on this. We met with Commissioner Zeid and told
him that we needed his help on this front when it came to that.
He agreed, and he felt like it was doable.
So it is going to take a full court press and I am going to
need all of you to help in terms of pushing that narrative that
we really want to do that. I think they don't want us to leave
the Human Rights Council.
We have just said there have to be competitive elections.
We have to make sure that it is not already decided who is
going to be on there and then we have to get the General
Assembly to not vote for these bad actors. It happened last
time Russia ran and Russia lost. That was a huge moment because
typically, the P5 always win an election but that was due to
what they were doing with Ukraine.
So there is a possibility of change. We just have to be
very aggressive about doing that.
Mr. Engel. Thank you. My time is almost up, but I wanted to
reiterate some of the things I said before. I get just as angry
at the U.N. as anybody when you think that they take us for
granted.
But I don't want to cut off my nose to spite my face. The
United States' presence at the U.N. is very, very important and
I worry about the President's proposed budget cuts to U.N.
funding and I wish that the administration would take another
look at that.
Nine of your predecessors signed onto a letter in support
of the continued payment of U.S. voluntary and assessed
contributions to the U.N., saying the cuts weaken our hand,
alienate allies, and cost us more over the long run. I wonder
if you could quickly comment on that.
Ambassador Haley. My job was to go in and see if I could
find value in the U.N. That was the directive all of you gave
me. That was the directive the President gave me.
There are a lot of places that the U.N. is very effective.
There is a lot of fat around the edges and some abuses that
happen at the U.N.
But I do think it is very important that we make the most
of it and I will tell you that, from the President's budget,
keep in mind that that was more of making a point. It was
making a point that he wanted to strengthen the military and it
was putting the United Nations on notice, and it worked. And I
have used that as leverage because now we are seeing a lot of
the other countries come forward and say yes, we should do
reform.
When it comes to peacekeeping reform, they have worked with
us on every single renewal to change it to make it smarter, to
make it better work for the people.
When it comes to management reform, they are working with
us on changing it. So I really do think the message was
effective and my hope is that I can be your conduit in terms of
working from the President's budget to where you all have to
make some decisions to help exactly what I think is important
in order for us to continue to have a strong voice at the U.N.
Mr. Engel. Thank you.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen of Florida.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning, and thank you.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Welcome, Madam Ambassador. You have done
an admirable job in your first few months and have demonstrated
strong leadership at the U.N.
I also want to commend you for your forceful words against
the Maduro regime. Thank you for speaking out so strongly in
support of the Venezuelan people.
Things have taken a turn for the worst. Just in the last 24
hours, as you know, there was a helicopter attack targeting the
Supreme Court by Maduro, and Maduro-controlled armed colectivos
surrounded the National Assembly. So the violence is
escalating.
And thank you to Mr. Deutch for bringing up Venezuela with
the Secretary-General yesterday. What actions are you
considering to hold Maduro accountable at the U.N.?
Are you considering Security Council actions or sanctions?
I know it is a difficult environment for you. How can we put
pressure so that Maduro at least allows humanitarian assistance
to help the people?
And let me just quickly touch on two other topics, Madam
Ambassador.
I have introduced legislation over the years that exposes
problems and offers solutions on UNRWA, particularly the
incitement issues, the ties to Hamas from its employees, and
the fact that U.S. taxpayer dollars are used to support this
violence.
UNRWA's mandate was extended, lamentably, through June
2020. How can Congress help to shift UNRWA's mandate to the
U.N. High Commissioner of Refugees? Because three more years of
this is unacceptable.
And lastly, the Human Rights Council is in the process of
creating a black list, a database for supporters of BDS to use
to target Israel's interest.
Where does this database effort stand right now and what
are we doing to kill this effort and prevent it from doing harm
to Israel? Thank you, Madam Ambassador.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
So, first, on Venezuela, because the Human Rights Council
would not hear the issue on Venezuela, we had the emergency
Security Council meeting in New York.
But then when I went to Geneva, we had a meeting outside of
that to just discuss Venezuela's issues to bring it home to the
Human Rights Council that they needed to do this.
The region very much didn't want us to talk about it and
said that this would make things worse. But as you saw with the
OAS, when they attempted to talk about it, Venezuela got out of
the OAS and then recently the OAS met again and they----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And we didn't have the votes.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. And they were unable to do
anything.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. That's unbelievable.
Ambassador Haley. So I can tell you, we need to keep the
pressure on Maduro. There are signs that he is now going to
start using his military and use weapons and anything you've
seen on TV----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. He has been doing that.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. It is so much worse. It is a
terrible situation. And so as much pressure as we can continue
to put on Maduro that we are watching.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Almost 80 people dead, thousands
arrested, thousands in jail.
Ambassador Haley. It is horrible. They just----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. And he is acting with impunity.
Ambassador Haley. They just want to be heard. They just
want to be heard, and it goes back to any government that
doesn't listen and take care of their people, conflict will
follow. It is a direct correlation.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Please keep acting on behalf of the
people.
Ambassador Haley. And we will continue to do that.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. On UNRWA and BDS?
Ambassador Haley. So on UNRWA I will tell you I actually
went and visited an UNRWA camp when I went to Israel----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Yes.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. And the Palestinian area. I
asked about the books and what we were seeing. They think they
have gotten it down. They said the problem comes into the
culture versus what we think is incitement. They are continuing
to work on it. We are continuing the pressure on----
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Baloney.
Ambassador Haley. We will continue to do that. I do think
that we need to look at UNRWA in a way that we expect more of
them and put pressure on them so that we can get the changes
that we need to have--changes in what they consider to be a
refugee, changes in any textbooks on incitement, changes in
Hamas members teaching in the schools. There is work to do. I
will say that there is also good that comes out of UNRWA. What
they do with the schools and the health care you do see value
in it. But I think we just need to continue to pressure them on
the things we want to see changing.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. And on BDS?
Ambassador Haley. The concern on UNRWA is they are now
trying to get assessed contributions in the U.N. and we are
fighting that back desperately.
On BDS, it is something I spoke about in Geneva and said
that it was a problem. I am very concerned. I am very concerned
that we may not be able to defeat this.
But we are trying extremely hard to show that this is
something that cannot happen. As governor in South Carolina, we
were the first state to fight it off.
I know how dangerous and abusive this would be and so we
will continue fighting this the whole way through.
Ms. Ros-Lehtinen. Thank you. Keep kicking butt. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Brad Sherman of California.
Mr. Sherman. Madam Ambassador, thank you for your work on
behalf of the people of South Sudan, your briefing on April
25th, and I hope you are able to achieve our objectives there.
I also want to thank you and join with my colleagues on
thanking you for your efforts to refute and to halt the U.N.'s
obsessive tendencies with unjustified attacks on Israel.
I hope that you are pushing inside the administration to
get them to fill the empty boxes on the organization chart.
Now, Rex Tillerson has praised the people who are filling the
acting positions--you know, Acting Assistant Secretary, Acting
Under Secretary.
My wife has been with the State Department for 20 years,
all over. You can't get policy direction from somebody who's
got the big word ``temporary'' on their door.
Until we get those positions filled with people that
reflect where the administration wants to go, we won't have
foreign policy in the hundreds of areas that you and the
Secretary of State can't personally address.
The world is better when the United States is involved. We
are involved in the United Nations. We are not necessarily
going to be paying our dues or our share of peacekeeping.
Is it easier or harder for you to do your job if we don't
pay our dues?
Ambassador Haley. Okay. Thank you for that.
Yes, we will continue to work on South Sudan. I will be
visiting there in the fall to deal with it head on.
Israel--I will continue to call them out every time that
happens.
I hear you on the State Department and what you told
Secretary Tillerson. We have worked really hard to fill the
roles at U.S./U.N. and are almost there. So thank you for that.
In terms of the peacekeeping budget, what we did was----
Mr. Sherman. Both the peacekeeping and the dues budget.
Yes.
Ambassador Haley. Peacekeeping and----
Mr. Sherman. My question was both. We have our general U.N.
dues. The line item for that in the President's proposed budget
is cut 27 percent.
Ambassador Haley. Right.
Mr. Sherman. Peacekeeping 37 percent. Does that diminish
your ability to do your job or does it make your job easier?
Ambassador Haley. No, my job has worked well because I have
used that as leverage. With every single renewal what we did
was we looked at the political solution. We asked, is it
working--is it actually helping the people on the ground?
What they have done in the past is with challenged areas,
they would just send more troops to it. Well, if the troops
aren't trained and the troops don't have equipment, it is not
going to be effective. So what we have now done is changed the
mandates to make sure they are smarter.
Mr. Sherman. Ma'am, I've got to cut you off there because
I've got this list----
Ambassador Haley. Well, let me just tell you this. We just
negotiated the peacekeeping budget last week and I was so proud
of my team because we cut it by $\1/2\ billion and that was
with the support of everyone----
Mr. Sherman. But now that it is a budget you like, should
we contribute our allotted share?
Ambassador Haley. I think that you could comfortably go to
25 percent and know that we will be okay.
Mr. Sherman. Twenty. Russia--we have a bill that passed the
Senate to impose sanctions on Russia and Iran. It has its
congressional review provisions.
I have been here a long time. The only way we got the
sanctions on Iran was to overcome efforts of the last two
administrations who wanted either no sanctions or wanted the
administration to be able to just wave a wand and say, well, we
don't like them so we are not going to do them.
Is the administration lobbying to change the congressional
review provisions of the Senate-passed Iran-Russia sanctions
bill?
Ambassador Haley. I am not aware that they are lobbying for
anything. I do know that they are reviewing it.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. Other administration----
Ambassador Haley. They also renewed recently the sanctions
on Russia in reference to Ukraine. Those were renewed last
week.
Mr. Sherman. Other administration officials have testified
that they haven't spoken with the President regarding Russian
interference in last year's election. Have you talked to the
President about that?
Ambassador Haley. I have not talked to the President about
that. And, look, I think the best thing that can happen is for
those investigations to play out quickly.
I have no reason to think that there was any sort of
involvement between the President and Russia and----
Mr. Sherman. I am going to try to move on to one last
question. The U.N. Security Council Resolution 2231 bans or
deters Iran from testing ballistic missiles. Is the Security
Council incapable of addressing Iran's violations of that
resolution?
Ambassador Haley. Well, we are going to push hard to
address it. They have tested. They have launched ballistic
missiles and now we are seeing that they are sending off
weapons and things to bad actors and so yes, we have to
continue to address that. The problem is Russia will always
veto it.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Chris Smith of New Jersey.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning.
Mr. Smith. Thank you for convening this important hearing.
Good morning, Madam Ambassador. Thank you for your strong and
effective leadership. It is principled.
I know, talking to many of the diplomats in New York, how
respected you are. You have absolutely made a mark and you're
deeply respected up here. So thank you for that leadership.
There is no better friend or diplomat or otherwise for Israel
and we thank you for that as well.
Yesterday, Rex Tillerson, Secretary of State, rightly
designated China as a Tier 3 country--the Chinese Government,
the worst violator for sex and labor trafficking.
I want to thank you, the administration, for making that
bold and, I think, long-missed call. For years we have been
asking China, whether it be sex trafficking, somewhat
attributable if not largely attributable to the missing girls--
62 million missing girls because of sex-selection abortion.
There is no other parallel in the world, and on labor
trafficking, whether it be North Korea or the problems of just
exploiting workers through what was thought to be a reform of
the laogai system, which didn't really happen. Thank you for
that designation. It is very well accepted.
Let me ask you about Liu Xiaobo. Obviously, a Nobel Prize
winner who has terminal cancer. He is still in China. He is out
of prison, we are told, getting medical care and I know the
administration has already asked, through our Ambassador, that
he be allowed to come here and get treatment along with his
wife, who has suffered de facto.
Whatever you can do, and I know you have a good working
relationship, even though I am sure you butt heads occasionally
with the Chinese Ambassador.
Let him come and let him come now, please. So I would ask
you for that.
Let me ask you, too, on the Special Envoy to Monitor and
Combat Anti-Semitism, that post has not been filled. I am the
one who offered the amendment in the year 2004 to establish it.
It remains unfulfilled and rightly so the American Jewish
groups are very, very upset by that omission. Fill it. Put the
people in there. Don't double hat it, I would ask,
respectfully.
There is so much of a rise in anti-Semitism and it is
needed now and that person, whoever he or she may be, can walk
point on trying to stop this terrible hate that is on the rise
around the world.
Let me also just say thank you. Karen Bass and I were in
South Sudan just a few weeks ago. I was there earlier in
August. We met with Salva Kiir and the change in UNMISS is
remarkable.
They were a garrison military, U.N. deployment, that sat
and did nothing when the Terrain compound was attacked,
including a woman from my own district who was sexually abused.
They just sat there, did nothing.
We now, through your great leadership, have a very
effective, much more robust, mandate by UNMISS. So I want to
thank you for that leadership and I know you worked hard on
that.
On famine, and you might want to speak to this, we are
concerned. Both Karen Bass and I were in refugees camps, two of
them, and one IDP camp in Unity State, and there are shortages,
particularly in Uganda.
There was a 50 percent cut in food and I know there is some
$990 million that has been appropriated in the appropriations
bill. Our hope is that it does not carry over into next year.
It needs to be spent now. These people, mostly women, 85
percent of the people in the camps are women or children, they
are in desperate need of food security and food aid. So please
make sure that money gets out.
And finally, on WIPO--I know we are running out of time--
but last year we had three of our subcommittees--including
Ileana Ros-Lehtinen's--held a hearing on illicit transfers to
rogue states of North Korea and Iran by the World Intellectual
Property Organization and its Director General, Francis Gurry.
Gurry retaliated against the whistleblowers who exposed the
wrongdoing and today we have people who have lost their jobs at
the U.N. because they did the right thing.
Please--this is a injustice. This has to be corrected. I
ask for your personal intervention on that.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
So in reference to the person being held in China, letting
them go, we are all on it at different levels of the
administration. That is moving. In terms of the envoy for anti-
Semitism, we welcome all the help we can get because I agree
with you on that.
In terms of South Sudan, we are seeing baby step progress
in that area but it is a baby step. We continue to work on
that. Like I said, I will be visiting in the fall to speak with
President Kiir myself on behalf of the United States to see if
we can put some pressure there. Also, know that South Sudan has
fallen off the famine list but it is still food insecure. It is
still very volatile. It is still a vulnerable spot.
Famine is on our radar across the board in all four of the
regions that we need to be looking at and so we are watching
that closely and working on that. And yes, WIPO--we continue to
work with them and work on issues that come up and we will
always do that. So please feel free to contact me any time.
Chairman Royce. Greg Meeks of New York.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Ambassador, I am actually stunned at the response
that you just gave back to Mr. Sherman that you've never spoken
to the President of the United States about Russia's
involvement in our democracy, never talked to the President of
the United States. We have to deal with Russia and the biggest
question that we have had recently is Russia's involvement and
what they have done to our democracy and for not to have had a
conversation with the President of the United States about that
involvement is absolutely shocking to me.
Secondly, you mentioned the word betrayal in your opening
statement. Well, I want you to know that that's an appropriate
word to describe what I am hearing from my constituents and
fellow Americans and our allies all across--at home and abroad.
They feel a sense of betrayal because of the way that the
Trump administration has diminished America's leadership and
global standing. Our allies have expressed their sense of
betrayal and mixed messages coming from the President and I
believe this budget proposal is a betrayal of our nation's
interests.
So while you mentioned a sense of betrayal regarding a
single U.N. resolution, I hope you recognize the deep sense of
betrayal that many Americans are feeling right now as the
administration pursues a path of isolation.
Recent Pew polling shows that America's global image has
been significantly hurt by President Trump. One exemption--
Russia. They have confidence in him. And I know that this
matters when it comes to diplomacy and our ability to
successfully engage internationally.
You mentioned earlier about human rights. Yet, when the
President went to Saudi Arabia there was no mention of human
rights. When he went to Egypt there was no mention of human
rights. When he met with the Chinese there was no mention of
human rights. When he had the Russians in his office giving
away national secrets there was no mention of human rights.
So I am concerned about--yet, when he went to Europe where
our allies are, he was critical of them and criticized them.
So it seems to me that the actions of the President of the
United States will make your job a very difficult job because
you're supposed to be working with everyone and with the
decrease in confidence in the United States, it seems to me
that that would complicate your job to advance our national
interests.
And then it seems as though we are not sure when you say
one thing and the President comes back and he says something
else.
So how do you handle situations in which the White House
contradicts or overrides something you have publically said or
the Secretary of State has publically said as regards to U.S.
policy?
Who determines what that U.S. policy is? And given all
this, especially with the Pew polls, that's going on it seems
as if we have lost a lot of our leadership around the world.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you, Mr. Meeks, and I want to know
what coffee you're drinking this morning because I need to
start drinking that.
First of all, let us go through because I want to answer
all of these. These are very important questions. First of all,
with Russia--my conversations with the President are very much
how you have seen me bash Russia on Ukraine.
You have seen me bash Russia on Syria. You have seen me
call out Russia if we see any sort of wrongdoings by Russia
and, yes, I do think Russia meddled in our elections and, yes,
I have said that to the President.
So having said that, I haven't asked the President any
further questions because I just--it is not something that is
on my radar. I don't get asked about any of those things at the
United Nations.
So I am very focused on my work in New York and that has
never come up once. There are no issues with Russia that have
come up once by any member state in the U.N. and so that is the
focus.
U.S. leadership and our global standing--Mr. Meeks, we have
really put a strong voice of the U.S. at the U.N. I mean, they
know we are back.
They know we are strong, and I will tell you when the
action took place to strike Syria the number of Ambassadors
that came to me and said, it is so good to see the U.S. leading
again. Very important.
Mr. Meeks. Did we lead? We pulled out of the Paris
agreement.
Ambassador Haley. Okay. I am going down your list.
Mr. Meeks. Okay. I am just talking about how we are pulling
out.
Ambassador Haley. I understand.
Mr. Meeks. We pulled out of a number of international--we
have a President that has indicated that he wants to do
bilateral, no multilateral, agreements. That he has no
confidence in multilateral organization.
Ambassador Haley. He supports me at the U.N. and he
supports what I am doing at the U.N. When you talk about human
rights, I was the first person to ever bring up human rights at
the Security Council.
I went to Geneva to talk about human rights. I have been on
it in terms of Venezuela, what is happening in South Sudan, all
that. The President supports me on that.
So when you talk about different views and those things
that are happening, we are on the same team. For me to talk
about it, he is supportive of that and so----
Mr. Meeks. You have said it. The President hasn't.
Ambassador Haley. I work for the President and I don't go
rogue on the President. He is very aware of what I am doing. He
is very supportive of it and I can tell you that in all of
these issues we are not apart on it.
He believes as strongly on the things I talk about as
anyone else and I would invite you to come to the United
Nations so you can see for yourself the strength the U.S. is
showing there because it is strong, it is heard, and it is
valuable.
Chairman Royce. We are going to go to Mr. Dana Rohrabacher
of California.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much. Pretty strong coffee
there, Gregory. Pretty strong coffee. I don't drink coffee
myself.
Ambassador Haley. I don't either. I might start.
Mr. Meeks. I don't drink coffee, either. I am just
concerned about my nation.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Well, let me just note that I think
betrayal is a very rough word and I would suggest that anyone
who voted for giving $150 billion to the Iranian Government,
making that available, shouldn't be talking about the words
betrayal.
Mr. Meeks. I didn't use it. She did.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. That's noted.
Madam Secretary, I would like to, number one, join my
colleagues in suggesting that Venezuela is something really
important to look at and those people down there.
Venezuela used to be a shining example of how freedom can
work, and although there were a lot of problems people were
working together there peacefully. And now for that to
degenerate into what it is, if we can lend a hand there both at
the United Nations and through you as a spokesman there in the
United Nations, make sure they know how concerned we are.
We should also be concerned about Turkey. Turkey is going
exactly the wrong way and these are things that we inherited
from the last administration, let me just note. This is--
Venezuela just didn't happen now. It has been headed that way.
I am sorry--the last administration did not do what needed to
be done. We need to do more in that area to support the good
people there in Venezuela and Turkey. Let me note, we also need
to support the good people in Iran. Rather than giving $150
billion to their oppressors, we should be seeing what people we
can actually be supportive of in Iran who oppose the mullah
regime.
So I would hope that in the United Nations that as these
debates rage that those are the type of points that can be
made. I would like to ask you about--how much money do we
spend--you said it is 22 percent of the U.N. budget. How much
is that all together?
Ambassador Haley. $600 million.
Mr. Rohrabacher. $600 million. And how much does China pay
in their dues? Do we know?
Ambassador Haley. A lot less. A lot less.
Mr. Rohrabacher. A lot less.
Ambassador Haley. But I am happy to get you that number.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Okay. Well, I am just saying that because
I think that when we have a body like the United Nations and
such a high proportion of their budget comes from us and for us
to be the whipping boy or our friend, Israel, become the
whipping boy, I think that should be unacceptable and you can
rest assured that those of us on this committee will be backing
you up when you make such stands.
My friend, Chris Smith, mentioned sex and labor trafficking
in China is something we have ignored up until now and I would
hope that these human rights issues do become part of President
Trump's agenda, let me note, and I think, by the way, we only
have the last administration for 8 years to compare what
President Trump is doing.
I think President Trump is doing a great job--doing a
fantastic job. How many American Presidents--instead of going--
this American President went to Saudi Arabia and talked to the
leaders of the Islamic world and said if you want to be friends
with the United States, drive the terrorists out of your
mosque. I have never been more proud of a President since
Ronald Reagan said, ``Tear down this wall,'' and I think it was
equivalent to that.
So I would hope that those people who are just anti this
President or trying to play politics with it--and just one last
note.
Russia is a flawed country--is a flawed state. I will just
have to say that we should be making overtures to see if Russia
can help us bring peace in the Middle East, especially in
Syria, rather than trying to basically alienate Russia more and
more and more because there are bad guys.
The Syrians aren't the only bad guys in that region. Many
of our own allies are just as dictatorial and bad as Assad is.
So let us hope that we can try to establish a more positive
relationship with Russia that will help bring peace to that
part of the world and help all of us.
Thank you very much.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you, and I will do this very
quickly.
I will continue to be a thorn in Maduro's side when it
comes to Venezuela. I will continue to do that for human rights
in any country that is an abuser of that.
In terms of Russia, I agree with you. General Mattis
continues to work with Russia because we do need to work with
them on Syria and we can work them on counterterrorism. And so
we are trying to find the places where we can work with them
but we are going to call them out in places that we have to.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Albio Sires of New Jersey.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to just say
to my friend, my colleague, from South Carolina, what a great
introduction.
I just have a question. Which job did you like better?
Being in South Carolina as the governor or being in the Big
Apple in New York?
Ambassador Haley. Ask me----
Mr. Sires. I am only kidding.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. Ask me in 6 months.
Mr. Sires. You don't have to answer that.
Ambassador Haley. Ask me in 6 months.
Mr. Sires. Madam Ambassador, you know, I think some of us
are frustrated. I did not grow up in this country. I grew up in
a country where, you know, the Soviet Union just basically
tried to indoctrinate everybody on the destruction of this
country--how this is the worst country in the world, how we
have to destroy democracy--and I guess the frustration that we
have is that the President doesn't seem to share that view.
He doesn't seem to speak strongly enough on what Russia is
doing interfering with the democracy of this country, how he is
trying to undermine this country, how he is trying to basically
destroy what we stand for.
It seems that everybody around him certainly speaks enough
about it but he is the biggest voice. You have a great voice.
But he is a lot bigger, and I wish, you know, he would come and
say, look, this is happening--they did meddle--they did try to
undermine our democracy, and I think that is part of our
frustration.
The other thing I want to commend you on raising the human
rights issue, and I promised the state troopers in New Jersey
that I was going to raise this issue of Joanne Chesimard, who
shot a state trooper in New Jersey and has fled to Cuba and has
been living there as a hero for the last 40 years. If you could
talk to the President, you know, mention to him that we want
this--this criminal back so we can continue our--the justice.
So if you can talk a little bit about that.
And, obviously, Venezuela, I am very concerned about
Venezuela. I saw a tape last night where one of the police
officers shot through a fence a young boy just point blank. I
mean, it is, you know, horrible.
And the last thing is, I don't know how you walk through
the halls of United Nations. The hypocrisy there is just
beyond. When you have human rights leaders in that commission
who are some of the worst offenders in the world. So if you can
just talk a little bit about that.
Ambassador Haley. I can.
In terms of Russia, the only thing I can tell you is that I
have done a strong share of Russia bashing while I have been at
the U.N. The President has not called me once and said to stop
it and has not in any way told me, don't bash Russia. I hope
that you will understand that he very well could have but he
hasn't.
In reference to the Cuban criminal, yes, I am on it. I will
make sure that we do something and see what we can do to get
the administration--the administration has been very good about
getting people home and it is something that it is on a
priority. So I will also work and make sure that that is on our
list.
Venezuela--huge concern--huge concern in every way. I can't
bring enough attention to what the Venezuelan people are going
through and how we are seeing more and more aggression by
Maduro. If you heard his speech yesterday, he very much is
saying he is going to use military action. He is very much
saying that he is going to get more aggressive and he is
blaming the protestors for trying to overthrow his government
when all they want is true democracy on that front.
And then in the U.N., you know, we work--it is just like
your work here. I have to work with certain people and on some
issues we agree and on some issues we don't. But I have a loud
voice on both of those.
So when it is time to work with China, I do. But at the
Human Rights Council I called out China. I called out Saudi
Arabia. I called out Cuba and Venezuela.
And so I will continue to do that because it--what we try
not to do is isolate anyone. We try and make sure where we can
work with them we do. But we are not shy about calling them out
when we need to.
Mr. Sires. Ambassador, do we have any kind of a plan in
case Maduro moves the military and--I think this--he's in the
final stage of just, you know, becoming a dictator. He already
is, but I think it is going to just get worse.
Do we have any plans? Are we talking to any members around
there? Because I think you are going to have an exodus. You are
going to have people leaving. Already I know Panama has told me
that they are having a lot of people coming over. Colombia has
a lot of--so do we have any plans?
Ambassador Haley. So I think there are plans in couple
places. One, we brought it up at the Human Rights Council.
Second thing, we were hoping for OAS. We didn't see that. I am
going to continue to push the Security Council.
I would welcome any support that you all can give in terms
of that. But I think now we have to go back to the Security
Council and do something about it there. The U.S. is also
reviewing the policy there on what we would do if this got
worse. So I know within our National Security Council meetings
that we have Venezuela is very much coming up on the radar as
well.
Mr. Sires. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Steve Chabot of Ohio.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you very much, Ambassador, for being here today.
I had the pleasure of meeting you in the Capitol building
for the first time last week when you met with a number of
members and thank you for your time then and thank you for your
time now, and a whole lot of us have been very impressed with
what we have seen and heard thus far since you have entered
into your current position. So thank you for your leadership--
--
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Chabot [continuing]. At this important time in our
history. I am going to repeat to some degree, first of all,
what a number of other members have expressed as a big concern
of theirs. It is mine as well, and that is the U.N. Human
Rights Council.
It seems that they spend an inordinate amount of time--it
seems like most of their time, really, criticizing one of our
most important allies, Israel.
And as you know, you recently stated to the council, ``It
is essential that this council address its chronic anti-Israel
bias if it is to have any credibility,'' and I certainly agree
with you in that respect and I would perhaps even go further.
I don't know if it is possible for them to gain credibility
after the waste of time that they have spent criticizing
Israel. So I, again, welcome your input--anything you would
like to tell us on that issue.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you, and I had referred to the
Human Rights Council before.
The reason I went to Geneva was very much to say it to them
and not just send a statement from New York, and we just said
for the United States to be involved in the Human Rights
Council they have to give us a reason to be because right now
we are going to be for human rights. It is either going to be
inside or outside the council.
What you saw was a lot of other countries are embarrassed
by Agenda Item 7. They get that it discredits them and they
understand something needs to happen. What they have suggested
is that it is Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Pakistan that continue
to use Agenda Item 7. We are now going to try and work with
those three and see what we can do to get that to stop because
I think that is incredibly important.
I also think we need to have competitive elections. You
know, when you have Cuba and Venezuela and Saudi Arabia and
China and all of these on the Human Rights Council there is
something very wrong, and what it has become over the years is
a place that bad actors go to sit to keep the sunlight from
shining on them. It very much embarrasses these countries when
human rights is brought up and it is very much the reason they
don't want me to bring it up in the Security Council but I will
continue to do that.
So that is why we have a decision to make and we will see
if they make any proactive changes to the Human Rights Council
and then we will decide whether the U.S. is better to be in it
or off of it. But that is a dilemma that we are still going
through.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. I agree with you completely.
Let me turn now to Korea. We have 28,000, approximately,
U.S. troops there and as we all know, they had elections
recently and they have a new President who tends to be more on
the left than the previous government was.
And one of his first acts was to suspend deployment of the
THAAD missile defense, which I think was a big mistake. They
have put, I think, our troops at risk and President Trump said
as much recently when he said he didn't feel that our troops
were safe there.
It would seem to me that we ought to give South Korea a
choice. They have the choice of having the most sophisticated
missile defense system--the THAAD system--to defend them and to
defend our troops so they get the missile system and our troops
or they have no missile defense and no U.S. troops.
I think it ought to be a very clear choice to them and they
need to face that choice head on. I think it really is
irresponsible for us to allow our troops--it was different when
we didn't have that capability. We had troops there for many
years and the North Koreans were always a threat. We have
troops all around the world that are at risk. But I think it is
an unreasonable risk when we have the ability now to defend
those troops and that government, in cooperation with us, could
defend those troops much more effectively and I would welcome
your comment on that.
Ambassador Haley. So I think that THAAD is something that--
what we saw was Moon was very cautious going into it but he has
actually made good strides toward us and away from North Korea
on many levels and, you know, those missiles that continue to
be tested continue to push in the other way.
I do think he was trying to slow walk THAAD to see where it
was going to be. I also think he's getting pressure from China
to get rid of THAAD. China is the number one country pushing
them to get the THAAD system out.
At the end of the day, I personally believe it is going to
work itself out. But I also know that the administration, the
second we see something that's not going in the favor of
protection of our troops, then I know the President will act.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Gerry Connolly of Virginia.
Mr. Connolly. Welcome.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning.
Mr. Connolly. Welcome, Madam Ambassador. Glad to have you
here today.
You indicated that the budget was making a point more than
it was a serious intention in and of itself. What point was
being made by zeroing out funding for UNICEF, an organization
that is highly praised, had a lot to do with saving millions of
children's lives around the world with child nutrition
programs, rehydration programs from diarrheal diseases and the
like, highly lauded, not political--why would we zero it out?
What point was being made in that budget?
Ambassador Haley. So I think that what you saw in the
budget was, it was trying to put the U.N. on notice. It wasn't
about the specific organizations as much as it was putting them
on notice.
I can tell you that I have seen UNICEF in action when I
went to Jordan and Turkey and to see the schools, and what they
do is highly valuable.
I believe I am a conduit between what the President's
budget did and where you end up. So I am happy to give any
information on what's working, what is not working or what I
see as valuable.
Mr. Connolly. But Madam--but Madam Ambassador, I have been
doing budgets up here and in my local government for over 30
years. When you zero something out you are not making a point.
You are making a profound statement and judgment about the
value of that enterprise.
Ambassador Haley. I am----
Mr. Connolly. To zero out UNICEF seems to be to be
something that is not a particularly proud value that Americans
would uphold.
Ambassador Haley. Well, I can tell you that as governor I
also had a budget and an executive budget very much is a
conversation point. It is a starting point and then you work
with your legislature to bring those two together.
And so I think what you have is that the President was
trying to make a point to build up our military. Yes, it ended
up going to where it had certain cuts there. I will----
Mr. Connolly. I don't think you want to go there.
Ambassador Haley. I am sorry?
Mr. Connolly. I don't think you want to go there.
So the President was making a point we need to build up our
military and people who need to pay the price for that are
children around the world who are at risk of malnutrition?
Ambassador Haley. I know that having had conversations with
the President on this budget and where Congress ends up there
is working room. There is room where I know that he would want
to support UNICEF.
Mr. Connolly. You are a loyal member of the administration.
Good for you.
Zeroing out UNICEF makes no sense to me and it is not
making a point. You said members up at the U.N. are just so
glad we are ``leading again.''
Are those the same members who have condemned President
Trump's ripping up of the TPP and renouncing the Paris
agreement? I am looking at some close allies, some of whom are
members of the Security Council like France and--and not
Germany, but Germany certainly wasn't praising America's
leadership on those things.
Ambassador Haley. Well, I can tell you again, as a
governor, with that Paris agreement the number of regulations
it put on our businesses, the number of things it did with me
trying to recruit international companies and how that----
Mr. Connolly. I wasn't asking that question, Ambassador. I
am sorry. I only have 5 minutes.
Ambassador Haley. Well, I am trying to----
Mr. Connolly. My question was whether your colleagues at
the U.N. were praising those decisions as that is America
``leading again.'' I am quoting your words.
Ambassador Haley. The U.S. has to make decisions that are
in the best interest of the U.S. It is not in the best
interests for our businesses or our industries. We are not
going to throw the climate out the window.
Mr. Connolly. Well----
Ambassador Haley. We are going to continue to manage that.
Mr. Connolly. I am glad to hear that.
Ambassador Haley. And you may not agree with how we manage
that but I will tell you that I think what the President did
was in the best interests of businesses and it was in the best
interests of the country and that does not mean we are not
going to be good stewards of the climate. And we don't want----
Mr. Connolly. Well, that would come as news to a lot of big
businesses that endorsed it.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. We don't want China and
Russia telling us how we need to handle our climate. I think
that it is very much point that----
Mr. Connolly. Excuse me. We helped initiate the Paris
agreement. They didn't put a gun to our heads at all.
Ambassador Haley. But it didn't go through the Senate----
Mr. Connolly. Well----
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. And it didn't get passed----
Mr. Connolly. Well, it is a proud moment that we are
joining two other countries in the international community--
Nicaragua and Syria.
Ambassador Haley. We are being independent.
Mr. Connolly. It must be a proud moment.
Ambassador Haley. We are being independent.
Mr. Connolly. Can I ask you, finally, what instructions
have you been given about Russia? Presumably, you talk to your
Russian counterparts about Syria, right?
Ambassador Haley. I talk to my Russian counterparts about a
lot of things.
Mr. Connolly. But not their interference with U.S.
elections. That is off limits?
Ambassador Haley. I mean, what would you want me to say to
them? I am at the U.N. We are working on international issues.
I have made it public that I do believe they interfered with
our elections. I have also said we can't have any country
interfere in our elections and I stand by that.
Mr. Connolly. I understand. But you now hold a very
important diplomatic position at the United Nations. The
Russians are at the United Nations. We talk about a panoply of
issues, as you just indicated.
But why wouldn't we--have you received any instructions at
all with respect to their meddling in our elections, like,
don't talk about that, Ambassador Haley?
Ambassador Haley. It hasn't come up.
Mr. Connolly. It has never come up?
Ambassador Haley. At the United Nations, it----
Mr. Connolly. No. No. I am talking about Washington. Have
you received instruction from the State Department, don't talk
about that?
Ambassador Haley. No.
Mr. Connolly. Any instructions at all about it?
Ambassador Haley. None. I have said what I have said, I
have been on the record, and no one has said, you are out of
line. No one has said, don't do anything. I mean, what I
appreciate is this administration does not tell me what to say
or what not to say. They allow me to say what I think and they
support me through that.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Let's go to Mr. Mike McCaul of Texas.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassador, for restoring American leadership to the United
Nations. And thank you for participating in the National
Security Forum, as well as Senator Rubio and myself.
I chair the Homeland Security Committee and over the
previous administration over the last 6 years I saw the
Caliphate expand and expand, and nothing was done to stop it.
External operations have been launched out of that region and
now it has become the epicenter for terrorism and the epicenter
of probably the greatest humanitarian crisis that we have seen
with millions of refugees in Turkey and in Jordan, as you know,
and throughout Europe, which poses a risk as well.
I am very proud of this administration's efforts now to
crack down on this terrorist organization. But in the meantime,
as we did nothing Russia went into Syria to get the ports on
the Mediterranean. Iran is now in the region.
So my question is very simple. What is your strategy to
deal with this very, very complicated situation?
Ambassador Haley. I think that it is changing by the day. I
think we literally are watching the Syria situation change by
the day. I will tell you that I visited Jordan and Turkey
recently just to make sure--as well as Israel--on that Syrian
border to see what the migration was doing, to see exactly how
we were dealing with Syrian refugees and how the host countries
were dealing with it.
Jordan and Turkey have been phenomenal to their refugees.
They see it as their duty. What we saw in Jordan is they are
giving education. They are giving health care. They are giving
a stipend. They do it on a bank card, and whether that refugee
goes to a bank or to a grocery store, it is by eye scan. They
have zero percent fraud. And so it is impressive to see what is
happening there.
Turkey is doing very much the same things but they actually
have their Turkish doctors training the Syrian doctors in 3
months so that the Syrian doctors can take care of Syrians.
If you look, Jordan has taken in 1 million refugees. Turkey
has taken in 3 million refugees. But they are feeling the
pressure. They are double-shifting schools. Jordanian and
Turkish children are going in the mornings, Syrians are going
in the afternoons.
Competition for jobs is starting to be there. But the
Syrians are very grateful. They are very entrepreneurial. If
you look in the camps they are creating their own economy with
battery repair and alterations and all these types of
businesses. So we need to support the host countries because
they are doing a phenomenal----
Mr. McCaul. And if I could just applaud your actions
against Assad and his use of chemical weapons to kill children
in a hospital.
But as long as he remains in power, propped up by Russia
and Iran, this civil war will continue to go on. That is the
root cause of this whole problem. The refugee humanitarian
crisis won't end until I think that problem is dealt with.
Ambassador Haley. Well, and I think that from the political
situation in Syria, what you are looking at is we are certainly
making a lot of strides of getting ISIS out. I think it has
been aggressive.
I think it is going faster than we expected. From that
standpoint, it is good. The Iranian influence in Syria is a
problem. It is going to continue to be a problem because they
are completely backing Assad.
Russia is completely backing Iran. And so we are trying to
make that separation because that needs to happen. One of the
best things we did was after the chemical weapons program, when
the President made that decision to go in and strike, it sent
shock waves throughout the international community as well as
in Syria to let them know we weren't going to stand for it. I
think the President has held true to any signs of chemical
weapon usage we are going to get involved.
Now we are going to have to start looking as a country at
what is the U.S. role going to be post-ISIS, when ISIS gets
out, because a healthy Syria is not with Assad. You can't have
Assad in power with a healthy Syria.
And so I think we have to look at it from all levels and
realize that a post-ISIS Syria doesn't mean all goes back to
where it should be happy and good again. We have to make sure
it doesn't stay vulnerable for other terrorist groups to come
in.
Mr. McCaul. Well, it is good to finally see some leadership
in that part of the world and I will say that the Iranians are
wedded to Assad. I am not sure the Russians quite are.
Ambassador Haley. I think they are starting to see him as a
liability.
Mr. McCaul. And I think there is an opportunity possibly--
--
Ambassador Haley. Yes.
Mr. McCaul [continuing]. To work with them to have a
graceful exile of Mr. Assad.
Ambassador Haley. I agree with you.
Mr. McCaul. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We go now to Mr. Ted Deutch of Florida.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning.
Mr. Deutch. Welcome, Ambassador Haley. Before----
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Deutch [continuing]. Asking questions, I just wanted to
make one request, if I may. I represent Bob Levinson. He has
been missing in Iran for 10 years. I would implore you at every
opportunity you might have to see anyone from the Iranian
delegation or when you speak with our allies who speak with the
Iranians, please press for his return to his family.
I want to--again, thanks, for being here and I am grateful
for what you have said this morning and your presence at the
U.N. these past 5 months and your willingness to speak out
forcefully there and here in support of human rights is really
welcome.
At times, your advocacy for a human rights agenda seems to
be at odds with some other members of the administration who
don't seem to place the same value on human rights in the
center of our policy agenda where it belongs, as you do, and
the lack of coordinated messaging has at times left our friends
and allies around the world confused and questioning and I
imagine it has, at times, made your job challenging.
But I commend you for what you do. I commend you for
convening the first special session on human rights during the
month that the U.S. held the presidency of the Security
Council. It is important to do what you are doing. We are able
to shine a light on human rights abuses. You are able to push
for peacekeeping reform.
You are able to urge for greater efficiency in refugee
assistance because the U.S. is fully engaged at the U.N. And
while the U.N. is far from perfect and we can all acknowledge
that, if we retreat from it instead of working from within it
to improve it, we will cede leadership to those whose goals and
interests run counter to our own.
American leadership is what helps to prevent global health
crises and address food insecurity. It is what helps address
instability in dangerous places. Diplomacy and development
helps to prevent wars.
So I hope that you will continue to speak out and this
Congress will fully fund our commitment to these efforts.
I agree with the concerns that you have laid out. I have
spoken out forcefully about the pervasive anti-Israel obsession
at the Human Rights Council. No country has been subject to
more resolutions than Israel.
But it is also true that since the U.S. reengaged on the
council the number of Israel-specific resolutions has decreased
and it is, as you pointed out this morning, it is hard to take
the Human Rights Council seriously when some of the world's
worst human rights abusers sit on the council in an effort to
shield themselves from criticism.
But, again, if we walk away from the council and give those
bad actors free rein to continue to make a mockery out of human
rights, we will all be the worse off for it and I hope that we
will stick with it so that you can continue to make the case.
You raise two possible reforms--membership standards and
the removal of Agenda Item 7. On membership standards, I wonder
if you could tell us how the team in Geneva is working to
advance that. Specifically, are you laying out criteria for
membership and how can we help you with that. And then
secondly, on Agenda Item 7, it is my understanding that
procedurally the next time that the agenda can be changed is
2021.
But earlier you mentioned that in your discussions with
other countries you singled out Egypt and Saudi Arabia and
Pakistan as the only ones who will not acknowledge the
absurdity of having a dedicated agenda item for a democratic
ally of ours on the Human Rights Council agenda while
completely ignoring the human rights abuses in Iran and North
Korea and Venezuela.
So my question to you on that is given that those countries
are the ones who object and given that this administration at
this moment has a lot on the table with those countries, have
you spoken to the administration about using all of its
resources with the Saudis and the Egyptians and the Pakistanis
to help them understand why it is in their best interest to
partner with us to make the Human Rights Council a place that
actually can be respected, and if so what steps have they
taken?
Ambassador Haley. Okay. Thank you.
In reference to Bob Levinson, we will never let that go. I
mean, that is something that I think sits on the hearts of many
Americans wanting to see him and his family reunited. And so
yes, we are going to continue to keep up the pressure on that.
In terms of the budget, I want to be a conduit in any way I
can. As you make your decisions on where the budget needs to
go, I will let you know what I found to be valuable, what I
think is important, and we will continue to be a leader at the
U.N. I strongly believe that. And so we just need to decide
what those areas are and we will continue to do that.
In reference to the Human Rights Council, yes, we talked
about competitive elections because typically what happens is
by the time the region decides who that person is going to be,
they are already on the ballot and there is no contest.
So we have to look at the contests before. It is going to
require more engagement but it is going to have to be
willingness by others. We know it can be done because Russia
lost last time and they lost because of their participation in
Ukraine. So we have to learn from that and say, okay, how do we
continue to bring those things up. So we are working not only
with the Human Rights Council itself but we are also trying to
engage in the General Assembly and maybe seriously look at
using UNGA in September to bring that more to light and see
what we can do there. I know Agenda 7 doesn't come up until
2021. We are not going to wait that long.
So our goal is to go ahead and start doing this now because
there are ways we could do it now. I have talked with the
Secretary-General about it. I have talked with the Human Rights
Council about it.
I have talked to members of the administration. This will
be multi-level and we are trying to do that. Secretary
Tillerson and I have discussed what pressure we need to put on
what countries and so yes, we are going to take that from all
angles that we can.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Madam.
Chairman Royce. Jeff Duncan of South Carolina.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and as I sat here this
morning, I want to remind the committee that President Obama's
State Department sent $350,000 in taxpayer-funded grants to an
organization called One Voice in Israel to influence the
election or the ouster of Prime Minister Netanyahu in 2015.
Ambassador Haley, you are doing a great job. Thanks for
being here today. You know, on my side of the aisle I am one
that believes that foreign aid is a powerful tool in U.S.
foreign policy and I get a little more than chagrin when
recipients of large amounts of U.S. foreign aid don't vote with
the United States at least half the time in the U.N.
If you really look at the voting records of countries like
Haiti, which was a huge recipient of U.S. foreign aid, and back
when I did the research in, I think, 2012 they were voting with
us, like, 18 percent of the time. If you really go through the
list of countries that receive billions of taxpayer dollars,
this is money from hardworking American taxpayers that we are
giving away to foreign countries that can't even vote with us,
their benefactor, at least half the time in the U.N.
I know you are aware of that. Some have speculated that our
efforts to whip the votes of the U.N. to try to get our
beneficiaries to vote with us aren't as good as our
adversaries.
Do you support the position that we ought to have
beneficiaries of taxpayer dollars vote with us more at the
U.N.?
Ambassador Haley. So I will tell you that the one point I
continue to make at the U.N. is the U.S. will not be taken for
granted and you cannot take the fact that this money that has
always been rolling to you is going to continue to roll to you.
So yes, we have put them on notice when it comes to that. I
do think we very much have a partnership that we can have with
Congress because we need to make sure they understand it is not
just give me the money and then turn around and go against
things that really matter to us on the other side, and
coordinating that is something we very much want to start doing
at the U.N. in terms of getting to see if we can push votes
that way.
And I am happy to work with you on that but yes, I think it
is very important that we always want to do what is in the best
interests to help people.
We have always had, you know, a moral--we have always kind
of been the moral compass to the world. But we are not going to
be rolled over any more at the U.N. We are not going to allow
that to happen.
Every dollar matters and we don't have to give it, and if
we do, other countries just need to respect that and understand
that and not vote against us on things that they know in turn
will help them. So yes, I absolutely think you are right on
that.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you for that. I have had the same
conversation with countries that are part of the OAS with
regard to Venezuela that don't seem like they can vote with the
United States and with democracy-loving countries as the OAS
does different things--not really sanctions at this point
toward Venezuela--I think it is a conversation to have.
Let me ask you about the Colombia FARC negotiations and the
peace deal that was implemented there. As chairman of the
Western Hemisphere Subcommittee, the next thing to look at is
going to be the increase in coca production and cocaine
trafficking out of Colombia. I believe Colombia took their eye
off the ball with regard to the cartel and even the FARC trying
to grow a lot of coca and increase cocaine production to put
some money in the bank before they became a legitimate
political power under that peace agreement.
Is there anything at the U.N., any conversations being had
about cocaine trafficking increasing in Colombia and Peru and
what we can do as a community to stop drug trafficking?
Ambassador Haley. Okay. First of all, to kind of go back to
your last comment, I would remind you that we give quite a bit
of money to the Palestinian Authority directly, bilaterally,
and any leverage you can do on getting them to stop those
martyr payments is going to be very important. If you can make
that correlation and use that as a conversation point that
would be very helpful to me.
In terms of the FARC, we saw that the weapons turned over
yesterday--we had a good announcement there in terms of things
are starting to move. The Security Council does have a 1-year
mandate in Colombia to sit there and look at all of those
things and in that it is, obviously, to bring up the health and
the effectiveness of how to make Colombia strong.
So yes, those will be one of the things we are doing. You
also know we have our South Carolina National Guard that is
partnered with Colombia as well and so I think you are right to
see past the FARC and see where it is going from there, to look
at the future of Colombia. And so we will be happy to partner
with you on that as well.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. Yes, I visited with the National Guard
folks in Colombia and am very proud of what they are doing with
Colombia and that partnership. I know you were part of that, as
well as General Livingston.
So thank you for that. Good luck, and thanks for being
here. God bless you.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Karen Bass of California.
Ms. Bass. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you,
Madam Ambassador. I want to congratulate your leadership in
your short tenure and definitely register that I appreciated
your bringing the Security Council to Washington, DC, and
including Members of Congress.
I would love to see that happen again and I also look
forward to continuing to work with you on South Sudan and
famine. So I wanted to ask you questions primarily related to
that.
Given that the U.N. has declared that famine in the four
countries as the world's worst humanitarian crisis since 1945,
what concerns me the most is that it is the crisis that no one
seems to know anything about. And I wanted to know specifically
what the U.N. is doing to bring the crisis to the attention of
the world. And, you know, the last time there was a crisis like
this in 2011 in Somalia, 200,000 people had to die before the
world really took notice.
The other thing is is that our contribution of $990 million
we put that in the continuing resolution. I do have concerns,
as I think Mr. Chairman Smith mentioned, that that money gets
out of the door as quick as possible and that money not be
rolled over into fiscal year '18 because that blows the entire
point. The point was to respond to the crisis.
And then, of course, I am concerned about the budget
proposed by the administration that would actually cut food
aid. So when I look at this handout is from USAID and it talks
about the funding gap and, you know, we have made substantial
contributions but other donors still have quite a lot to
contribute.
And so I wanted to know your thoughts on how we might be
helpful to you in terms of getting other donors to step up to
the plate, including some nontraditional donors such as China
and the Middle East.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you, and I really do believe these
four famine areas are extremely important and if we really want
peace and stability we need to look at that.
When it comes to the food aid, very important that we
continue to work with USAID but also with the World Food
Programme.
Ms. Bass. Yes.
Ambassador Haley. You know, we now have--we made sure that
we have an American leading that who happens to be a former
South Carolina governor----
Ms. Bass. Yes.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. David Beasley, and he has
hit the ground running and is really starting to raise quite a
bit of money for the World Food Programme as well.
But we need to continue to put pressure on other countries
because the Secretary-General has raised the famine issue as
something to be concerned about. We don't want people to get
overly excited that South Sudan came off that list----
Ms. Bass. Right.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. Because the food insecurity
is still very strong, and then there are the political issues.
You have still got access issues of trying to get the food in.
You have still got issues with South Sudan when it comes to
that. When it comes to Yemen, we are watching the port very
carefully, Hodeidah. We have to make sure that there is no
problem with that port or we will really be in a bad situation.
And then when it comes to Nigeria and Somalia, just dealing
with al-Shabaab and Boko Haram are going to continue to being
issues as deterrences to getting the food in.
So I think what is most important is that we continue to
talk about it. Thank you, thank you, thank you for the billions
dollars because that was hugely important when it came to the
famine relief and I think we need to continue to do that.
But it is also the reason I am going there in the fall so I
can see it in terms of what else can the U.N. be doing, what
else can the U.S. be doing in terms of helping with that.
Ms. Bass. Well, when Chairman Smith and I did go, even
though famine has been rolled back in South Sudan, we did find
that people are only getting enough food for \1/2\ month. So
maybe it is that they are not dropping dead as quick but they
still are very much in a crisis.
Then you mentioned Mr. Beasley heading up the World Food
Programme, yet our budget calls for cuts to that. And so I am
hoping that in your position you can push back and encourage
that those cuts not happen because we don't have any reason in
the world to think that we are not going to be facing famine
next year until we address the root causes of the famine, which
is the conflict.
And then just on a final note at the end of my time, you
know, I know that there is a lot of interest in getting
countries that disagree with us to vote with us, and I don't
know where you measure that. And I would hate to think that the
U.S. would move in a position of saying we are going to
withhold aid unless you vote, what, 10 percent? Fifteen
percent? A hundred percent? How do you measure--you know, how
do you measure that? I think that would be a very bad precedent
and direction to us to go forward.
So I look forward to continuing to work with you and maybe
we can speak before you head off to South Sudan the next time.
Ambassador Haley. Yes. No hard percentages on what funding
should happen. I think that we just look at each individual one
and where we see a bad actor that is not relating well--with
the Palestinians, to get them to stop those martyr payments is
so important and I think it creates a conversation for you all
to have to help encourage that.
But yes, we are not looking at hard cuts in terms of that
and I continue to tell the President what is valuable and what
is not. And so things like UNICEF and World Food Programme and
the famine issues are things that I have talked with him about
and will continue to talk to him about and I think that's why
we can be the conduit between the President and Congress on
where the final budget ends up.
Thank you.
Mr. Duncan. Okay. It is great to be in the chair with
Governor--with Ambassador Haley here.
The Chair will now go to Mr. Perry for 5 minutes.
Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning.
Mr. Perry. Ambassador, great to see you. On behalf of all
the Americans that feel as I do that we are tired of seeing
America be the whipping post, are very proud of your service in
the service of our President of the United States, and let me
just state that.
And then with your indulgence I just want to address what I
think is political theater here. So while it is interesting, I,
and the American people, may marvel at the Left's newfound
concern regarding Russian/Communist/Socialist nations'
continued efforts to diminish America.
I just want to remind everybody about the FDR
administration--Alger Hiss, John Service, Harry Hopkins, who
served at the very highest levels of government--and what seems
to be the Left's continued being enamored with Russia, Cuba,
Che Guevara, et cetera. From FDR to the previous President's
statements to then-President Medvedev. And I just got a news
flash for everybody--Russia, Communists, the Socialists have
always meddled in America, have always targeted us and they are
going to continue to do that. So welcome to the fight.
With that, Ambassador, I have a question which I am going
to put up front just for you to think about and then I am going
to buttress it a little bit here.
I am working on some legislation to prevent the U.S.
taxpayers from funding UNRWA, right--the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency--and I want to get your thoughts on that, in a
general way, as it currently exists.
And the context is this--it is 67 years old, right, and I
looked at their mission statement--to establish a lasting,
peaceful, and to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, direct
bilateral negotiations. That's number one. Number two--counter
Palestinian terrorist groups. Number three--establish the norms
of democracy, accountability, and good governance.
And when I look at, in that context, what we are dealing
with now--and I will just pick out a couple things--UNRWA's
expansive definition of refugee where President Abbas has
acknowledged that that definition would mean the end of
Israel--that is number one.
Number two--the Hamas affiliation with UNRWA and the fact--
I will just give you a metric here--since 2006, Hamas-
affiliated candidates have held 11 seats on the UNRWA teachers
union executive boards and the UNRWA schools use textbooks and
materials that delegitimize Israel, denigrate Jews, and
venerate martyrdom. Fully 78.6 percent of youths in Gaza and
46.4 percent of youths in the West Bank support the Knife
Intifada. Furthermore, 76 percent of the terrorists taking part
in the Knife Intifada were under the age of 30.
And finally, I don't understand--and I am not sure why
anybody can explain to me how they report directly to the
General Assembly rather than the United Nations High
Commissioner on Refugees.
So it has been since 1950 that we have been paying for--I
think we are currently up to about 31 percent of their budget--
for a temporary mandate. The United States is out of money. We
are out of cash to throw around, right. We are $20 trillion

dollars  deg.in debt, $200 trillion in unfunded
liabilities. It seems like it has been long enough to fund
something that can't even meet its mission. As a matter of
fact, I think it would be correct to say that it flies in the
face and runs completely counter to every single one of the
policy goals it was set up for, yet the American hardworking
taxpayer is paying for this thing.
What are your thoughts, ma'am?
Ambassador Haley. So I had thought a lot of what you said
about UNRWA but I wanted to see it for myself. And so when I
went to Israel, I went to the Palestinian areas and looked at
the UNRWA camp. We talked about the schools. We talked about
the textbooks. We talked about participation of Hamas and where
things were going with that, and this is what I will tell you.
Yes, UNRWA is not perfect and yes, when it comes to any
sort of relationship with Hamas that needs to come out. They
claim they are cleaning up the textbooks but I think more work
needs to be done on that front.
The only reason why I would say don't eliminate UNRWA is
because there is so much resentment between the Palestinians
behind that fence and Israel that an uneducated Palestinian
versus an educated Palestinian are unhealthy----
Mr. Perry. Okay. I am going to push back. Just a moment,
Ms. Ambassador.
Ambassador Haley. No, and I want you to--I saw this.
Mr. Perry. So let me ask you this. This seems like a fair
question. How much longer should folks like me wait on behalf
of the American taxpayers until they clean up their act? What--
I mean, it has been 67 years. How much longer should we wait?
Ambassador Haley. And I feel your frustration and I think
that what we need to figure out is what is the replacement of
UNRWA or how do we go back. First, we have to limit the number
of refugees.
It is out of hand the number of people that UNRWA covers
because they are not all refugees. But the schooling and the
health care for those groups in there, I mean, there is no
other place for them to get it. And so there is a--there is a
population there that does need to have that. All the points
you raised are right and all the--those are all things that we
need to fix. But I do----
Mr. Perry. My time has expired, Ms. Ambassador. But at a
minimum, I think we ought to look at what their mission is and
we can't meet this mission then we ought to reestablish a new
one, and I yield.
Mr. Duncan. Gentleman's time has expired.
Ambassador Haley. I understand.
Mr. Duncan. I will now go down to the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Keating, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Ambassador----
Ambassador Haley. Yes, good morning.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. Thank you for being here and
thank you for your service.
The Office of U.N. Women I think is a very important
office. It empowers and trains women's groups so that they can
contribute to conflict resolution and peace building. It also
deals with an issue that this committee has been very involved
in in terms of having women be active as participants in
counterterrorism implementation and dealing with that
implementation task force, making sure that gender is addressed
in counterterrorism strategies. It is also involved, among many
other things in fighting violence against women, engaging women
and protecting women themselves and providing resources to
women who are victims of violence.
You said the President's budget is there to make a point.
What point did the President make by zero funding this office?
Ambassador Haley. Well, you know, my job is to go through
and see what the office does, whether it is valuable, what the
U.S. role should be and then report back, and so that is what I
plan on doing.
Mr. Keating. Do you think it is valuable--that office?
Ambassador Haley. We will find out. I mean, I think I need
to do more work. But yes, overall, anything that empowers
women, creates a healthy situation for women, works for girls,
does any of those things, yes, it sounds good on the surface.
But we are going through all of those, whether it is,
UNESCO or whether it is any of these programs we are going to
continue to look at----
Mr. Keating. What is the time frame for going through this
now and can you enlighten us in terms of a time frame where
this office will know it is going to continue to exist and go
forward?
Ambassador Haley. I mean, I think you can expect in short
term. I mean, we are going through all of these. It has only
been 5 months so we are trying to cover as much as we can at
the U.N. I am happy to report back and let you know what we
find out and whether it is valuable and it is something I would
let the President know as well.
Mr. Keating. Thank you. This committee has been very
involved in trying to empower women and deal in that area
itself so it is something that I would appreciate in short
term----
Ambassador Haley. We will get back to you on that, yes.
Mr. Keating [continuing]. Getting back from you.
Secondly, you know, we talked about staffing in the State
Department in particular and all those areas that haven't been
staffed.
I wonder, in your working with State, has that made it
difficult to communicate back and forth for you and your
function?
And just to give a sense of things, do you have a lot of
opportunity to deal directly with Secretary Tillerson and
coordinate and have conversations? How frequently do you have
the opportunity to converse or stay in touch?
Ambassador Haley. So I--because I am a Cabinet member, I
primarily work with General McMaster at the NSC and so we work
with his staff quite a bit. With the hirings at the State
Department, you know, we have nothing to do with that so I am
focused on the hirings at USUN.
We have, up until now, saved $500,000 compared to this time
last year just by cutting overtime and trips and, you know,
certain things. But our experts there are fantastic.
Mr. Keating. But it hasn't inhibited you in terms of your
communication with the Secretary back and forth, that lack of
staffing?
Ambassador Haley. I work more with the NSC than I do with
the State Department.
Mr. Keating. I see. Do you have occasion to work with the
President's senior advisor because he is so involved right now
in Middle East issues, Mr. Kushner? Have you talked and engaged
with him? How frequently do you talk to Mr. Kushner about these
international problems?
Ambassador Haley. It depends on what issues he is working
on. But I talked to him certainly before I went to Israel to
look at the U.N. programs.
I always download them on what the trips are. They let me
know if there is any issues. But with the U.N., I primarily
work with Secretary Tillerson or General McMaster. But if Jared
has a certain question or a certain issue that he wants to
discuss then he will call me.
Mr. Keating. What is your view of his role?
Ambassador Haley. I think that when it comes to the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process, I think he is being very
effective in terms of--when I was there, there is hope. There
is--I felt it.
Both sides realize they have got to come to the table. Both
sides realize something needs to happen. I think he's handled
it respectfully and I think he's handled it aggressively. So
that is really the one thing I have worked with him on and I
think that on any other issues that he works on I am not as
sure because we don't have as much. I know that he was very
involved in the trip that the President made, you know, to the
area and that was extremely effective because I was in the area
and it was very well received.
Mr. Keating. Well, thank you.
I just had one other quick question because my time is
running out.
Ambassador Haley. Yes.
Mr. Keating. With Qatar and the blockade, what is your
position on that? There seems to be conflicting positions
within the administration.
Ambassador Haley. I see it as an opportunity. We should
take it as the opportunity that it is. It is a good chance to
tell Qatar quit funding Hamas, quit doing these things in Gaza
that they are doing. Let them know that they have been funding
groups that are going toward that terrorist activity we don't
want to see but at the same time go back to Saudi Arabia and
say, look, you can talk to them but at the same time you have
to cut this out--you have to stop doing this. It is an
opportunity to kind of hit on both of them, I think.
Mr. Keating. Yes. Well, thank you for coming here and I
hope we have the opportunity to have you back here again. I
appreciate the service.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you very much.
Mr. Keating. I yield back.
Chairman Royce. Ron DeSantis of Florida.
Mr. DeSantis. Welcome, Ambassador.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. DeSantis. Before you assumed your position, the U.S.
passed Resolution 2334--really disastrous resolution--a frontal
attack on Israel. What is your understanding about the role
that your predecessor played in facilitating that?
Ambassador Haley. Well, I made sure to let every member of
the Security Council know what a kick in the gut 2334 was to
the people of the United States.
Mr. DeSantis. And was that view a change from what they had
been told previously with the previous administration?
Ambassador Haley. There was some who were apologetic. There
were some that were resentful. There were some that acted
indifferent. But yes, they did let me know that this was U.S.-
led and U.S. pushed and that only made it worse.
Mr. DeSantis. No doubt. So the question is do we have an
opportunity to repeal that or reverse that and if not why
should the American taxpayer fund an organization that, of
their 24 resolutions, 20 of them were dealing with this one
tiny--the only Jewish state, the state of Israel?
Ambassador Haley. I can tell you, it has been nothing short
of abusive what has happened to Israel and the only thing I can
compare it to is like the kid bullied in the playground. They
did it to make themselves feel better. They did it because it
was in habit. They did it because they could. I think that what
I will tell you is we put them on notice the very second I went
to my first hearing because I could not believe how abusive it
was.
Mr. DeSantis. So you think the American taxpayer has a
right to expect changes at the U.N. in order to continue to
send money?
Ambassador Haley. Absolutely, and they all know not to talk
about 2334. Very hard to repeal now that it is done. But what
we will do is call them out any time this happens and we have
seen a decrease in that rhetoric and in this last Israel-
bashing session, which they do every month and have for the
last 10 years, it was the first time that the majority of the
members just pushed the peace process instead of bashing
Israel. So there is a change but there is a long way to go.
Mr. DeSantis. And I appreciate your leadership. We also can
take other actions. The President, when he campaigned, promised
to move our Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. I have gone
over, looked at sites. It can be done. Do you support doing
that and are we going to eventually do that?
Ambassador Haley. I have always supported the Embassy move
and I believe the President supports it as well. It is not
about if it happens. It is about when.
Mr. DeSantis. But I hope it is soon because I think it
would be great if we could do it now. There is an issue of we
have Americans that were born in Jerusalem. When they go to get
passports the State Department does not allow them to write
Israel--Jerusalem, Israel--because they claim that that's
disputed and it is not the capital of Israel.
Can we get relief for some of those? I mean, would you
favor that, allowing Americans born in Jerusalem to just have
Jerusalem, Israel if they so choose on their passports?
Ambassador Haley. I have not--I am not aware of that. But I
am happy to talk to the State Department about that----
Mr. DeSantis. That would be great.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. To see what it would take.
Mr. DeSantis. The Muslim Brotherhood--is that part of the
solution in the Middle East or part of the problem in the
Middle East, in your view, and if it is the latter, should the
U.S. designate them as a foreign terrorist organization?
Ambassador Haley. So I think that that is highly debated.
That is not something that has been discussed within the
administration. I am not a fan of the Muslim Brotherhood and so
I do think that they are more problematic in the area than
helpful.
Mr. DeSantis. Because I think that we, you know, hit the
terrorists, kind of Whac-A-Mole, which is good--you got to take
them out. But there is a foundational ideological view that is
motivating that and there will be other people who will fill
that vacuum.
The Brotherhood, I think, represents the foundation and if
we can deal with that then I think we are dealing with the
problem of radical Islamic terrorists much more holistically
and likely to be more effective.
Ambassador Haley. I completely agree with you.
Mr. DeSantis. Turkey--are they a valuable part of NATO at
this point? There was a disastrous display here in Washington
where Erdogan's goons were beating American protesters.
You have seen a country that used to be a bridge to the
West has turned in a much more Islamist direction. Our
relationship with Turkey--is it strained? What is the viability
of them as a NATO ally if they seem to be going in a direction
that is different from the Western values that the rest of the
NATO allies hold?
Ambassador Haley. So a few things with Turkey. It is
complicated. But when I was in Turkey, I did meet with the
Foreign Minister. It was mainly focused on how to get access
into Syria because they were stopping some of the NGOs from
getting in there.
But we talked about multiple other things--prisoner
releases and some other things along those lines. Turkey is a
fantastic host country to the Syrians.
They are doing everything right by the Syrians. Their
government is starting to turn for the worst. You can start to
see more of a dictatorship that is starting to happen--those
types of things.
I work very closely with the Turkish Ambassador because
with everything going on we need to. They are not happy with
what we have done with the YPG but they get it. They don't like
it but they get it.
And so I think Turkey is one of those that has its good
sides. It has its bad sides. It has been made clear to them at
the highest level that you can't come to our country and act
like that--at the highest level.
They know that that's not something we will tolerate. They
know that it was very much frowned upon. They have given
excuses as to why it happened and they know we are not taking
any of their excuses.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Ami Bera of California.
Mr. Bera. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, for the Indian-American diaspora this is
probably a first and, obviously, proud for the community. You
know, Madam Ambassador, when we think about the U.N. Security
Council it has been a consistent policy from the past
administration, also I think with the current administration,
to do necessary reforms and modernize the U.N. Security
Council. And can we get--obviously, the politics at the U.N.
aren't going to be easy but in a statement released earlier
this week the President reaffirmed his commitment to add India
as a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council along with,
what I would argue, we should include all of the G4 nations. Is
that something that we can get your commitment to continue to
work on?
Ambassador Haley. Well, I have told all members of the U.N.
that we are in support of Security Council reform as long as
they don't take our veto away.
Mr. Bera. Right.
Ambassador Haley. You know, that has been very important.
So yes, I know that there are multiple different plans out
there and things that are going on. We are going to continue to
engage and continue to talk about that.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
In your earlier comments you noted that the budget was
making a point as opposed to being reality. My colleague, Mr.
Connolly, talked a little bit about what UNICEF does and you
yourself, in answering one of this questions, talked about how
you've seen firsthand how what they do is incredibly valuable.
Can we get your commitment as you're working behind the
scenes with the administration, with the President, we will do
our part to restore full funding or as much funding as
possible? Can we get your commitment that that is a priority?
Ambassador Haley. I think that we need to remind these
organizations that they too need to smartly spend and they need
to look at their budgets as well as we are all kind of looking
at how we can be smarter about what we do.
But yes, I absolutely will support UNICEF. It is something
that I am happy to continue to talk to you about--that one and
other organizations that we found helpful. But I am also
talking with the administration about it.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Bera. Another organization that was zeroed out was the
U.N. Family Planning Agency. Their mission is to prioritize the
health and education and needs of women and girls around the
world. If you look at their core work, it is providing access
to contraception. It is providing safe childbirth. It is
addressing and responding to gender-based violence. It is
advocacy against abusive practices like child marriage and
female genital mutilation.
You would agree that those are worthy causes to fight?
Ambassador Haley. There are many causes that are important
that affect women and children that we want to make sure that
we keep that at the forefront.
The problem with the UNFPA is they did have ties to China
that does forced sterilization. But I can tell you every ounce
of that money is going to all the things that you just talked
about but it will be done through the general health programs
through USAID.
Mr. Bera. Well, so I have some concern because that has
been brought up multiple times. Under the last Republican
President, George W. Bush, the State Department did do an
examination to see if that was occurring and they did not find
that evidence that UNFPA was engaging in----
Mr. Smith. Would the gentleman yield at that point?
Mr. Bera. Well, I have only got a limited time so--that
they were engaging in coercive abortion or involuntary
sterilization. If that is in fact occurring, great. Let us
remove funding from those types of programs or lets hold UNFPA
accountable.
But UNFPA is doing tremendous work around the world
protecting maternal-child health, and I say that as a doctor.
We shouldn't just throw everything out if there is a single
program--I understand there is the Kamp-Kasten Amendment and
instead of just withdrawing all funding--a lot of women are
going to suffer. There will be unnecessary deaths and so forth.
So can I get your assurances that you will look at these
programs as opposed to just zeroing out and eliminating these
programs? If there is evidence of coercion, if there is
evidence of involuntary sterilization, great. Address that. But
let us not pull all of our funding.
Ambassador Haley. So on a lot of programs, yes, I am happy
to work with you on all of those. That is a decision that has
already been made by the administration. So I don't anticipate
a change in that. But I am happy to at least let you know the
information that they have on----
Mr. Bera. But the administration already made a decision to
zero out funding for UNICEF. That's the starting point, as you
said. It is not necessarily an ending point. We can continue to
put some of this push back?
Ambassador Haley. Well, and I think that that was just the
directive that we got, you know, that that was going to happen.
We haven't had that on UNICEF and some other things.
But what I will tell you is very important is that global
health of women and children as we go forward and so we have
made sure that that same money is going to global health
programs to do the same things within the USAID. But I am happy
to get you any information I have as to what the
administration's stance is on that.
Mr. Bera. Great. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Ted Yoho of Florida.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Ambassador, it is great to see you here.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho. It is refreshing to see you sitting there
compared to where I--we saw last time. But I love your attitude
because you're not serving a political party.
You are not serving so much the administration as you are
representing America the way it needs to be represented and its
strong leadership and I do thank you for that.
Some members are still in denial that America is facing
tough economic challenges. Austerity measures are coming and so
I am, for one, happy to see some of the cuts the President has
offered because that leads to reform and those reforms are what
we need to make.
Secretary Tillerson in Seoul declared the era of strategic
patience toward North Korea has ended. In veterinary medicine
we have a comparable phrase and it's called benign neglect, and
that is hoping an illness will get better on its own.
However, it doesn't work for a terminal disease and that is
what the situation in North Korea is and we need to deal with
it. So my directions are going to be toward China and China's
help with correcting the problems, and are they a strategic
partner or a strategic opponent? Because I think their actions
speak louder than their words.
They say they want to help us and what I see is double
speak. If you look at what China has said they were going to
help us with with North Korea, they were going to put more
pressure on them. But yet, when they said they are not taking
in any more coal, if you look at their iron ore imports from
North Korea to China it is up 270 percent. Their trade for
North Korea in the first quarter of this year is up 37.4
percent.
And so when you look at what China is doing, they are
putting pressure and boxing Taiwan in. They have thrown them
out of the World Health Assembly, and Taiwan was such a
valuable partner in that.
They are the ones that came up with the cures for the SARS
epidemic, and they threw them out of that. They put pressure on
Panama to take Taiwan out of that. They went against South
Korea when we put the THAAD system in and that was strictly
defensive in nature.
And so China is showing aggression in there, at the same
time telling us that they are going to work with us. Yet, they
take over the South China and claim it all as theirs under the
guise of peaceful navigational purposes.
So it was great to see the FONOPs that we did--the freedom
of navigation that the Navy did--and I hope we continue that
with all nations in the South China Sea because China speaks
that they are going to help us but yet their rhetoric isn't
there. A detailed U.N. report issued in February of this year
published the names and addresses of multiple U.N.-designated
proliferators that have openly operated on Chinese soils for
years and since then the Center for Advanced Defense has
exposed China-based business networks as being behind the
smuggling of record cargoes of North Korean weapons to the
Middle East.
So China is funding and allowing North Korea to gain access
to these weapons or they are producing them, selling them to
the Middle East, going into the hands of terrorists fighting
our troops.
And so if China is really going to help us, my question to
you is why hasn't China been held accountable for the repeated
violations and undermining of U.N. sanctions and what tools
does the U.N. have in your capacity to hold China accountable
and ensure the sanctions are implemented?
And two last things. I chair the Asia Pacific Subcommittee
in Foreign Affairs, and I know we are separate branches of
government. But want to know where we can help you. And one of
the things we did is put in the state sponsors of terror bill
and I would sure love to see North Korea put back on the state
sponsor of terror so that we can enforce the secondary and
tertiary sanctions on banks and businesses doing business with
them. So if you could answer that question about China, thank
you.
Ambassador Haley. Yes. So first of all, China is--when it
came to North Korea, I do think there was a good faith effort
initially. We continued to put more pressure.
They continued to move a little bit more. As the missile
testing continued to happen they actually publically in China
were saying something about North Korea and then all of a
sudden North Korea pounced back and at that point we saw a
calming down of China and pulling back again of China.
I can tell you that they did--when we proposed sanctions on
North Korea and all the entities in those missile tests they
voted with us and we were able to pass it because they voted
with us. Are they doing enough on trade with North Korea? No.
Laborers? No. Any of those other things? No.
So the pressure we have put on has been strong and I have
said publically if we had to go to secondary sanctions, we
will. And so we are not past holding anyone accountable when it
comes to supporting or helping North Korea in what they are
doing with the nuclear situation and we will continue to push
hard on that front and I think that the President has also----
Mr. Yoho. Thank you for your service and thanks for being
here. And any way we can help you let us know. Thank you.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you. Will do.
Chairman Royce. We go to Lois Frankel of Florida.
Ms. Frankel. Hello.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning.
Ms. Frankel. I just want to thank you for your service. I
have very high hopes and expectations for you and I am just
urging you to remember that you represent all Americans, not
just a President of the United States.
Allow me to start with a little bit of a rant and then I do
have a question. I do not understand why our President wants to
keep putting more money in defense but yet reduce the funding
for those elements of our security that would keep us from
having to use our military. So that means, I think, that your
efforts should be fully funded, obviously.
I want to just say this and I want to say it politely
because, as I said, I really--my purpose is to urge you to be a
champion for the women of this world. I did not like your
answer to my colleague's question about the defunding of the
United Nations Population Fund because you said well, the
administration has already made that decision.
Well, I want to urge you to try to convince our present
administration to overturn that. You know, I know you would
agree that for the world to be peaceful that women need to be
fully productive in their societies--not just reproductive but
productive and that means they have access to health care.
In our own country, our Constitution gives us the right to
contraception and to legal abortion and yet we are making every
effort to cut that off all over the world. We have the gag rule
now. Now we have this defunding of the United Nations
Population Fund and with a totally phony excuse about something
China is doing, which there is no proof of.
So I want to know how you are going to fight to make sure
that women have access to health care around this world.
Ambassador Haley. Well, thank you, and I first want to say
that I do believe in this position I am serving every citizen
in the country to try and have a strong voice for the United
States. I will continue to do that and I see that as my role in
my job.
I have a passion for not only women but children in
conflict and so at every position, whether it was Jordan,
whether it was Turkey, whether it was Israel, I always just
meet with women.
Now, I meet with others but I do a separate sidebar with
women to find out exactly what they care about. And so, for
example, in Jordan and Turkey, the psychological support that
they need and their children is a huge thing and I am trying to
really push that we start to go to that psychosocial support in
helping them.
When it comes to family planning, we want to help with that
as well.
Ms. Frankel. How are you going to do it? Let me ask you,
have you had a discussion with the administration about
reversing their position on this health care funding?
Ambassador Haley. Well, first of all, when it comes----
Ms. Frankel. Would you have a discussion?
Ambassador Haley. Of course. I have only been there 5
months, so understand that UNFPA that was decided very early
on. I have no problem looking into it. I have no problem
checking to see what the reasonings were behind it and----
Ms. Frankel. Well, I am just going to say something here. I
think it is an urgent issue because I have to tell you that
access to healthcare and reproduction is something that is
occurring every single day. So you need to really do that.
I have another question for you.
Ambassador Haley. Just one more point, if you don't mind.
Ms. Frankel. Yes, please. Yes.
Ambassador Haley. So keep in mind the U.S. is not the only
one that funds the UNFPA. We are actually the third largest
donor to the UNFPA.
So while I know that the U.S. has decided not to do that,
those programs are not stopping because we do have other
countries that are funding it. So I don't want you to think
that that just goes away.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. I just want to urge you, plead with you,
please focus your attention on that.
The next question, last question, is I know that the
President has suggested that your budget be cut. Hopefully, the
Congress is not going to go along with that. I want to get a
commitment from you.
If we fund the positions and we fund the efforts at the
U.N.--the Congress--that we feel is necessary, are you going to
take the effort to hire the positions and make sure that the
issues we are trying to fund are executed?
Ambassador Haley. I don't have anything to do with the
State Department hires. That is different.
Ms. Frankel. I am asking you about your hires.
Ambassador Haley. Yes. My hires, yes, we will continue to
do that and whatever budget you give me I will work with.
Ms. Frankel. Okay. Thank you.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Ms. Frankel. Good luck.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Ms. Frankel. I am counting on you.
Ambassador Haley. I know, and I will try and make you
proud. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Adam Kinzinger from Illinois.
Mr. Kinzinger. Thank you for being here.
Ambassador Haley. Good morning.
Mr. Kinzinger. Very, very appreciated. Thank you for your
service. Thanks for spending the time with us and delving into
a lot of important issues.
Mr. Chairman, I will point out the clock needs to be reset,
otherwise I will go on forever.
Anyway, so just thank you for everything you've done and
for being here. A lot of important issues we are discussing. I
think there is no more important issue than Syria, which I know
you have touched on.
But when we look at world stability, when we look at the
war on terror, when we look at American's safety, I think it's
important that Americans understand that what goes on in Syria
affects us here and that the brutal regime of Bashar al-Assad
backed up by the Iranians, backed up by the Russians that are
bombing hospitals with GPS or precision-guided munitions,
secondary strikes against the same hospitals, are actually
creating a whole new generation of terrorists.
In fact, there are some in this body that buy into the
argument that strongmen somehow work in the Middle East. I
think it is important to remember that with the era of
information and the era of being able to communicate, people
simply don't like to be oppressed. Some people maybe think that
they enjoy being oppressed but people don't like it. They,
naturally, desire freedom and in that process of being--whether
it's a chemical weapon attack, whether it's a conventional
weapon attack--losing your father or your mother or your child
makes me much more likely to join an opposition force which, up
until recently, appears to have been ISIS in many cases.
I want to thank you and the administration for putting what
I think was an amazing red line down in the statement about a
pending potential chemical weapons attack. As you said earlier,
I think that saved countless lives. There are lot of children
that now, hopefully, can realize their dream of being a police
officer or a teacher because of that really strong line.
So it's great having you there. It is great having an
administration that understands this. Let me just ask a little
about Syria and the discussion of that next generational war on
terror.
I think it's the 7- and 8-year-olds today that are in the
refugees camps that are either not getting education or are
getting education that are going to be either the folks that
in, frankly, 5 years, because that is how young they recruit
them, that we find ourselves having to fight on the battlefield
or else they are going to be the generation that actually
rejects this ideology from within.
Can you talk about the difficulties in the refugee camps
and the difficulties in Syria generally and how that plays into
the long-term fight on terror that we have on our hands?
Ambassador Haley. Yes. And so first of all, with Syria I
would remind you that the post-ISIS decisions that are made in
Syria are going to be extremely important to make sure that it
is not a new breeding ground for other threats to come in.
And having talked with the Syrian refugees both in the
camps and outside of the camps, they are completely ready and
waiting to go there and build it back up from scratch. They
want to go home. They have family members there. That is
something that I think is going to continue to happen.
When it comes to the education, so what we know is the
refugees that have come out, those children are getting
educated. They are getting assistance. They are being well
taken care of.
All of those things are fine. There are about 500--300,000
students in Turkey that are not getting education but the 3
million people are and they are trying to accommodate that and
that is why I am trying to get the U.N. to focus on supporting
host countries so we can get those kids educated as well.
In Syria, I don't think they are getting educated in Syria.
Now, I am sure every area is different but it is just such a
mess because we are just still trying to get aid in there. We
are still trying to get food in there and make sure that they
are taken care of.
But it is not just in Syria. In any area around the world,
if you have children who have to do without, whether it is
education, whether it is health care, any of those things, they
are prime targets for terrorists to get them and we have to
always remember that as we go forward because that is--yes, we
can defeat ISIS today but those threats will go on forever and
that is why I put so much emphasis on human rights as it
relates to conflict because those things are what drive
terrorists to come in and take advantage of the situation.
Mr. Kinzinger. And I thank you for being part of that whole
of government approach. I mean, I think sometimes we get mired
down in this idea that when the Islamic State is defeated we
can all come home and have fun rainbows and happy time. But the
reality is you can't defeat an ideology with bombs and bullets.
You can only defeat existing terrorists. And so it's important
to think long term because, frankly, this is going to be a
long-term war.
And I think, you know, specifically, a great country I got
the privilege of visiting was Liberia and there is a strong
U.N. mission there. I think it is important to note that when
we talk about the United Nations, though needing reforms, it
can be a force multiplier, doing things that our troops don't
have to do.
But you see in that whole generation that was torn apart by
civil war and people that mean and want to do well, but you see
30-year-olds that don't know how to read and write with no
hope. And when that happens in the Middle East that is a
fertile ground for recruitment.
So, again, I just want to say thank you so much for your
service. Thanks for being here, and I will yield back.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you very much.
Chairman Royce. Joaquin Castro of Texas.
Mr. Castro. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Ambassador,
for your testimony today.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Castro. I think your time during your service during
this President's tenure has been one of the more moderating
voices on what I consider to be some of their more outlandish
moves. But I think it has also put folks like yourself and
Secretary Tillerson in a box sometimes.
And so I want to ask you a question that I have been asked
many times by the Foreign Ministers, Ambassadors, members of
Parliaments that I have met with since President Trump took
office, which is who reliably speaks for the President in the
foreign policy space?
Ambassador Haley. So we work very much as a team and the
team works strongly. In our NSC meetings I have a great
relationship and we talk through things with Tillerson, Mattis,
McMaster, we have Kelly--I mean, everybody there. That group is
the main group--General Dunford--those are the main people.
Pompeo is another important one. We go through all aspects of
everything when it comes to dealing with that. So it really is
a team----
Mr. Castro. So there is a process in place that----
Ambassador Haley. And a very organized process in place.
General McMaster has done a fantastic job and all of our voices
are heard and all of us get to help push that decision.
Mr. Castro. Do you feel as though the President takes your
advice?
Ambassador Haley. I think that the President--you know,
then General McMaster has to do that. I think the President
does--he has turned out to be a very good listener in terms of
the fact that he wants to learn and he appreciates different
viewpoints and then he makes his decision.
Mr. Castro. Well, I guess probably the most glaring example
or problematic example that I have seen was when Prime Minister
Netanyahu for a joint press conference--and the idea of a one-
state solution rather than a two-state solution was broached, I
believe while Secretary Tillerson was on a plane somewhere, was
not present--and then the next day you had to come back and
basically say, no, our approach is still a two-state solution.
And then the President later said well, it is really whatever
the parties want to do.
Ambassador Haley. Right.
Mr. Castro. So you can imagine around the world that people
start wondering who is speaking for the President.
Ambassador Haley. Well, and in fairness too, everybody was
involved with that. The President has very much felt like we
don't need to push what the solution is between Israel and the
Palestinians--that we need to have them come to the table and
make those decisions.
So his point was if they come up with a one-state, if they
come up with a two-state--whatever they come up with we are
going to support and the way it got out--I agree with you, the
communication was weird--but that was his intention. So we knew
very much that he wasn't giving up on a two-state solution. He
just was saying whatever they come up with we will support and
if that's a one-state solution we will support that, too.
Mr. Castro. Well, and then I guess a more recent example is
the example of Qatar, where the President was essentially
praising the blockade and at the same time, because we have a
base there and other interests, other parts of our foreign
policy apparatus seem to be coming to the defense of Qatar.
Again, there seem to be at least two heads there. What happened
on that issue?
Ambassador Haley. It is a complicated issue and, like I
said, I have given my opinion. I think there is an opportunity
to hit both sides and try and get more of what we want.
Qatar has been funding--we know that they have done a lot
with Hamas as we are dealing with Gaza and some other areas.
And so I think the President really does want to push out ISIS,
push out terrorism, and his whole point of going and making
that first visit was to say we have got to get rid of all of
these threats that we have. So when this came up with Qatar his
focus was very much on the funding they were doing for
terrorists and I think that, yes, we have a airbase there. Yes,
there are some ties. But he sees the priority as cutting--is
getting rid of ISIS and getting rid of terrorism as right there
at the top.
Mr. Castro. And then finally, because I just have about 50
seconds left, I am on the Western Hemisphere Subcommittee and
Venezuela, of course, is a big issue. I know you probably
fielded a question from Albio Sires, perhaps, on it. But what
is your outlook for Venezuela and for the region?
Ambassador Haley. It is worse than what we are seeing on
TV. It is in a very bad place and what I had said before was,
you know, we did an emergency session--the Security Council.
They weren't happy with that. They felt like it needed to go to
the Human Rights Council but we still had it.
We went to the Human Rights Council. The reason they have
not brought it up, which they need to, is because Venezuela
sits on the Human Rights Council. And so we blasted them on
that.
We were banking on OAS doing something. That didn't happen.
This needs to be on our radar. Maduro is leaning more and more
toward using military force and weapons and I think that this
is something that is only going to get worse before it gets
better and we need to make sure that we are watching this
carefully and do something about it.
Mr. Castro. Thanks for your service.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Lee Zeldin of New York.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassador, for your service to our country and for being here
today.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Zeldin. U.N. Security Council Resolution 2334 was an
anti-Israel anti-Jewish resolution seeking to ethnically
cleanse Judea and Samaria and East Jerusalem. Is it an accurate
summary of your observations since taking over as Ambassador
that some of the nations that voted for this resolution were
resentful, some were apologetic and it appears to have been
U.S.-led and U.S.-pushed?
Ambassador Haley. I talked to all of the Security Council
members and told them how offended and what a kick in the gut
it was for Americans. What I got was some felt very arm twisted
by the U.S. Others thought it was the right thing to do and
then, you know, the hard part about me talking with 2334 is
they keep telling me, well, it is the U.S. that wanted it--it
is the U.S. that wanted it.
So it is hard for me at this point. I am just saying there
is a new administration. This is not where we want to go and so
now they don't talk to me about it because they know it is such
a sore subject with us.
Mr. Zeldin. And your testimony is confirmation that the
U.S. was engaging in dangerous ugly backstabbing of our
nation's ally in Israel, and we abstained.
And when Ben Rhodes and others were on conference call--
this is in the White House records--quoting verbatim--when
asked why we abstained Ben Rhodes, the taxpayer-funded White
House fiction writer, says,
quote,  deg.``We
abstained, as Samantha explained, for a number of reasons.''
First, the United Nations, we continue to believe, is a
flawed venue for this issue in that it has frequently been used
to single out Israel. Not only was that effort U.S.-led and
U.S.-pushed, but then publically we were abstaining and we were
abstaining for the reason that I just quoted from Ben Rhodes.
And I really appreciate your testimony to help clear the record
and history on that.
Ambassador Haley. Well, and if I could just add, I respect
Samantha Power and appreciate her service very much. But that
was one of our lowest points in our country with what happened
because the international community, when they saw that we went
against an ally, it set off a terrible tone in terms of where
we are going to go.
And just to let you know how bad it was, when she
abstained, the entire Security Council and the audience got up
and applauded and Israel was sitting there watching that. Think
about what we just did to a friend, what happened. You don't
ever applaud in the Security Council. It never happens. It
happened that day.
Mr. Zeldin. And I think it is clear from anyone in Israel
who would be listening to your testimony here today that you
have the back of America's allies. You understand that we
should be strengthening our relationship with our friends,
treating our adversaries as our adversaries and I am very happy
that you are there.
I do want to ask about the Taylor Force Act, which has now
grown bipartisan support in Congress, which would withhold aid
to the Palestinian Authority until it stops inciting violence
and financially rewarding terrorists--a policy otherwise known
as ``pay to slay.''
Have you taken any position--are you able to share with
regards to what your opinion is on the Taylor Force Act?
Ambassador Haley. So I have met with the family and yes, I
am very vocal about the fact that the U.S. gives bilateral
money to the Palestinian Authority and we need to have a strong
conversation with them on how these martyr payments have to
stop and I think that it is one of those things that, by us
giving money, we are supporting it and we have to make that
correlation with them and let them know that that's not
something that we are going to accept or do going forward.
Mr. Zeldin. And I think it is great that you did meet with
the family. Taylor Force--this isn't an Israeli. It is an
American who graduated from the United States Military Academy,
and I appreciate your leadership.
In my remaining time, I am going to yield to the gentleman
from South Carolina, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Ambassador, we are so proud, as your resident
Member of Congress, to be here with you. Also, a fellow
resident of Lexington County, as a South Carolinian, we are so
proud of your efforts to reverse, as Congressman Zeldin has so
correctly pointed out, the anti-Israel policies. It is just--
what a breath of fresh air.
I also want to thank you too, as I met with you in New York
last week, thank you so much. Your first speech was to condemn
Russian aggression in Ukraine--10,000 people dead--and Russian
aggression in the Republic of Georgia. We are very proud of
your service. And I am at the National Defense Authorization
Act debate right now so I need to run back.
Thank you. God bless you.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you, and thank you for being my
congressman.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Brendan Boyle of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Ambassador.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Boyle. I actually wanted to raise an issue that has not
been brought up yet, I think, for the 2\1/2\ hours of this
hearing.
Yesterday, we saw all around the world one of the worst
cyber attacks ever to strike. Hacks targeted government
ministries, banks, utilities, and other important
infrastructure and companies, especially in Ukraine.
Ukraine, again, suffered the extent of that attack worse
than any other country, including, by the way, the virus-downed
systems of the site of the former Chernobyl, forcing scientists
to monitor radiation levels manually.
So I have introduced, along with my colleague on the other
side of the aisle, Congressman Fitzpatrick, also from
Pennsylvania, we have introduced H.R. 1997, the Ukraine
Cybersecurity Cooperation Act in order for the United States to
help our ally in an area in which they are clearly vulnerable
and that vulnerability has been exploited.
Do you think such an act would be helpful and do you
believe that your role at the U.N. would be aided if the United
States Congress would provide leadership in helping an ally
like Ukraine when it comes to cybersecurity?
Ambassador Haley. So cyber attacks are the new ammunition
that we are going to continue to see around the world and it
continues to be worse and worse as every country continues to
see how they can make it better.
I can tell you that the U.N. is now trying to become the
cyber activity police and we don't want that because we don't
want China and Russia deciding how the U.S. would handle cyber
attacks or dictate how we handle those things going forward. So
we are fighting that. But yes, I think it would be helpful if
the U.S. goes and does these things that would keep the U.N.
from doing it and would allow for us to continue to help. And
Ukraine, I can't say enough about what a great ally they have
been on the Security Council. They have just been with us on
everything.
Mr. Boyle. So this is actually a good segue to the broader
issue of our support for Ukraine. Your comments that you gave
just now and others inspire a lot more confidence than the
comments of our President and the Secretary of State when it
comes to standing up and supporting our ally, Ukraine, turning
back Russian aggression and illegal occupation of Crimea--and
what they are continuing to do to this day in Eastern Ukraine,
which often gets ignored in the media.
I wanted to ask you about that, though, because, obviously,
with the President, the Secretary of State, our Ambassador to
the U.N., we have had, frankly, three different messages--at
least two different messages.
Do we, the United States, still stand and support and stand
by the agreement that was reached in Minsk--the Minsk
agreement?
Ambassador Haley. Yes, we do.
Mr. Boyle. Okay. That, you realize, is contrary to what the
Secretary of State has recently said, that there would be--we
would allow a certain amount of back sliding or a renegotiation
of it agreeable to both parties. How do you reconcile that?
Ambassador Haley. We continue to push the Minsk agreement.
We just renewed sanctions last week on Russia's role in Crimea.
We are not lifting those. We are going to continue to stay
strong on that. And so at the Security Council that is what I
am pushing. That is what I am doing.
Mr. Boyle. And you would agree that we shouldn't offer any
sanction relief before Russia finally lives up to its
obligation in Minsk?
Ambassador Haley. Absolutely.
Mr. Boyle. That is great.
Have you had this conversation with the Secretary of State
and even with the President himself?
Ambassador Haley. So the President and I have had a
conversation with Ukraine and Russia. He very much wants to see
how we can reconcile, if there is any way to--you know, how
much this is. When I brought the Security Council not only did
they meet with Members of Congress but they met with General
McMaster. They met with the President and others, and Ukraine
and Russia both sit on the Security Council.
And so they also had conversations with him. I will remind
you that my position is a Cabinet position so when I say
something or I do something, yes, those are my views and those
are my thoughts and that is what I share with General McMaster
and with the President. So they are very aware of my thoughts
on this and have not disagreed with me on that.
Mr. Boyle. Yes. I do want to point out--one my colleagues
referenced this earlier--I can't tell you the number of times
that, because of being on this committee now several years, we
have relationships with diplomats from other countries
including parliamentarians of other countries, the number of
people who have asked me, so who really speaks for this
administration because the Secretary of State will say one
thing. The President contradicts it within the hour.
You give comments at the U.N. that are, frankly, more
reflective of a traditional U.S.--Truman through Obama--foreign
policy. So that continues to be a challenge and ends up making
the U.S. look, frankly, incoherent in its foreign policy and
makes your job more difficult.
Ambassador Haley. Well, we work very well together and we
work closely together, and while we don't, you know, just say
the exact word for word talking points, we are all moving in
the same direction.
Chairman Royce. The Ambassador has to depart at 1:00 p.m.
so I am going to ask members to be succinct.
We go now to the co-sponsor of the legislation with Mr.
Boyle and that is Brian Fitzpatrick.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Madam Ambassador, how are you?
Ambassador Haley. I am good. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you for being a good leader. More
importantly, thank you for being a good person. I think it is
evident to anybody who is in your presence that you have a good
heart and that is the most important quality you can have so
don't change, please, okay?
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. A couple things--I want to thank you for
your support for Israel. We have covered that a lot. Focusing
in on Ukraine, which my colleague, Mr. Boyle, had alluded to--
Brendan's legislation is outstanding. It is critically
important. If you could do me a favor, review that and any
support that you and the administration could give to that
would be very, very helpful.
From a philosophical standpoint, because right now we are
in the budgetary process--we are being asked to make some
really tough decisions between military spending, diplomatic
spending--from a philosophical standpoint, some people believe
that U.S. intervention is only appropriate when our national
security interests are imminently at threat.
Other people take the view that when there are atrocities
occurring around the world that the U.S. cannot ethically and
morally turn a blind eye to that.
So your philosophy on when intervention is appropriate from
all components--if you could comment on that.
Ambassador Haley. Well, I think that the U.S. should always
have a strong voice. You always have to pick a side, you know,
when it comes on any issue. I just think it is--abstentions are
nothing that I believe in. I think you have to pick a side one
way or the other and you have to tell what we are for and you
have to tell what the U.S. is against and that doesn't mean
that you are cutting countries off. It means that on every
issue we are going to have a different thought and we have to
just communicate that and make that known.
We are the moral compass around the world. We have been. It
doesn't mean we are perfect, but that is what we try and do.
And so U.S. values, for us to continue to own those and express
those I think is an important part of who we are. I also think
that we are a leader and we are a leader that many other
countries look to to see what we are going to do and they make
their decisions on that.
And so we need to always look at what our role is going to
be and we need to decide place by place as opposed to just a
blanket policy because all of these conflicts that we are
seeing now are completely different.
And so I think taking a custom approach to all of the
conflicts and how we think we can be the strongest and most
supportive to bring a political solution is very important.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Will the gentleman yield?
Chairman Royce. We would like to get to the junior members,
if we could.
We are going to go to Dina Titus of Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassador.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Ms. Titus. You said early on several times that we could
count on you to be a thorn in the side of Russia or a thorn in
the side of somewhere. But that's kind of like saying you're
going to be a burr under the saddle or a pea under the
princess. That sounds like we are more of an irritant than we
are a leader and that is what worries some of us on this
committee about what is happening to the image of the country.
Also, I would like to go back to something that Mr. Meeks
mentioned earlier and that's that poll that showed our image
declining internationally. It says since the inauguration of
President Trump, according to citizens of 27 countries from
around the world, we have just gone downhill.
You think that the President is doing a pretty good job but
the rest of the world doesn't seem to think so. Sixty-four
percent had confidence in the U.S. President at the end of the
Obama administration. That number has fallen to 22 percent. At
the end of the Obama administration, 64 percent had a favorable
view of the United States. Now it is just 49 percent.
I represent Las Vegas and, you know, that's an
international city. We welcome 8 million foreign visitors from
all around the globe every year. But we have seen a real
decrease in the interest in coming to the United States by
foreign visitors. According to the U.S. Global Travel
Association, there is going to be a $1.3 billion loss in 2017.
That is 4,200 jobs in communities like Las Vegas and
Charleston.
So all the signs show that if we don't work to correct
this, it is going to have a major impact on a big part of our
economy. In fact, the recent surveys show that 45 percent of
European business travelers said that they would plan future
meetings somewhere else because it is too difficult to come and
travel to the United States.
You said when you were governor that we want to continue to
sell to the rest of the country and the world how great of a
place South Carolina is to visit and you also said, when you
were trumpeting the state's economic tourism basis, that what
it tells everybody across the world is if you haven't been
here, get here quickly, and if you have get back. Well, that's
kind of what we like to say in Las Vegas, too.
But I wonder if you really believe that the Trump
administration has been a good salesperson for international
tourism, if you are concerned about this image decline and
these statistics, and as our representative to the United
Nations, what you are doing to try to just repair that image,
put the welcome mat instead of saying no, we don't want you to
come.
Ambassador Haley. So, first, in reference to being a thorn
in the side, being a thorn in the side means that I call out
something when I think it is wrong and I think that that is
part of what the U.S. does and I think that it is also praising
when things are right. It is criticizing when things are wrong
and acting accordingly, and so I stand by my comments on that.
I will tell you, in reference to your poll, I have not seen
it. But whereas that is 27 countries, I deal with 192 and the
overwhelming feeling is that we are unpredictable. They don't
know exactly what we are going to do. But it has kept them more
on alert in terms of wanting to be there with us, not wanting
to get on the wrong side of us.
So I haven't felt that. My goal is to have a relationship
with everyone and to make sure that I show that the U.S. wants
to get political solutions to all things and work with
countries to do that. And so I always try and do that as we go
forward.
In terms of the economy, and you brought up South Carolina,
which I am very proud of, we have multiple international
businesses continuing to come in. Our economy is through the
roof and we have record years in tourism and we are not seeing
a decline in any way on international tourism, trade, any of
those things. And so I do think that the President has set a
tone. Every President sets a tone, and we always have sides who
agree with the tone or don't agree with the tone. But my job is
to make sure that I am on the side of the U.S. and that----
Ms. Titus. You don't think unpredictability is dangerous
and it leads to instability and can be a problem in
international diplomacy?
Ambassador Haley. In my job, I have found it has made my
negotiations better and it has made it easier because they
don't assume. They don't take us for granted anymore. They
don't--they no longer look at us as one that they can just push
over and know exactly what we are going to do. So for me it has
been helpful.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Tom Garrett of Virginia.
Mr. Garrett. First of all, I want to thank the chair for
looking out for the junior members. We represent roughly the
same number of people as the senior members and I am grateful.
I am going to ask a series of questions that are really
simple and I am seeking a relatively short answer. Do you think
that conspiracy theories about things like Russian meddling and
the outcome of our election that are propagated by some members
of this body as well as the media, the basis of which a CNN
exec recently called BS but ran the stories anyway, might
contribute to diminished opinions of the United States around
the world?
Ambassador Haley. No one at the United Nations is talking
about this issue at all or anything----
Mr. Garrett. But the questioning, ma'am, with all due
respect, was about----
Ambassador Haley. Yes, it does not help the situation.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And do you think that rhetoric that says
that because we have disagreements over things like health care
policy, the President and the Republicans want to kill children
and old people, might contribute to diminished feelings about
the United States across the world?
Ambassador Haley. That is far from the truth.
Mr. Garrett. But do you think that rhetoric might
contribute to a diminished opinion of the nation?
Ambassador Haley. Of course.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And are you familiar with the quote by
Vandenberg that said politics stop at the water's edge?
Ambassador Haley. Yes.
Mr. Garrett. Has that been your experience since you've
served in your current capacity?
Ambassador Haley. You know, I think my job is to sit there
and ignore what is happening in DC because I have found the
rhetoric has just been over the top.
Mr. Garrett. It is--isn't it? Isn't it? And so I am not
going to ask the follow-up question because I respect where you
are coming from and appreciate the job you do and the fact that
you have done it in a manner such that you personally at least
have received bipartisan praise for in this meeting.
But I think we reap what we sow as it relates to how people
view us and that the reckless hurling of invective not
undergird by facts, obviously, would perpetuate those who don't
like us not liking us.
Now, moving on to something more pressing--the U.N.
Security Council Resolution 2231 essentially endorsed the
JCPOA, which I have repeatedly and for the press gone on record
as calling the JCPOS.
I will tell you that 2231 repealed what was U.N. Security
Council Resolution 1929. You are probably familiar with this. I
am not confident who the prior administration had negotiating
the JCPOA but are you aware that U.N. Security Council
Resolution 2231 stated, ``Iran shall not undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear
weapons,'' and then it was replaced by a U.N. resolution
commending the JCPOA that read, ``Iran is called upon not to
undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles,'' and
then they gave a little bit more latitude--``designed to carry
a nuclear payload.''
Are you aware of this?
Ambassador Haley. It is one of the most dangerous things
that happened when we passed the JCPOA because basically what
you did was you just deferred what is going to happen and you
gave them a bunch of money to do it and now you see that they
don't follow the rules by 2231 with the testing, with the----
Mr. Garrett. I would argue that they didn't violate the
rules of 2231 because 2231 endorses the JCPOA and the JCPOA
says is called upon not to instead of shall not. And who wrote
that? And that is a rhetorical question.
For our nation with the security of ourselves and our
allies in mind and how incompetent, or nefarious, are they? You
don't need to--that is rhetorical.
Ambassador Haley. It is very concerning. Very concerning.
Mr. Garrett. Again, with all due respect. So my question
becomes is there a way, and I have no clue to the answer, to
repeal 2231 and actually go back to the United Nations
resolution which was more effective in deterring Iranian
aggression than what the United States let a multinational
coalition hammering out.
Is there any way to go back from 1929 to 2231, which says
shall not as opposed to it is called upon not to?
Ambassador Haley. Russia would veto it.
Mr. Garrett. Okay. And that leads beautifully--almost like
we coordinated this--into my next question. So there has been
Russian aggression in South Ossetia--I am going to probably
butcher some of these names--Abkhazia, the Georgian regions.
There has been Russian aggression in East Ukraine and
Crimea. There has been a Russian and China veto of U.N. actions
regarding the tragedy and crisis in Syria. And we spoke
yesterday with the Secretary-General and he said, well, there
is so many things we can't do because the Security Council
members would veto them. How do we make this organization with
such lofty ideals an effective player on the world stage?
And, part two--it is tangentially related--how do we repair
the message that was sent when Ms. Power abstained that we will
not be loyal to our allies by virtue of how we conduct
ourselves today at the U.N.?
Thank you.
Ambassador Haley. So my number one goal is to make the
Security Council mean something. I think that the fact that we
are not seeing a lot of resolutions against Israel shows that
that part is working.
I think that Russia does stop a lot of things and lately
Russia stops anything the U.S. is for. That is a long line of
reasoning. China can do the same thing.
I do think we have made huge strides in terms of
peacekeeping reforms and what we are going to do on management
reforms and the fact that we just saved $\1/2\ billion on the
peacekeeping budget was a huge win, and so we are going to
continue to do that.
But the one thing I will tell you is we are going to
continue to talk about 2334 as something that the U.S. does not
support, does not endorse, and if given the opportunity, that
will never happen again.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. Norma Torres of California.
Ms. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Ambassador Haley.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Ms. Torres. I know the time has been long and I apologize
that we have not given you a short break.
Ambassador Haley. No worries. I am fine.
Ms. Torres. Regarding Syria, I agree with you, we can never
take Syria back to what it was. So through this horrific
conflict last December the General Assembly created the
international, impartial, and independent mechanism to collect
and analyze evidence about the atrocities in Syria.
I want to know what specific steps has the United States
taken to advance this mechanism.
Ambassador Haley. So, interestingly enough, the Security
Council supported the Joint Investigative Mechanism
unanimously. They decided what it would do, how it would
happen, and what things take place since that has happened and
since we have had the Syrian atrocities with chemical weapons
and everything else Russia now says it is not a fair mechanism
even though they were the ones that helped put it together.
We continue to support the JIM. We will continue to push
the JIM. But Russia continues to undermine it and say that it
is not something that is effective.
Ms. Torres. Speaking about Russia, on April 27th you stated
that Russia continues to cover for the Syria regime. Russia
continues to allow them to keep humanitarian aid from the
people that need it. Russia continues to cover for a leader who
uses chemical weapons against its own people. Russia continues
to veto and Assad continues to do these things because they
know Russia will continue to cover for them. Do you still stand
by that statement?
Ambassador Haley. You know, I think General Mattis has
implied that things are starting to move and I hope that's the
case. But that has definitely been the case in the past and I
would love to see all of that change but----
Ms. Torres. So do you still stand by that statement?
Ambassador Haley. Yes.
Ms. Torres. Okay. Great.
Although Russia and China have not sent over a jet fighter
plan, although submarines are nearing our coast, there are
other things that they have done, both, that have impacted our
economy greatly.
One of them is happening now. The port of Los Angeles is
the last victim of this global cyber attack. Now, I understand
that we are still investigating. We don't know exactly where
that is.
So I find it hard to believe and I would like to get
clarification from you on your statement when you said--
regarding Mr. Boyle's question, that you do not want China or
Russia to dictate how we approach these attacks.
And I get, you know, somewhat where you are trying to get
at that. But I am also concerned that there isn't a
conversation, you know, within 192 countries that you deal with
about Russia's influence in our election, about their influence
in the European elections and, most recently in Germany's
election.
How can that be? How can we not see cyber attacks or
influence in our elections as a threat to our democracy, as a
threat to our economic standing?
Ambassador Haley. So it is a threat and I think what you
are seeing, and I've talked with my counterparts is we are
seeing them intervene in multiple elections. I have talked with
the Ambassadors about it.
Everyone sees it as a problem and I do think it is
something that is going to come up. I do think it is something
that is going to surface because it is affecting so many other
countries in the process.
What we don't want is for the U.N. to regulate cyber
situations because they would put China and they would put
Russia on it because they are two P5 members.
And so we don't want to do that because as they have done
in so many other cases, they take care of themselves and they
hurt everyone else.
Ms. Torres. I have 1 minute left and now I am going to move
on to a easier question. I understand that the residence of the
U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations has moved from the
Waldorf Astoria to a different high-rise building close to the
United Nations.
In 2015, a Chinese company purchased the Waldorf Astoria
for $1.95 billion and the U.S. presence there was under review
since we have strong concerns about the security implications
of Chinese ownership.
Chinese-linked hackers have been accused of perpetrating
the massive breach of personnel records that compromise the
data of millions of our own Federal employees. So I am very
happy that the residence in New York has moved so that we can
ensure the security of our personnel and your security. But I
would also like to get further clarity from you regarding the
future of the residence since the Trump Tower is only a mile
away. I want to ensure that you are not thinking about moving
and spending taxpayers' dollars at the Trump Tower.
Ambassador Haley. No, I am not. I did not pick this
location. We did move because China bought it and for the
reasons that you stated. I did not pick this location but I
will stay wherever--I will stay in this location until it is
time for me to leave. But no, I am not moving to the Trump
Tower.
Ms. Torres. Thank you, and I appreciate your visit.
Yield back.
Chairman Royce. Mark Meadows of North Carolina.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ambassador Haley, thank you so much----
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. For enduring almost 3 hours of
questioning in such an eloquent way. I think--representing
North Carolina, I get to share the same television market with
you when you were governor and I must confess I am so
unbelievably impressed with your grasp of foreign policy coming
from a governor to your particular position now.
Being someone who loves foreign policy, there are nuances
that we could trip you up each and every time with a question
and yet you have been able to masterfully answer those from
either side of the aisle. So thank you.
Let me drill down a little bit further because, as you
know, whether it was in South Carolina or in North Carolina,
there is a huge push back for spending American taxpayer
dollars on something and then having our member states vote
against the United States over and over and over again.
And so it has been one of those areas where I had a
wonderful meeting with the U.N. Secretary-General yesterday
who, by the way, holds you in very high regard. I was very
impressed with him--I mean, in his desire to reform the U.N.
because many times member states have, I guess, a push back
when it comes to reforming because that may mean that moneys
don't flow necessarily as easily to their host country.
Would you be willing to work with Members of Congress on
the voting records of member states to help us identify when
they vote with us and when they do not vote with us so that we
can have a very accurate account and perhaps tie it a little
bit closer to foreign aid?
Ambassador Haley. So, yes, I absolutely would be willing to
work with you but I would say we need to use leverage. So I
gave the example earlier. You know, for example, we give a lot
of money to the Palestinian Authority. We should tell them that
we can't continue to give money if they continue to have martyr
payments----
Mr. Meadows. Right.
Ambassador Haley [continuing]. And if they continue--so if
we can tie it----
Mr. Meadows. And that doesn't mean just changing it from
the PLA to the PLO----
Ambassador Haley. Right.
Mr. Meadows [continuing]. Because they stopped it in one
and they moved it to the other.
Ambassador Haley. Right. So I don't think we should do it
by percentages of how much they vote with us. I think we should
do it be leverage on policy issues that we can change.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
And so we have worked up a new report with the
Congressional Research Service in terms of dollars given and
how they vote with us and I was amazed to see billions of
dollars going to many of these different countries and yet when
it comes to Israel they vote with us 4 percent of the time.
Can you take a message to many of your Ambassador friends
in New York and tell them that that dog will not hunt?
Ambassador Haley. I would love that list. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. And so the time has come. There is a new
sheriff in town and we are going to look at it very, very
closely. Will you take that message back to----
Ambassador Haley. I will take that message. I have told
them that we will no longer be a pushover and they can't take
our U.S. funding for granted any longer, and I would love that
list.
Mr. Meadows. All right. And we will get that to you.
And the last thing I would say is would you consider
Israel's human rights record to be better than that of Iran?
Ambassador Haley. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. So why is it perplexing--I noticed that you
had an op-ed where you showed that there was 70 resolutions
against Israel and only seven against Iran.
Can you fathom any logical reason why the U.N. would do
that?
Ambassador Haley. Because they always have.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Can you take another message to
them, that that dog won't hunt either?
Ambassador Haley. That is right.
Mr. Meadows. All right. And if you will----
Ambassador Haley. Message already sent and will continue to
be.
Mr. Meadows. All right. Well, thank you, Ambassador Haley,
and with the last remaining minute I am going to yield to the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Smith, so he can follow up on
one question.
Mr. Smith. I thank my----
Chairman Royce. And, again, I am going to suggest to the
members our goal was to reach all of the junior members. But
the gentleman from New Jersey is recognized.
Mr. Smith. Well, some things were said that need to be
corrected and I would like to just get this on the record.
I would like to thank the administration for faithfully and
very effectively implementing longstanding U.S. law initiated
under Ronald Reagan which requires the shut off of U.S. funds
to any organization, not just the UNFPA, but any organization
that supports or co-manages a coercive population control
program.
Since 1979, China has required women to get permission to
have a child. You don't have a child unless you get permission.
Forced abortion is commonplace.
It is pervasive, as is forced sterilization, and as you
pointed out, Madam Ambassador, every dollar that doesn't go to
the UNFPA will go to some other NGO or entity that will do the
same type of work--family planning, maternal and child health,
and I think this is very important and I could go on but I am
out of time.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. The committee made a commitment to
Ambassador Haley to end at 1:00 p.m.
Ambassador, I would ask that you respond to additional
questions in writing. We go now to Mr. Bradley Schneider of
Illinois.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ambassador, for being here. I want to personally thank you.
Your staff has taken the time to meet with us on issues such as
sexual violence and exploitation and I look forward to
continuing to work together.
I am going to apologize if I get a tap on my shoulder. We
have a vote in another committee on refugees, and I will stop
and let you out.
Ambassador Haley. I understand. Thank you.
Mr. Schneider. But we have talked about refugees. We have
talked about human rights and, as Mr. Smith touched on, what is
happening in China.
I want to bring you back to UNRWA, if I can, and in your
opening remarks you said that there is an issue of culture
versus incitement as they were talking to you about it.
And I would argue that culture is something that comes
through education and the education that is happening in the
territories is incitement and if we are going to have a
prospect for peace, if we are going to have a prospect for two
states living side by side, insecurity impedes the Jewish state
of Israel and the Palestinian state, the culture is going to
have to accept that and that is going to come from the
education.
In other questions you have addressed the issue of
education and the importance to educate young people in the
territories, which I could not agree with more.
My question is as you look at UNRWA it has been in place
for 70 years. It has issues of harboring terrorists, working
with terrorists. You can go on and on.
Is there the opportunity to take the beneficial services,
as you said, that are good, that come from UNRWA and find
perhaps other agencies, whether it is the High Commission for
Refugees or the PA itself and get to a point where after 70
years this special unique situation with UNRWA can be
streamlined into the operations of the U.N. and the Palestinian
Authority to move us toward peace?
Ambassador Haley. First of all, I agree with everything
that you said and yes, we have----
Mr. Schneider. And excuse me. I will leave you to answer,
but I have to go vote.
Ambassador Haley. We have talked to the Secretary-General
and yes, we have made that push and would support that push.
Chairman Royce. Well, I want to thank Ambassador Haley for
your testimony here today. It is 1:00 and you have a lot of
work to do with the reform agenda at the U.N. Many have tried
before you and they haven't found a lot of success. So we wish
you well.
Ambassador Haley. Thank you.
Chairman Royce. We will be backing you and we can see from
your attitude you intend to succeed in this. But while it is
frustrating, it is needed work because several U.N. agencies do
important work, and I mentioned the value of peacekeeping and
the need to make it better.
And our security should never be delegated to the United
Nations. I know you won't do that. But our security can also be
improved when the U.S. rallies the world including at the U.N.
So if I were to think of an example that comes to mind
immediately it would be the North Korean resolution passed
through the Security Council as an example.
And, of course, we need better enforcement. We thank you
for your commitment to that enforcement.
Ambassador Haley, we look forward to following up on
several of the issues that were raised today. Myself and the
ranking member will see you in New York, and we all look
forward to seeing you again in the committee.
We stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:01 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
