- [H.A.S.C. No. 115-31]Consequences and Context for Russia's Violations of the INF Treaty

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 115-31]

CONSEQUENCES AND CONTEXT

FOR RUSSIA'S VIOLATIONS OF

THE INF TREATY

__________

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

meeting jointly with

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TERRORISM, NONPROLIFERATION, AND TRADE

of the

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

[Serial No. 115-57]

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 30, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-147                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Vice Chair    JIM COOPER, Tennessee
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               SUSAN A. DAVIS, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   JOHN GARAMENDI, California
JIM BRIDENSTINE, Oklahoma            BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               COLLEEN HANABUSA, Hawaii
BRADLEY BYRNE, Alabama               RO KHANNA, California
SAM GRAVES, Missouri
Tim Morrison, Counsel
Leonor Tomero, Counsel
Mike Gancio, Clerk

------

COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

EDWARD R. ROYCE, California, Chairman
CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey     ELIOT L. ENGEL, New York
ILEANA ROS-LEHTINEN, Florida         BRAD SHERMAN, California
DANA ROHRABACHER, California         GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas             THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
TED POE, Texas                       KAREN BASS, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DAVID N. CICILLINE, Rhode Island
JEFF DUNCAN, South Carolina          AMI BERA, California
MO BROOKS, Alabama                   LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
RON DeSANTIS, Florida                ROBIN L. KELLY, Illinois
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 DINA TITUS, Nevada
ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois             NORMA J. TORRES, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
DANIEL M. DONOVAN, Jr., New York     THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
Wisconsin                        TED LIEU, California
ANN WAGNER, Missouri
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida
FRANCIS ROONEY, Florida
BRIAN K. FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

Amy Porter, Chief of Staff      Thomas Sheehy, Staff Director

Jason Steinbaum, Democratic Staff Director
------

Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade

TED POE, Texas, Chairman
JOE WILSON, South Carolina           WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
PAUL COOK, California                BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              NORMA J. TORRES, California
BRIAN J. MAST, Florida               BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, Illinois
THOMAS A. GARRETT, Jr., Virginia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, Committee on Armed Services..     1

WITNESSES

Rose, Hon. Frank A., Former Assistant Secretary of State for Arms
Control, Verification, and Compliance, Department of State.....     1
Scher, Hon. Robert M., Former Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Strategy, Plans, and Capabilities, Department of Defense.......     3
Wolfsthal, Jon Brook, Former Senior Director for Arms Control and
Nonproliferation, National Security Council....................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Cooper, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Tennessee, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces, Committee on
Armed Services.............................................    37
Keating, Hon. William R., a Representative from
Massachusetts, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade, Committee on Foreign Affairs..    39
Poe, Hon. Ted., a Representative from Texas, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Nonproliferation, and Trade,
Committee on Foreign Affairs...............................    35
Rogers, Hon. Mike............................................    33
Rose, Hon. Frank A...........................................    40
Scher, Hon. Robert M.........................................    49
Wolfsthal, Jon Brook.........................................    63

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Letter to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Dempsey......    81
Joint Chiefs of Staff 2013 report............................    83

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Cooper...................................................    99
Mr. Rogers...................................................    95
CONSEQUENCES AND CONTEXT FOR RUSSIA'S VIOLATIONS OF THE INF TREATY

----------

House of Representatives, Committee on Armed
Services, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Meeting Jointly with the Committee on Foreign
Affairs, Subcommittee on Terrorism,
Nonproliferation, and Trade, Washington, DC,
Thursday, March 30, 2017.

The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:45 a.m., in
room 2172, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers
(chairman of the Subcommittee on Strategic Forces) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES, COMMITTEE
ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Rogers. This joint hearing will come to order. Since we
were called away for votes at a bad time, we have agreed to
dispense with opening statements from the members and go
directly to our witnesses. We want to thank our witnesses for
being here and taking the time to not only attend, but to
prepare. We know it takes a lot of time and energy, and it is a
great help to us, so thank you very much.
We have a distinguished panel with us today. The Honorable
Frank Rose, former Assistant Secretary of State for Arms
Control, Verification, and Compliance; the Honorable Bob Scher,
Former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Strategy, Plans, and
Capabilities; and Jon Wolfsthal, did I say that right?
Mr. Wolfsthal. Excellent, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Former Senior Director of Arms Control and
Nonproliferation, National Security Council.
We will start with Mr. Rose. You are recognized for an
opening statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rogers can be found in the
Appendix on page 33.]

STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK A. ROSE, FORMER ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
STATE FOR ARMS CONTROL, VERIFICATION, AND COMPLIANCE,
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Rose. Great. Chairman Rogers, Chairman Poe, Ranking
Member Cooper, Ranking Member Keating, members of the
committee, it is a pleasure to appear before you today to
discuss how the United States and its allies should respond to
Russia's violation of its obligations under the Intermediate
Nuclear Forces, or INF, Treaty. As I outlined in my prepared
statement, I believe it is highly unlikely that Russia will
return to compliance with its obligations under the treaty for
a variety of political and military reasons. Specifically, I
believe that Russia no longer views the Euro-Atlantic security
architecture put in place in the late 1980s and early 1990s as
in its interest, and it is slowly but surely trying to, I would
say, dismantle that architecture, and the INF Treaty violation
is a symptom of that.
Therefore, a strong but proportional response is required
by the United States and its allies to effectively deal with
Russia's violation. I would recommend that the United States
and its allies adopt a, quote, ``countervailing strategy'' in
response to Russia's violation that seeks to enhance deterrence
by holding critical Russian assets at risk. That response
should also include limited defensive measures to deny Russia
significant military benefit from the deployment of the new
ground launch cruise missile. This approach would include
several elements.
First, I think it is important that the United States
remain focused on maintaining the unity of our alliance, both
in Asia and in Europe. The INF Treaty is not simply a bilateral
treaty between the U.S. and Russia, but it goes to the heart of
Euro-Atlantic security. So as we develop our response options,
I think it is imperative we do that in a way that maximizes
coordination with allies. And, furthermore, as we look at
military response options, I think it is important that we find
ways to include the allies.
Secondly, I think the United States needs to place the
blame for the demise on the INF Treaty squarely with Russia. It
is Russia who has cheated on the treaty and got caught. We need
to be careful, though, that we don't unilaterally withdraw and
give Russia a victory. My predecessor in the Bush
administration, Steve Rademaker, in testimony before this
committee in July of 2014, made the same point. We don't want
to give the Russians a gift.
Third, I think it is very important that the United States
continue to fund the nuclear modernization program,
specifically the new air-launch cruise missile, the long-range
standoff system, or LRSO. This will improve our ability to hold
critical Russian targets at risk.
Fourth, I think the United States should develop a
conventional variant of the LRSO. Again, this conventional
variant of the LRSO will further allow us to hold critical
Russian targets at risk.
Fifth, I think we should facilitate allied acquisition of
air- and sea-launch conventional strike capabilities,
particularly the joint air and surface standoff missile, or
JASSM, and we should also consider selling the Tomahawk sea-
launch cruise missile to interested allies.
Sixth, I think it is critical that we remind Russia that
NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] remains a nuclear
alliance, and implement all of the key nuclear recommendations
from NATO's Warsaw Summit of July 2016.
And, finally, the United States and NATO should deploy
limited cruise missile defenses to protect key alliance assets
in the event of a conflict with Russia. While I support the
deployment of limited cruise missiles, I would caution against
moving forward with the deployment of a larger set of mission
defense capabilities aimed against Russia, especially Russia's
strategic deterrent. Such an approach would be extremely
expensive and technologically challenging.
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, the INF Treaty has served the
security interests of the United States and our allies for
almost 30 years. It is not just a bilateral treaty between the
U.S. and Russia, but goes to the heart of European security.
However, it is clear to me that Russia is not coming back into
compliance, or unlikely to do; therefore, a strong but
proportional response is required. Those response options
should be implemented in a way that maintains alliance unity,
and places the blame for the demise of the treaty squarely
where it belongs, with Russia.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rose can be found in the
Appendix on page 40.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much.
Mr. Scher, you are recognized for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT M. SCHER, FORMER ASSISTANT SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE FOR STRATEGY, PLANS, AND CAPABILITIES, DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE

Mr. Scher. Thank you. Chairman Rogers, Chairman Poe,
Ranking Member Cooper, Ranking Member Keating, distinguished
members, thank you for inviting me to testify today. As I am
sure you all know, my testimony represents my personal views
only, and not those of the previous administration. And I will
try to touch on just the key highlights of my written
testimony, which I know will be put into the record, in this
opening statement to keep lots of time for questions and
answers.
Russia's violation of the INF Treaty and its deployment of
the violating system must be considered within the context of
Russia's overall aggressive behavior. Given this, any approach
to Russia's violation needs to be considered within a complete
context of a strategy towards Russia. Having said that, within
this context, I believe it will be very difficult, if not
impossible, to bring Russia back into compliance, but I also
believe that right now, it remains in our best interests to try
to get Russia to return. Having the INF Treaty in force
enhances strategic stability, and continuing to be seen by our
allies as working diligently with Russia is important.
The centerpiece of any policy must be approaching this with
all levers of national power and using these to demonstrate
that we will not allow the Russians to benefit from their
violation. As such, the administration should consider taking
some combination of military actions along with diplomatic and
economic actions to show Russia it will not achieve the
advantages it seeks by deploying this system. And further, I
would argue that U.S. government policies should be oriented
towards demonstrating to Russia that they are actually going to
be worse off militarily and diplomatically if they continue to
field this system. Certain actions clearly need to be taken or
are already being taken and should be built upon. We need to
better protect our forces and our allies directly from these
missiles, and I believe that there should be consideration of
increasing those capabilities, especially in the area of cruise
missile defense. The United States and its allies must look to
field systems into and around the region that can hold at risk
key targets inside of Russia, including, but not limited to,
the violating systems.
The U.S. and NATO should continue to improve the readiness
and presence of their conventional and nuclear forces. As the
United States and NATO allies step up pressure, other actions
should be considered in any review. When considering these
options, however, we must realize that any policy has to strike
the difficult balance between demonstrating to Russia that it
cannot take its aggressive actions and expect that there will
be no response, against ensuring that any actions taken to
increase overall strategic stability--sorry--that any actions
will increase strategic stability, not reduce it.
Some examples of military actions I described in my
testimony that could be considered are: increasing deployments
of SSGNs [cruise missile submarines] in and around Europe to
increase strike capacity of U.S. assets in the region; fielding
unilaterally and in conjunction with NATO allies broader and
more sophisticated rocket artillery systems on the territory of
our eastern allies; speeding up the deployment of the LRSO and
quickly developing a conventional cruise missile variant;
transitioning the Air Force program office overseeing LRSO
development into a joint program office; and considering how to
develop or how we might field a ground-launch cruise missile
similar to the one Russia has apparently deployed. While
consideration of this option is not a violation of the INF
Treaty, clearly, many would see this as the most escalatory of
the options.
Critical to any coordinated political, economic, and
military set of actions that we take is that they are developed
and carried out in coordination with our allies. Our alliance
structure is key to our strength, and it is a comparative
advantage we have over Russia. However, we also cannot afford
to let NATO drift into paralysis, and must make it clear to our
allies that inaction is unacceptable.
I appreciate the attention that these subcommittees have
paid to this important issue. I appreciate the chance to
testify in front of you, and look forward to answering any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scher can be found in the
Appendix on page 49.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you very much for that statement.
Mr. Wolfsthal, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JON BROOK WOLFSTHAL, FORMER SENIOR DIRECTOR FOR
ARMS CONTROL AND NONPROLIFERATION, NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL

Mr. Wolfsthal. Chairman Rogers, Chairman Poe, Ranking
Members Cooper, Keating, and other members, thank you very much
for the opportunity and honor of testifying today. I will just
note that I am also testifying in my personal capacity, and I
will ask that my longer remarks be submitted for the record. I
responded to many of the questions that the committee posed,
but want to frame my remarks in three guiding principles that I
think should influence any decision to take action in response
to INF violation, and many of these are echoed, I think, by my
colleagues here.
First and foremost is anything we do must maximize alliance
unity, both in NATO and in East Asia. We have to remember that
this is not just an Atlantic problem, this is also something
that affects Japan and South Korea.
Second, we should make sure that Russia gain no military
advantage through its violations. The Obama administration, as
this program was under development, took steps in that
direction. The deployment of this system, I think, does
necessitate other steps to ensure that is the case, and I will
recommend some in a minute.
And then, third, I am very mindful, as I know my colleagues
are, about the danger to crisis stability in Europe. We should
be mindful not to do anything that makes that problem worse, as
long as it does protect our security interests. We are in an
action-reaction cycle with Russia. It doesn't mean that we
shouldn't take action, but we need to understand how it will
affect that dynamic, because the risk of conflict is real and
growing.
I want to include one last factor that I would not put in
the same category as guiding principle, but I think is
important, and that is that we should remember that arms
control has never been a standalone purpose. It is a tool in
our toolbox. The INF Treaty has allowed us to catch the
cheating of Russia in time to take response, and it is one that
we can use wisely if it is in the context of a larger policy,
just as we are now with the new START [Strategic Arms
Reduction] Treaty, which remains very much in our interest, and
I don't believe should be an area where we think about
countermeasures unless and until Russia fails to comply fully
with that agreement.
So to the meat of how to respond to this violation. First
and foremost, I think our response should and can be
diplomatic. We need to be much more forceful in how we confront
Russia's actions and the damage--and be clear about the damage
that Moscow is doing to the global nuclear landscape. We must
move to share publicly with our allies and with the broader
public information about Russia's violation that heretofore has
only been shared with Russia and to our closest allies. I
believe that the scale should now tip much further towards
public release, because that will assist in the second step of
this campaign, which is to put increased public pressure on
Moscow.
Why did Moscow cheat on the INF agreement as opposed to
withdrawing from it, which it is legally entitled to do and
they have mentioned for many, many years as a possibility? It
is because they don't want to be responsible for the collapse
of an arms control treaty. And so putting the onus directly on
them, I believe, may be an effective way to cost them
politically and diplomatically, and might guide some of their
future actions. I don't suggest it is a be-all and end-all
response, but it strikes me it is a clue to their thinking.
I also think that we should be unwilling to allow Moscow to
maintain its traditional role as a leader in the global
nonproliferation and arms control community. That is a
responsibility that you earn, one that we have continually
earned, that Moscow has abdicated. And so putting pressure on
Moscow in the context of the Non-Proliferation Treaty [NPT],
the permanent members of the U.N. [United Nations] Security
Council, the P5 fora, I think are all viable diplomatic
measures.
Third, I believe that we can and should take legal
countermeasures in response to this violation. If the
administration finds Moscow in material breach, we have the
right to not only take countermeasures within the context of
the INF Treaty, but also within the context of other arms
control treaties that Moscow may care about more than our own.
We care about the INF Treaty; Moscow clearly does not. Moscow
cares a lot about other treaties, like the Open Skies Treaty,
one that is not as deeply rooted in our security interests as
in Moscow. And so, I think that we can work within the alliance
structure to put pressure on Russia and deny them their rights
to fully exercise their Open Skies Treaty rights in a way that
might put additional pressure on them to come back in
compliance with the INF. The benefit of this is also it puts
our allies in NATO, their skin in the game. They also care
about Open Skies, but they are not parties to the INF Treaty,
and so showing that we going to take measures in one area may
bring them to take action in others.
I will sum up also in the military sphere. Some of what I
will say echoes some of my colleagues' remarks. I do not
support deploying land-based missiles in Europe in response to
Russia's actions. I believe that we have many better options.
We have the ability, and we already have the capability, to
have air- and sea-launched cruise missiles in the European
theater, but I think the risks of trying to push that avenue
with our allies outweigh the benefits.
I do believe that we should establish a joint program
office for the new long-range standoff missile, one that would
look into the possibility of a conventional variant to this
nuclear program. I would actually go further. I don't believe
that there is a very strong case for the nuclear-armed LRSO
with a penetrating bomber, so I would redirect the entire
program towards conventional, but I know that is an issue that
we looked at both by the administration and this committee. But
I would also make a virtue out of necessity, and make clear
that we are doing this in direct response to Russia's
violations, and to echo my colleague Bob Scher, that this would
make it very clear that Moscow will suffer from both a security
and a diplomatic standpoint as a result of their actions.
So just to echo, I would say that we clearly do need to act
in response to this, but we need to take care not to overreact,
and to keep our security and the goals of stability and
alliance management in mind as we craft our response.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wolfsthal can be found in
the Appendix on page 63.]
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. I recognize myself for the first set
of questions.
Mr. Scher and Mr. Rose, in 2015, the Congress asked
Chairman Dempsey to come up with a list of recommendations for
the President as to how the U.S. should respond to the INF
violations, and we also wanted to know what they were later,
but do you know what those recommendations were that Chairman
Dempsey made to the President? Did you support his military
options, why or why not?
Mr. Scher. Yes. Certainly we in the Office of the Secretary
of Defense were well aware and, frankly, worked with the Joint
Staff to develop those military options and did see them. I
supported them all going forward as credible options in
different cases. Honestly, my memory will fail as to which ones
specifically I didn't support or did support, but I did think
it was a very useful exercise and to make sure that a full set
of options was put on the table and delivered for interagency
discussion.
Mr. Rogers. Do you know if any of them were exercised?
Mr. Scher. Honestly, I believe very few were exercised, if
any. Some of the very--the small pieces, but, in fact, in large
part, many of--most of them, I believe, were not. There were,
however, things that were done in conjunction with conventional
forces in ERI [European Reassurance Initiative] and other
places that did fulfill some of those pieces, but they were not
necessarily directly related or--said to be directly related to
the INF Treaty violation, but to the full suite of Russia
aggressive action, which is, in fact, what we have always said
we were going to do.
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Rose.
Mr. Rose. Yeah, I would just concur. I thought that was a
very useful exercise. I was involved in that. I don't remember
every single option, and a lot of that was classified. I would
concur with Mr. Scher's statement that not many of the specific
INF-related options were exercised, but they were, I would say,
include--some of the other ones were included in that broader
response to the Russian threat. And I think that is a really
important point to make, is that we need to put this in a
larger strategic context in which the INF is part of a larger
challenge that Russia is presenting. As I mentioned in my
opening statement, sir, I don't think the INF is a separate
thing. I think it is part of this larger picture, and that is,
Russia no longer sees the Euro-Atlantic security structure put
in place in the 1980s and the 1990s as in its interests.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. At this time, if there is no
objection, I am going to enter into the record a letter that
Mr. Poe, Mr. Cooper, Mr. Sherman, and I sent to Chairman
Dempsey in January of 2015 asking for a copy of these
recommendations. We have never received it. And we have fenced
off money in the NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] last
year from the administration until we do receive it.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 81.]
Mr. Rogers. Mr. Scher and Mr. Rose, again, are you aware of
the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff report in 2013
stating that there are at least four validated military
requirements that call for the U.S. to use military
capabilities prohibited in the INF?
I am going to include a copy of this unclassified report
for the record as well.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 83.]
Mr. Rose. Sir, I didn't become assistant Secretary until
late 2014, so I wasn't directly involved on the INF work
attending the IPCs [Interagency Policy Committees]. I am sure
it was there, but I don't recall that specific document.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. Mr. Scher.
Mr. Scher. I also did not work on the document, but I am
aware of it, but wouldn't profess to be an expert on the
contents.
Mr. Rogers. And, Mr. Scher, you heard Mr. Wolfsthal make
reference to the Open Skies Treaty. Why did the Department
believe it was necessary to recommend that Russia was also
violating the Open Skies Treaty? I understand that both the
Joint Staff and OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense]
jointly made that recommendation, and why was there no
determination ever made?
Mr. Scher. Honestly, I cannot speak to the why not a
determination was made, in part, because actually in the way
that the OSD system was set up, it was not within my purview,
but also that is sort of--you know, but I do understand that
that was the determination from the Department and that was the
recommendation put over. I would have to leave it to others to
go into the details of any conversations about why it wasn't
specifically brought up.
Mr. Rogers. Okay. Thank you. I yield to Chairman Poe for
any questions he may have.
Mr. Poe. I thank the chairman.
The Russians have a pattern, and I think because of their
pattern and our reaction or lack of reaction, we are living in
fantasy land if we think the Russians are ever going to come
and comply with this treaty. In 2008, the Russians violated the
treaty, and the administration told Congress in 2011 that the
treaty was violated, and then it took--in 2014, 2015, and 2016,
the State Department confirmed that the treaty was violated.
And so here we are in 2017, with all of the other actions by
the Russians; 2008, we might all remember, they invaded
Georgia, then they went into Crimea, and then they went into
eastern Ukraine. And so they are violating the treaty at the
same time they are being an aggressor nation and taking
territory that belongs to other countries, and nothing has
happened to any of that.
So, that is the pattern of the Russians. And here we are in
2017, 9 years after the violation, and we are talking about,
okay, finally we are going to do something about this, but
there are still no solutions; nothing has been done to react to
this aggressive tendency by the Russians.
And I agree with you, Mr. Rose, that we should try to work
on solving this in a diplomatic way, that is always the
ultimate answer to getting this, but I don't think the Russians
are--they are calling our bluff about this.
So what specifically can Congress do or the administration
or the Department of Defense do to get the attention of the
Russians, or are they just going to keep being in violation of
this treaty?
Mr. Rose. Thanks very much for that question, sir. I would
say a couple of things. One, we have taken some actions with
our allies, specifically at the Warsaw Summit, to respond to
Russian aggression. We have the enhanced readiness initiative.
And Bob Scher, in his capacity as the NATO high level group
chairman, the NATO group responsible for nuclear policy, has
done a number of things to make sure that the alliance has the
nuclear capabilities to conduct operations should deterrence
fail.
I agree with you, we have tried diplomacy. As I outlined in
my statement, there was almost 4 years of diplomacy beginning
in 2013 with the objective of trying to bring Russia back into
compliance. Those diplomatic efforts have not worked. So that
is why----
Mr. Poe. Let me reclaim my time, because I only have a
total of 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Yeah.
Mr. Poe. And you have a lot of information. We have read
all of the statements.
Mr. Rose. Okay.
Mr. Poe. Meanwhile, though, the Russians continued the
deployment--or development and deployment, maybe, of the
violation cruise missiles.
Mr. Rose. Yep.
Mr. Poe. And so we are at a place now where all of this has
not helped----
Mr. Rose. Right.
Mr. Poe [continuing]. Hasn't solved the problem.
Mr. Rose. Right.
Mr. Poe. And I understand, I can even understand the reason
the Russians are not in compliance. That is pretty clear to me.
So what are the options of the U.S. right now?
Mr. Rose. I think there are a number. Specifically, I think
developing a long, conventional variant of the LRSO is very,
very important. And I----
Mr. Poe. So we can have that development and----
Mr. Rose. Well, we have a nuclear capable version.
Mr. Poe. But not a conventional?
Mr. Rose. Not a conventional. But let me commend Chairman
Rogers and his committee, because they have been pushing for a
conventional variant. So that is number one.
Number two, we can make available to our allies strike
capabilities, JASSM-ER [extended range], but also Tomahawk.
And, three, I think NATO should be developing some limited
cruise missile defenses to protect key command and control
nodes, ports, and airfields. So those are three things that I
would do.
Mr. Poe. Okay. Would you agree or not that we are more
concerned about the Russian violation than maybe even our NATO
allies are concerned about it?
Mr. Rose. I think some of our NATO allies. It depends. I
mean, some NATO allies are more concerned than others.
Mr. Poe. Last question for all three of you. Should the
United States suspend our portion of that treaty?
Mr. Rose. I would not do it at this moment.
Mr. Poe. All right. Mr. Scher.
Mr. Scher. I am not sure that gets us any benefit that we
can't accrue other ways, so, no.
Mr. Poe. Okay. Mr. Wolfsthal.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I think we can take countermeasures under
the rights afforded to us in international law without
withdrawing or suspending from the treaty.
Mr. Poe. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the ranking member, Mr. Cooper, for any questions he may have.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to follow
up on Chairman Poe's line of questioning regarding our European
friends. The primary threat of these INF Treaty violations is
to Europe, right? And I am worried we care more about this than
our European friends do. Is there any information you can
supply us with that shows that they really do care and are
willing to pay and willing to make defense adjustments?
Mr. Scher. So I think we have--I mean, we have seen that
all of the NATO allies are actually--almost all of them are
making progress towards getting to a 2 percent goal, or have
ceased falling in terms of their defense budgets. That is not
the strongest statement I would like to be able to say, and it
certainly is insufficient.
I do think that your general assessment that there are a
lot of European nations who don't take this as seriously as we
do is correct. I also think it, unfortunately, is a political
issue in many places where there are some people who do--within
countries, do take it seriously and some other members of that
same governing coalition who have a harder time with it.
It is our job to lead NATO. We need to make sure that NATO
is part of this answer, but we need to lead it as well. And I
think one of the things that was stated in Mr. Wolfsthal's
testimony, in fact, trying to ensure that we do as much as we
can to make it clear that this information that we have, the
intelligence we have, is absolutely right and correct and
bringing people onboard. So we can wait in terms of doing
something, but we can't wait forever.
Mr. Wolfsthal. If I may. So we have not been effective in
our international diplomacy, because we have not been able to
openly share the information we have about this violation. I
think that would dramatically help. It would make it hard for
Europeans to hide behind the ``We are not sure'' excuse, even
though privately we have shared some of this information and
they are convinced. But I think Mr. Scher's point, and I think
Frank Rose would back me up on this, the Europeans are
unwilling to get onboard any sort of INF response, in part,
because they are not members to the treaty; and two, because we
have not been clear in what it is we are trying to do. What are
we asking them for? Nobody is going to give the United States a
blank check in this environment, and so we need to determine
what our position and policy should be, we need to work within
the NATO context and keep them united, and then, I think, we
have a very good chance of actually pushing back on the Russian
violation.
Mr. Cooper. You don't have to be the signatories of a
treaty to be the primary victims of a breach of the treaty. So
that is kind of an illogical----
Mr. Wolfsthal. It is true that that is not an excuse. I am
just trying to explain what we have heard from them. In part,
however, we need to recognize the Europeans have already been
targeted by Russian nuclear weapons even without the INF
Treaty. Russia can strike everything in Europe with their long-
range systems. What this violation actually allows them to do
is use these systems against Europe and then have more weapons
to strike at the United States. So it is not purely about
Europe.
Mr. Cooper. Which countries in NATO care most about this
violation?
Mr. Rose. Well, sir, I don't want to get in in an open
session too much into that, but I think it is fair to say our
eastern allies tend to be more concerned about the threats from
Russia. And what I would also add is that, as Assistant
Secretary, one of my primary objectives in 2015 and 2016 was to
try to get as much intelligence information available--made
available to allies. And what I would say is this: We are in a
much better position now than where we were 2 years ago with
the allies, and I think there is a very good foundation for the
new administration to build upon.
Mr. Cooper. Final question. Is our reluctance to state the
name of any NATO ally in this hearing proof of the success of
Russian disinformation campaigns in Europe that makes this
issue a hot potato politically?
Mr. Rose. Well, sir, I don't necessarily think it is
Russian propaganda. I think it is a concern that many of these
countries cannot verify this information on their own, because,
as you know, this is some of our most sensitive sources and
methods, number one. And number two, they have so many other
challenges with the Russians. So I would not say that.
Mr. Scher. I would just add, I think, my belief is we will
have a better chance to pull together as an alliance if we
don't single people out individually. We want to do everything
we can to help those within each of these countries who
understand the problem fight their battle against other voices
within their same countries who are having a harder time, and
singling people out won't help build that alliance cohesion.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I would just point out, I wouldn't put this
in the same category as what we are concerned about in
interfering with elections and fake news. Russia has been
stating, falsely, for many years, that the United States is in
violation of the INF Treaty. We abide by our legal processes
and ensure that we are, in fact, complying, but that muddying
of the waters has been successful, in part, because we have had
to keep much of this information classified. It is one of the
reasons I suggest we now err on the side of release.
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Keating for 5
minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to
welcome Mr. Rose, who comes from America's hometown in
Plymouth, Massachusetts, and I think whose folks are still in
Cape Cod, so welcome. But I want to just--we have said a lot
about military response, we have touched upon some of the
diplomatic response, but, Mr. Scher, in your remarks, your
opening remarks, you talked about also economic response to
this. And I would like to ask the whole panel, since we were
just broaching on this, and I think it is important, what kind
of economic responses, specifically, do you think we could
undertake? I will start with Mr. Scher, since you brought it up
yourself in your opening statement.
Mr. Scher. I did, although that is a tried and true tactic
of the Department of Defense to make sure that the other parts
of the interagency are represented and get a voice.
Fortunately, you have created this panel with that voice in
mind. So I am going to defer to my State Department--my former
State Department and former White House colleagues.
Mr. Rose. Mr. Keating, what I would say is two things.
First, there are very limited economic options on the table, so
they would be more symbolic. I would say because of the Ukraine
sanctions, that has basically sucked all the air out of the
room, number one. Number two, we would likely need to implement
these sanctions on our own. Most of our European and other
allies don't have the legal mechanisms available to impose
sanctions for the violation of the INF Treaty.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I would echo Mr. Rose's testimony. I think
there are some limited options that we could choose if we are
willing to have these be unilateral sanctions, and I think they
can affect not only the Russian entities involved, but there
are other countries who provide direct support to these
programs. I won't get into that in this session, and I no
longer have access to classified information, but I think there
are some other opportunities there that bear digging into, and
happy to talk about that off-line.
Mr. Keating. I also want to touch on the possibility--and I
hope it isn't a possibility--that, indeed, you know, actions
like this could be used later on as creating a bargaining chip
for other negotiations, and what comes to my mind is Crimea,
and the danger, I think, in having this activity where they
take this action, and then all of a sudden in other
discussions, having them say, well, we are going to stop the
suspension of this and conform to it in exchange for something
else. I look at that as a terrible downward spiral that would
have great implications. But can you comment on that kind of
reaction or the use of this, you know, under those
circumstances?
Mr. Rose. Mr. Keating, that is a really good question, and
it leads me to another point. I am not trying to dodge your
question, but I think what it tells me is that we really need
to have strategic stability discussions with the Russians. I am
known, both publicly and privately, for being very tough on the
Russians. However, we are not talking to them about the
fundamental issues associated with strategic stability. So one
of my key recommendations to the new team is that they
initiate, not an arms control negotiation, but a set of
discussions focusing on better understanding their strategic
concerns and the Russians better understand our strategic
concerns. I think that is very, very important.
Mr. Scher. I think, Congressman, the only thing I would add
is that your caution is well-taken. When you are looking at
this as a broad set of issues, as you have to, and then a broad
strategy with Russia, what we need to make sure we don't do is
fall into the trap of if they do something bad, then we give
them something to return to the situation it was before. That
is a net win for them.
Now, if you look at it in a, you know, specific context,
you might be willing to do that in order to gain overall, but
it is always a concern about what we do. We have seen that
pattern of behavior in North Korea, we have seen it all over
the place, and it is something that we do need to watch for
and, frankly, it is something, I think, we need to make sure
that our alliance watches for as well. And simply by
highlighting it, we actually go a long way to not letting that
go down that path.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I agree with those comments. I would remind
people there was a suggestion, I can't remember if it was
during the transition or early in this administration, that
perhaps we would trade a new round of arms control with Russia
in exchange for lifting sanctions over Crimea, and it doesn't
work that way. We have to prioritize. We know that Russia is
suffering as a result of these sanctions. I think it is one of
the reasons you have heard us talk about not wanting to link
INF directly to the Crimea sanctions, and that is something we
are just going to have--we have to chew gum and walk at the
same time.
Mr. Keating. That is why I highlighted the question. And I
wanted Russia to know that this Congress realizes the dangers
in doing that. And I think I can speak for most of my
colleagues, they are not going to go down that road.
I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Franks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Scher, I
will direct this first to you. You know, I heard, I think,
pretty compelling indications from you and Mr. Rose
specifically that it was going to be very difficult to bring
the Russians back into compliance, because obviously, they have
already deployed systems in contradiction to that, and it seems
like a real challenge; but in the interests of open pursuit
here of that goal, Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
Brian McKeon testified on two occasions that DOD [Department of
Defense] was going to recommend three categories of military
response options to convince Russia to return to compliance
under the treaty. These included active defenses and counter-
force and countervailing military capabilities.
Mr. Scher, could you give me some examples of these
capabilities as he may have been indicating?
Mr. Scher. Certainly. I think--so in the active defense
realm, that is--the majority of that is pointed at, you know,
cruise missile defense, specific missile defense around
specific areas, and I think that, as I said in my testimony,
the written testimony, cruise missile defense, I think, is
something that we don't do as good a job on as we would like
to, as I think we should, and we need to kind of look at that
as well as, you know, missile defense. We should not, however,
get caught in the trap of believing that there is ever going to
be enough missile defense, because it cannot ever get to the
point where we can outspend our adversary of missiles versus
missile interceptors; but we can get to the point where we can
protect critical infrastructure, and that is something I think
we might want to take a look at doing more.
The countervailing--the two other pieces are strike assets,
and one is the concept is looking at how can you take out the
offending--the actual offending, you know, system, and,
certainly, we have many forces in and around the region that
can do that. Then there is also saying we don't have to go just
after the offending system, but we can go after other things
that Russia holds of value, and obviously, those same effect--
same that we have, you know, in terms of everything air-,
ground-, sea-based, can go after those assets. And I think what
all of us recommend, certainly I know I recommend it, is that
we need to continue what we have done in terms of the European
Reassurance Initiative, something that Congress has funded a
number of years in a row and I hope continues to fund, so that
we can move more forces more regularly in and around the
eastern parts of our NATO alliance, and that we can bring
firepower there, as well as encouraging our allies to step up
to the plate and purchase more systems that can be integrated
into the NATO alliance.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Rose, I am just taking off of what Mr.
Scher said. Did any of these capabilities that Mr. McKeon
indicated, did they really ever get developed to any extent?
Mr. Rose. Well, you know, some of these capabilities, for
example, JASSM-ER, extended range JASSM, we are deploying that,
and that gives us the ability to hold conventional targets at
risk with conventional weapons.
With regards to some of the nuclear things that we talked
about for deterrence that we are procuring, the duel-capable F-
35. So some of these things----
Mr. Franks. We are on our way in some of those areas?
Mr. Rose. Yeah. Some of those areas.
Mr. Franks. But does it remain your opinion that it is
going to be extremely difficult to pull Russia back into
compliance?
Mr. Rose. Sir, I think it is going to be extremely
difficult to pull Russia back into compliance.
Mr. Franks. Well, the reason I emphasize that, obviously,
is if that is our stated conclusion, then it certainly puts a
great deal of emphasis on the question of how long we want to
remain tied to its restrictions as well.
Mr. Rose. Sir, can I just add, I just want to reemphasize
the importance of alliance unity. And as the new administration
moves forward, I would think that whatever they do, they want
to be in close coordination with our allies in both Europe and
Asia.
Mr. Franks. All right. Final question, and I will start
with you, Mr. Rose. Do you think that--I mean, sometimes I have
an opinion on the questions I ask, as you might imagine, but
has Russia violated the Open Skies Treaty?
Mr. Rose. What I would say, and I don't have access to
classified information, if you look at this year's--or last
year's compliance report, we had many compliance concerns about
Russian implementation of the treaty.
Now, my understanding is that the administration is working
with allies to resolve those compliance concerns, but we are
not there yet. So we have certain--I wouldn't say it is a
violation, but we certainly have compliance concerns.
Mr. Franks. And, Mr. Scher, would you characterize it that
way?
Mr. Scher. Yes. I think I always like to take my lead from
the State Department colleagues about compliance issues, but it
is certainly a concern for the Department of Defense.
Mr. Franks. Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to add my list
to those concerns. So with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
Mrs. Davis from California for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
joining us. Just taking from the discussion about NATO, and I
am sort of trying to get a sense of where it falls on a range
of issues that we have with our counterparts, a few of us will
actually be joining them in a few hours overseas, and so I just
wanted to get a sense.
Mr. Scher, you said that you would prefer to err on the
side of releasing some of the information so that they could
have a greater sense of what the challenges are. Is that
something that--or Mr. Scher--Mr. Wolfsthal--I am sorry. Mr.
Wolfsthal, I think you said that. I am sorry.
Mr. Wolfsthal. If it sounded smart, I usually----
I do think that we need to be more public about the
information that we have and we need to be sharing it more
widely within NATO. There is always a tension between not
burning a source with inside the intelligence community, and
revealing that information, because it will allow the Russians
to take countermeasures and we won't have that source anymore.
But I think now, particularly with the system reportedly in
deployment, there is much more information, and even visual
information that can be deployed diplomatically in the alliance
and just as a public diplomacy campaign that can be very
effective in galvanizing some support within NATO; but I also
think we have to do that with the thought in mind what is it we
want to do once we get that support, and so they have to be
linked together.
Mrs. Davis. Yeah. I think part of my concern was in having
those discussions, if they were appropriate, that it also might
mean that we would take some actions in terms of deploying in
Europe, and whether or not that would create some feeling of
confidence in what we are doing as opposed to a real pushback.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I think that is exactly right, ma'am, and I
think you have heard all of us talk about there is a great
danger in the idea that we would move or suggest that we would
move to deploy ground-based strike capabilities in Europe in
response to INF. First, I don't believe, and I, again, have
been out of the administration for several months, that the
military believes that that is a military necessity or
requirement. Without that, then I think we would risk alliance
unity, because some countries might be willing to support it
and others will be very much opposed. And having, I think, all
of us work through the decision in the 1980s to deploy both
GLCM [ground launched cruise missile] and Pershing II, I won't
say it nearly broke the alliance, but it fed into the Soviet
strategy of weakening it, and I don't think we need to do that
at this point.
Mr. Rose. Ma'am, can I just add on that point, I am not
necessarily opposed to ground-based capabilities, but I think
there are a couple of questions that you want to ask before you
move down this road. One, do we need this to meet our military
requirements? Two, is it cost-effective? And three, where are
you going to deploy it? And having negotiated a number of
basing agreements, I understand how challenging it is to put
capabilities in foreign governments. And I----
Mrs. Davis. I guess I would ask--I am sorry, because my
time is running out. I would just add, I mean, and is it the
appropriate response to their violation of the INF?
Mr. Rose. Ma'am, I would not recommend doing a GLCM in
response. I think we can do what we need to do with sea- and
air-launch capabilities.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Rose. Can I ask you, and I hope
you can feel free to be forthcoming, does the State Department
now have the appropriate staffing level and expertise to deal
with this issue as well as other issues that are out there,
given the personnel shortfalls, and obviously the desire to
slash the State Department budget?
Mr. Rose. Ma'am, let me say this: I thought we had a good
team when I was there, but we have a problem getting younger
staff into the State Department. And this is a real problem,
because we are losing expertise and we are not training the
next generation. I gave a plea to the transition team when I
left, is we have got to find a way to get younger people into
the State Department. So previously, I thought we had a good
team, but that was the concern that I had, is that we did not
have a mechanism to bring junior staff, and we have a dearth of
people who understand these issues.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you. Mr. Wolfsthal.
Mr. Wolfsthal. If I can just make a point, I will be very
quick. I was very honored in the administration to actually run
an interagency process. I would convene Deputy Assistant
Secretaries of State, Assistant Secretaries of State, and we
would prepare materials up to the Deputies and the Secretaries
to make decisions.
This administration has not yet even appointed people at
those levels in the Defense or State Department. There are
people available, and I think it is to our detriment to not
have a fully staffed interagency in something that I think--it
is not surprising that they may be a little slow off the mark,
but it is something that worries me in terms of our ability to
respond.
Mr. Scher. Just to go back to your other point, even though
I don't believe right now we need to field ground launch cruise
missiles, I don't think it is proper for us to take it off the
table, nor do I believe anyone is suggesting it. It is a real
capability with real effects. If it didn't have real effects,
the Russians wouldn't be fielding it. And I don't think it is
something we should necessarily take off the table, because,
depending on the combination of assets, it can be very
effective, and can be very cost-effective, but it has got to be
looked at in broad case and we have got to do it with our
alliances. I don't think we are there yet, but as you noted in
my testimony, I think it behooves us to take a look at it, and
I think Russia will pay attention to that.
Mrs. Davis. Thank you, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Brooks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Scher and Mr.
Rose, what are some of the factors the United States should
consider prior to the extension of the New Strategic Arms
Reduction Treaty?
Mr. Rose. I would say a couple of things. One, is it in the
interest of the United States to maintain the New START Treaty.
My view is yes. You know, despite all the concerns that we have
with INF, I believe it is in our interest to maintain the New
START Treaty, because it puts limitations on Russian forces,
and furthermore, it provides us insights we would not
necessarily get from our national technical needs. But the
bottom line is, are they in compliance. And two, does it serve
our national interest?
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Scher.
Mr. Scher. I would mirror exactly what was said, but
obviously my focus is on, is it in the U.S. national interest?
I believe it still is, as long as they are not violating, and
as long as we continue to have the ability to inspect and do
other pieces, so, worthwhile.
Mr. Brooks. All right. A follow-up question for Mr. Scher
and Mr. Rose, but on a different treaty. Now, we have heard
suggestions from some corners that we should try to
multilateralize the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
According to unclassified reporting, Iran has roughly several
hundred intermediate-range ballistic and cruise missiles that
would be prohibited and have to be eliminated if Iran came
under the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. Similarly,
Pakistan has hundreds of missiles that would have to be
eliminated--or limited by the treaty. China has at least 1,500.
In what world would these countries agree to just give up these
missiles? That is the first question. And, second, is there a
risk that multilateralizing the INF will only give Russia a
convenient excuse for its illegal behavior?
Mr. Rose. Sir, what I would note is that in 2007, the
United States and Russia proposed the idea of multilateralizing
the INF, so it is not a new issue. However, I would caution, I
would say, one, we should not entertain this idea until Russia
comes back into compliance with its obligations under the
treaty. And secondly, and I think you hit the nail on the head,
it would be very difficult to get North Korea, Iran, Pakistan,
China, and India to agree to give up their ballistic missiles.
So I don't think it is very much a viable idea at this point.
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Scher.
Mr. Scher. Yeah. I don't think that is the world in which
we live right now.
Mr. Brooks. Mr. Wolfsthal, they were both briefer than I
anticipated they might be. Would you like to comment on either
of those two sets of questions?
Mr. Wolfsthal. I am as surprised as you are, sir.
On the multilateralization, I agree; I think it is not
realistic to think that we will have a multilateral treaty that
bans INF. I guess I would frame my response the following: What
we are seeing Russia do is not just an action. They are
reacting to the fact that we have developed tremendous military
capability to protect our allies, and that they feel that they
have not been able to do the same.
We have now seen them come online with both air- and sea-
launch cruise missiles, as they demonstrated in Syria. And so
while I think that they are not likely to come back into
compliance with INF, I think we do need to be talking to them
at a military level, and at a political level, to understand
how we can reduce the risks of unintended and accidental
conflict, and that could involve some agreement regarding how
and when we would deploy certain capabilities in response to
how and when they deploy certain capabilities.
I am not suggesting we validate what they are doing,
because they have violated a treaty that has been ratified by
the United States and there should be consequences for that,
but we need to understand the broader context in which that is
happening.
Mr. Brooks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Titus, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad we are
holding these hearings today about Russia's violation of the
INF Treaty, because given the administration's potential ties
to the Russian administration, I think it is very important
that the congressional committees on Foreign Affairs and Armed
Services keep a close eye on our relationship with Russia and
what is happening in this area.
We have heard a lot from all of you on the panel about the
need for alliance unity. In fact, Mr. Rose and I think Mr.
Wolfsthal opened with that. That was your number-one
recommendation, that we do it. But I am afraid that we are not
going to be able to do it, given the set of circumstances that
exist today. Just in the last 70 days of the Trump
administration, we have had our allies disparaged and insulted;
we have had conflicting information and opinions and positions
come out of the administration on where we stand on NATO; we
have had a Secretary of State who said he doesn't even want the
job, his wife told him to do it; you mentioned, yourself,
dozens of empty appointments at top levels, so I don't know who
is going to be having these discussions that you think we need
to have; and we have got a State Department budget that is cut
by 30 percent.
Would you comment on that, whether you are even optimistic
that we can do anything about holding anybody accountable, or
set a new set of standards moving forward? All three of you.
Mr. Rose. Well, ma'am, let me just say, every
administration, it takes a little bit of time to get up. So
let's hope that over the next couple of months, we see some
solid appointments by the President. And I am actually
encouraged to see some of the people at the Pentagon who I have
worked with in the past. But the bottom line, I will come back
to your point: Our allies are an asymmetric advantage of the
United States. It is what makes the United States the United
States. It is something Russia and China don't have. So we, in
our foreign policy, should be doing whatever we can to maximize
the benefits of those alliances, because those alliances
provide us so many benefits from a diplomatic perspective, but
also a military perspective.
Ms. Titus. I couldn't agree more.
Mr. Scher. You have listed an appropriate and a large set
of problems that we have to face to overcome to get the 28
nations of NATO to agree to things. I would suggest that we
have always had a lot of things to get over to get 28 nations
to agree to pretty much anything, so I hold that while it
sounds daunting, I still hold out some hope. And to emphasize
the point that Mr. Rose made, we are better off with a less
good solution in 28 countries working together than with the
perfect solution and not having the alliance held. You have to
believe--it is, as Frank said, an asymmetric advantage. If
Russia didn't resent the fact that we had this and didn't think
this was a plus on our side, they would not work so hard to try
to divide it, and we can't let that happen.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I am an eternal optimist, and so I believe
that things that are readily self-apparent, like maintaining a
strong alliance is helpful to the United States, will take root
and be endorsed and blessed in any administration. And we have
seen evidence in the past of skepticism when it comes to other
things that I believe are self-evident; cooperative threat
reduction and helping to eliminate stocks of nuclear, chemical,
biological materials around the world was something quite
controversial in the early Bush administration. They came to
embrace that. So I think there is hope, but I think we have to
keep reminding the body politic of exactly why we have NATO and
why it benefits us.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. All three of you mentioned the word
``hope,'' so we now have a foreign policy based on the concept
of hope. I hope it works. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I think the gentlelady. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Garrett, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will just start
with Mr. Rose. It is safe to say, based on the cost to procure
and develop, that the IRBMs [intermediate-range ballistic
missiles] and MRBMs [medium-range ballistic missiles] that we
discussed and addressed in the INF, are cheaper and more
readily available than an ICBM, correct?
Mr. Rose. I think that is a fair assessment, sir.
Mr. Garrett. And it is also fair to say, based on the
Pershing platform and the Griffin platform and Soviet-era
platforms, that the technology to fill that gap if we were to
essentially flip the switch to off exists today, correct?
Mr. Rose. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Garrett. And we could also presumably upgrade that
Griffin system, that land-based Tomahawk cruise missile that we
abandoned with the INF to the Block IV capability pretty much
with the flip of a switch, correct?
Mr. Rose. I would have to go into the specifics, but I am--
--
Mr. Garrett. Well, and we can't go into but so many
specifics, but----
Mr. Rose. Yeah. Yeah.
Mr. Garrett. In the theoretical abstract world.
Mr. Rose. Theoretically, absolutely.
Mr. Garrett. So I am looking at a New York Times article,
which is entitled ``Russia Deploys Missile, Violating Treaty,
Challenging Trump,'' specifically addressing new Russian land-
based cruise missiles. And, again, I would source it from The
New York Times. We don't have any current capability, nor do
our allies in the European theater, to match this. Am I
correct?
Mr. Rose. Sir, what I would say is we don't have ground-
launch capabilities with a range between 500 and 5,500. Sorry.
However, we do have a series of capabilities, air- and sea-
launch capabilities, that I can believe--I believe holds at
risk what the Russians view as critical, and I think we need to
continue to improve those capabilities. I would just add, I am
not opposed to a GLCM.
Mr. Garrett. Let me--I am not hostile to you, but I have a
finite amount of time. We have no idea what our generation 5
aircraft can do against the S-300, S-400.
Mr. Rose. I don't know.
Mr. Garrett. We just don't know. So we think we have a
capability. I guess what I am ultimately driving at is, if the
multilateralization of the treaty is not an option, because
people who want to be ICBM players can't afford it, and the
Soviets can essentially replicate capabilities for cheaper by
virtue of violation of this treaty, and there are no
ramifications today, right? The Obama administration addressed
the potential deployment as early as 2014, now the present
administration has a quandary, is it not in our best interest
to encourage our European allies to do what was suggested
earlier, and that is start picking up some of their own weight,
as they are not signatories to the INF Treaty, and the United
States is already carrying a lot of water for a lot of people
in a lot of places.
Mr. Rose. Sir, I think there are things that our allies
should do, specifically, purchasing JASSM-ER and Tomahawk. On
ground-launch cruise missiles, my point is this, do we have a
military requirement? Is it cost-effective, compared to, for
example, developing a conventional variant of the LRSO, and
where would we deploy it? I want to emphasize that, because
this is controversial in some allies within NATO, and we don't
want to give the Russians an opportunity to create mischief.
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Chairman--Mr. Scher, am I pronouncing that
correctly? I had the opportunity to speak with the defense
minister in Germany in February, and very gently and tactfully,
I would like to believe, suggested that that 2 percent
expenditure on defense was a welcome addition that the Germans
as they are aware, are the long pole in the European defense
tent. You know, we can spend money on this, or our allies can
spend money on this, ironically having the benefit,
potentially, of helping us help them, if you don't mind me
grabbing from the movie Jerry Maguire. What is to stop our
allies from taking this responsibility, and what is the best
way to convey this request in a diplomatic and tactful manner
so that we can live in a safer world?
Mr. Scher. I think the key is, certainly--and nobody--you
know, in my past job, and I think all of us made the point to
the European allies that they had to start pulling more weight
than they had been doing previously. Two percent is a nice
figure. It is a good talking point. It is not the extent of
what we need them to do. In some cases, I would argue some
countries need to do more; in some cases, maybe they can do
less, but do more elsewhere.
Having said that, it is a nice target, frankly, and a
target that most of the NATO countries are not meeting.
As much as it would be great to be able to focus only on
the violation, I think we have to look at the Russian
aggression writ large, use that as the piece to make it clear
to our allies, both in Western Europe and in Eastern Europe,
that there is a concern and a problem. The Eastern Europeans
understand it inherently; the Western Europeans have conflicts
within their own populace. We need to help that process along
and get them to spend more and do more. If it is ground launch
cruise missiles, maybe, who knows, but more has to be done.
Mr. Garrett. I just hope the Russians don't force their
hands sooner rather than later.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Washington State, Mr. Larsen, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize. I have a
little bit of a variety pack of questions, but certainly
related to the big topic we are talking here.
But some--Mr. Wolfsthal, I will start with you. You
mentioned--we have all talked about the Open Skies Treaty. This
is not a bilateral treaty, right? So why is it important,
therefore, to consult our allies in any discussion about using
the Open Skies Treaty with regards to Russia?
Mr. Wolfsthal. So we have been working with our allies over
our concerns regarding Open Skies and Russia for many years. I
think that has been a very fruitful exercise. It has been--as
we have been able to work with them so they understand our
concerns, and we have also supported our allies when Russia has
been selectively complying in ways that affect them.
My suggestion, that we think about countermeasures for INF
violations in the Open Skies context, was a response, in part,
to the fact right now, Europe aren't members to INF but they
are members to Open Skies. And so if we wanted to try this
approach, we would have to coordinate in advance with the
allies. But I think we have a firm legal basis, both within the
Open Skies and the INF context, that that might have some
potential to actually motivate them a bit more. Because we have
to view all of these treaties as a network. They are designed
to create stability and predictability in the European theater.
Russia's undermining them means that they cannot, and that is
something that directly affects us and our European friends.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Rose, do you have any comment on that?
Mr. Rose. I would agree with my former colleague from the
NSC [National Security Council].
Mr. Larsen. You don't have to anymore, you know.
Mr. Scher. It is fun.
Mr. Larsen. Mr. Scher, could you talk a little bit about
this question that came up a couple of days ago at our HASC
[House Armed Services Committee] hearing with General
Scaparrotti, the request to have a full division, an additional
division in the European theater, and how that--do you have
thoughts from your past life in how that would fit into the
signaling part of deterrence as we have the capabilities here,
or does it? What would the use be other than to have 10,500
more troops, U.S. troops, in the European theater?
Mr. Scher. So I will admit to have not gone--not done my
homework to go back and see what General Scaparrotti proposed.
Mr. Larsen. Sure.
Mr. Scher. But I think you need to have enough forward
presence of U.S. forces to demonstrate clear commitment to the
alliance, and deterrence to the adversary.
There is a point at which you would like to have all the
forces you could ever imagine and want there, but you won't be
able to because there are commitments that we have elsewhere. I
would--I think that having a maneuver division--the capability
to have a maneuver division in Eastern Europe on a short amount
of time is an incredibly important--important in terms of both
deterrence to show our will to Russia, and real capability and
assurance. More than that, certainly, would add, but also, you
would have to look at the broader context of strategic
stability. Does that actually make Russia want to do more and
put more forces forward. So there is a balance there. And also,
recognizing that we never had enough forces on the continent to
win. That was not the goal of our forces, even during the
height of the Cold War. The focus was forces there, and then
you pull forces forward, you know, from the continental United
States and elsewhere if you needed it.
We shouldn't imagine that forces that are in Europe are
going to stop any, you know, push by Russia, should they so
choose with no warning, but we need to have enough to
demonstrate to our allies that we are there, and to Russia that
we are not----
The exact numbers are always--it is an art rather than a
science. A full maneuver division with all of the enablers that
go along with it to land quickly and be able to maneuver
immediately is critically important. I don't know how much more
than that we need. I would leave that to the folks who are
still in office.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, sure. The reason I am asking the questions
is in the context of this particular hearing, because I think
all three of you have made the case that a tit-for-tat on INF
Treaty really isn't the--wouldn't be the top option for us to
take, that there are many other options that we ought to
consider before we get to the point where we pull out of the
INF, just because the Russians are not in compliance.
Mr. Scher. And I would say the--you know, there is
certainly a political aspect to the INF Treaty violation,
without a doubt.
Mr. Larsen. Yes.
Mr. Scher. There is a real operational piece as well of
what those missiles, if deployed at scale, could do, and what
they hold at risk within NATO. So that is how I would argue
that my successors in the Department of Defense need to think
about this. So what military capability can we bring to make
sure that those don't achieve an overwhelming balance of power
on the Russian quickly and immediately.
But it is a real capability, make no doubt about it. It is
hard to find; it is hard to take out; it is hard to defend
against; and it is immediate and quick. You don't have to do
any movement for them to suddenly hold at risk a lot of NATO.
We won't be able to counter all of it, but can we make it clear
that our forces will be there, they will be affected, we will
be part of that war immediately and that--but critically, that
the NATO alliance will go at it together.
Mr. Larsen. Yes. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair will now
recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Mast, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mast. Thank you all for your testimony. I say this very
seriously, it ranked among some of the best testimony that I
have had the opportunity to read. I really did enjoy it. You
know, in that, I am going to focus primarily--as much as I love
the kinetic side of things, I am going to focus on more of the
other side of things.
And I want to point to you, first, Mr. Wolfsthal and some
of your comments. I find myself just a little bit confused by
them, and I think we can find ourselves in a good place, maybe
by clarifying them. You made some of these comments: You know,
in the last administration it was very clear that violations of
arms control treaties would be confronted and have
consequences. But in a--you know, in a different piece you
said: Up until now, the U.S. has been reserved in its
condemnation of Russia. And then in another place, you know,
you said about the Russkies, that they shouldn't be allowed to
gain a military advantage, and then went on further to say: You
know, to this point, the Russians have been allowed to pretend
that they are a responsible nuclear actor, and that very
specifically--this is what interests me--we should no longer
provide cover for that posture of them pretending to be a
responsible actor.
So I want to know, you know, diplomatically, what can we
learn from the past so that we don't make that same mistake
going forward in the next 8 years? What cover was provided to
them that we should do that now going forward? What did they
miss? What do we need to learn from that so they don't give us
the political middle finger in this?
Mr. Wolfsthal. Sure, Congressman. Thank you, and thank you
for the thoughtful reading and response.
Russia is a nuclear power. They have the largest nuclear
arsenal outside of our own, and they have the ability to
destroy the United States and any other country that they
choose. We recognize that they have that capability. But at the
same time, they also have been very active in working with us
over many decades to support the cause of nonproliferation. We
worked with them very closely for 20 years to enhance nuclear
security. They had been active supporters in trying to deal
with the challenge of nuclear Iran. But over the last 5 to 10
years, we have seen a lot of that cooperation ebb. And, so, we
still go through the motions in places like the Non-
Proliferation Treaty Review Conference, inside the United
Nations Security Council, inside the P5 meetings of nuclear
states on nonproliferation, and treat them as coequals. We have
chosen not to take that fight that we have, and the very
serious concerns, into those fora, because we don't want to do
further damage to the nonproliferation system, because that
matters to us, too. We care about people complying with the NPT
and putting pressure on North Korea.
My point was simply that we should be very clear and direct
in those fora that Russia is not living up to its historic
responsibility, that we in the United States are, and that
Russia has a lot of work to do if they want to be a legitimate
international actor in those areas.
Mr. Mast. They do have a lot of work to do, unquestionably.
But I really want to get to, you know, can you see any specific
points beyond that cover that we have given them--and that is
an important word, ``cover''--and beyond that, I would ask you
to follow up with, do you see us having to readdress--
obviously, you know, there is going to be another nuclear
posture review going on, but our nuclear strategy in general?
You know, we have gone through the tide of years from mutually
assured destruction all the way up to selective ambiguity. Do
you see a need to readdress what is our nuclear strategy?
Mr. Wolfsthal. Very specific point I would make, in my
private capacity, is I think we should not engage Russia in the
P5 on nonproliferation and nuclear security. I think that we
should resolve back down to the P3 with us and the British and
the French. The Chinese can be supporters in that. That, I
think, has limited effect, but I think it is something that we
can do and that would send a very strong message to Russia
diplomatically.
In terms of the Nuclear Posture Review, every President has
the right, and I think should put their stamp on nuclear
policy. What are nuclear weapons for? Why do we have them? When
would we consider using them? Those are critical decisions that
only the President of the United States can answer.
We worked very hard to make sure that our policy was
supportive in the Obama administration of our global
nonproliferation efforts and our global efforts to prevent the
use and spread of nuclear weapons. And I think in that, we were
very effective.
The Trump administration has, quite frankly, spoken on
multiple sides of the issue: Let there be an arms race on the
one hand, but it would be great if we could get rid of all
weapons on the other hand. These are issues that I think a
fully formed interagency needs to wrestle with, and that the
President needs to digest and internalize before putting a
stamp on them. But I think there is room for adjustments, both
towards real reductions--I think we have more nuclear weapons
than we need--but we may want to have more strategic ambiguity
if that is the desire of the President, that is his right as
the President.
Mr. Mast. Thank you for your comments. I appreciate it. I
yield back, sir.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. The Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Schneider, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to, as well, thank the witnesses. I will concur.
I found the testimony very helpful, and I appreciate you
sharing your experiences with us.
As I read through the testimony last night, as I have
listened this afternoon, one of the common threads that seem to
run through all of your testimony is this emphasis on
maintaining unity, maintaining unity with our allies.
And I would like to discuss in the little bit of time that
we have, both short and long term. I will start with the short
term. In the short term, if each of you could expand, on what
opportunities are there that you would highlight for the
administration and for Congress? What are some of the cautions
you would give us? And the key priorities we should focus on
short term?
And, Mr. Rose, we will start with you.
Mr. Rose. With regard to the allies?
Mr. Schneider. Yes.
Mr. Rose. With regard to the allies, number one, I would
focus on implementing----
Mr. Rogers. Your microphone needs to be turned on.
Mr. Rose. Sorry. Sorry, sir.
With regard to the allies, number one has to be
implementing the recommendations of the Warsaw Summit, both on
the conventional side of the house but also on the nuclear side
of the house.
Number two, improving their strike capabilities, in a
conventional area, specifically JASSM-ER as well as Tomahawk.
And, three--and this is something that is bipartisan--we need
to continue to push our allies to spend more on defense. This
is--you know, it is not just the Trump administration who has
been pushing this pressure on the allies, but it has also been
the three or four previous administrations. So those would be
my key recommendations. But you are right, sir, alliance unity
is key, and the Russians are trying to undermine alliance
unity.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. Mr. Scher.
Mr. Scher. I think Frank is showing his Department of
Defense roots. He has, I think, ably put forward some of the
key elements. Following up on the commitments is always
critical, continued spending. But I also think we need to--
frankly, they need a sense of predictability, right? We need to
both be able to tell them they need to do more, while
simultaneously ensuring that they know that we will be there.
That it is in our interests, not anybody else's, for us to be a
part of the NATO alliance, and that we are better off because
more things--we get to fight away games. We get to be out into
other places. That is directly and foremost in our interests.
Maintaining that alliance is critical. They should never--we
should never lose fact--lose sight of that. They should not
lose sight of the fact they benefit by being in the alliance
just as much as we do.
I think with--you know, because those are the facts of the
case, in my opinion, it should be easy to push forward with
alliance management if we can do it deftly and make sure that
they both spend more, continue to move forward on the Warsaw
commitments, but also realize that the world is changing around
them.
Mr. Schneider. Mr. Wolfsthal.
Mr. Wolfsthal. I would say in the near term, we need to
understand that tone and form matter, that we need to be
prioritizing the schedule of the NATO Summit; we need to be
prioritizing the visits by the Secretary of State, Secretary of
Defense, Members of Congress, the House, the Senate. We need to
show that this is the most important military alliance on the
face of the planet, and has preserved the peace for two
generations plus, and talking about NATO as an integral part of
our defense strategy is part of that. And I don't mean that to
be a partisan comment. I think you can put pressure on NATO for
spending. You can put pressure on them to take their defense
requirements more seriously, but in the end, we have to talk as
a responsible international leader, because that is what the
United States is.
Mr. Schneider. Great. Thank you.
In the minute left, I know it is not fair to put you on the
spot like this, but Mr. Rose, you used the term ``strategic
stability discussions.'' In the context of where we are today,
what is happening--we talked about the State Department
earlier--to what extent have our strategic stability
considerations changed, and how do we effectively communicate
those, both to people in the State Department, but to the
outside world as well?
Mr. Rose. Sir, what I would say is this: We need to
reestablish a forum to talk with the Russians on strategic
stability issues. That doesn't mean moving forward with a new
negotiation, but we don't have that mechanism. We tried at--the
last couple of months of the Obama administration to
reestablish that mechanism; the Russians decided not to move
forward. However, I strongly encouraged the new administration
to begin a very serious discussion with Russia about strategic
stability.
And, furthermore, that relationship over the last 25 years
has been based on further strategic reductions. I think we may
be in a different place. I am not necessarily convinced that
the Russians are interested in further strategic reductions;
however, I think it is in our mutual interests to maintain
stability, and we should take actions to encourage that.
Mr. Schneider. Thank you. Obviously, an issue that needs
more than 5 minutes, but I very much appreciate your input. And
I yield back.
Mr. Rogers. I thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from California, Mr. Rohrabacher, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Thank you very much.
Does the INF Treaty--it covers, basically, intermediate-
range and cruise missiles? Is that what we are talking about?
Okay.
Let me just say that some of the premises of this
discussion has been one that is disturbing to me. And let me
just ask: Is it your premise that if there was a nuclear
exchange, we should be preparing for a situation where we could
come out of a nuclear exchange with some warfighting
capabilities left? I mean, when you are talking about we need
to defend, with missile defense, some particular storage or
some capabilities, if there is ever a nuclear exchange. Do you
believe that we could have a limited nuclear exchange with the
Russians?
Mr. Rose. Sir, no. Why I am such a supporter of the
modernization is we want to deter that from happening. And the
best way to deter a nuclear exchange is to have capable U.S.
nuclear forces.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Well, certainly. But anything but capable
nuclear forces that are after an exchange, I will have to say
that if there--do we believe that if Russia actually invades
Western Europe that they--that that would happen without a
nuclear exchange? That we would not, then, move forward? That
there wouldn't be rockets going off? That they would take the
chance of just going in and allowing us a first strike? That is
a--anyway, is that--it makes no sense, when I am listening to
you, talk about these things.
Quite frankly, we--as you are aware, we have enough weapons
to destroy them instantaneously.
Do we believe that the Russians have a plan to invade
Western Europe?
Mr. Scher. So I won't touch on whether--on the intel
perspective. The key from the Department of Defense is we need
to plan as if they would, and as if they do. And planning to do
that----
Mr. Rohrabacher. Is part of our plan that they can invade,
and we wouldn't have a nuclear exchange?
Mr. Scher. We would love--yes, absolutely. If they do not
use nuclear weapons, I would argue that we have sufficient----
Mr. Rohrabacher. You actually--any sane person who thinks
that there would be a massive invasion of Western Europe, and
there wouldn't be a nuclear exchange is living in la-la land.
Let me ask you this: When you say about--when we have--
okay. Are sea-based and air-based nuclear weapons, you know,
the cruise and intermediate-range weapons, are they covered in
the INF Treaty?
Mr. Rose. No, sir. The INF Treaty only deals with ground-
based capabilities.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Right. Okay. So when we have maneuvers,
which we have had in Estonia, when we put--by the way, when we
put our--have our maneuvers right on their border, and we are
not expecting them--that to have an impact on their view of the
world, when we do that, if we have B-52 bombers flying from
England as part of the maneuvers that we have had in the
Balkans, is the B-52 bomber capable of carrying these cruise
missiles, and these intermediate-type range nuclear weapons?
Mr. Scher. Yes.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes. We have ships that have also been
part of these maneuvers in the Balkans--excuse me, the Baltics.
Are the ships that we send there, are they capable of carrying
these nuclear weapons?
Mr. Rose. Well, sir, my understanding--and I will defer to
Bob--is that we made a decision in the early 1990s to remove
nuclear-tip cruise missiles from our surface ships, but we do
maintain the ability, and deploy conventionally armed
Tomahawks.
Mr. Rohrabacher. The answer is, yes, they are capable of
this?
Mr. Scher. No, sir.
Mr. Rohrabacher. We have--and we are complaining about the
Russians and their intent with developing some weapons that are
now in their country, but now we are sitting engaged in sending
to their border--to their border, weapons systems that can
deliver these very same nuclear weapons.
Mr. Scher. And they are doing the same to us. In fact, I
would argue that their exercises on their border with NATO
allies are even more provocative.
Mr. Rohrabacher. They are doing it to us. They are doing it
in their country. We are not in our country. We are--they are
doing it--you know, we had--I just had a hearing a couple of
weeks ago on the Baltics. And, no, I personally don't buy that
when Russia has maneuvers inside their own country versus us
having maneuvers on their border is the same. No. When they
have maneuvers in their country, just like we have maneuvers in
our country, it is not something that, in some way, we should
look at as a hostile act. They might even be a defensive act,
perhaps us flying our B-52 bombers right at them, and then
turning around at the last minute, or our stationing ships that
deliver nuclear weapons, perhaps that--and perhaps sending more
armored units right up to their border in the Baltics, perhaps
that is the reason they have those maneuvers.
Mr. Rogers. The gentleman's time has expired. Mr. Scher,
you were wanting to make a response.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Yes, please.
Mr. Rogers. I would like to hear your response.
Mr. Scher. First of all, just to be clear, despite the fact
that surface ships could theoretically retain the capability to
launch nuclear weapons, they currently do not have them on,
that can't always be the case, necessarily, but we do not have
that capability, period, full stop. Secondly----
Mr. Rogers. Go ahead. I want to hear your statement.
Mr. Rohrabacher. You are here. That is right.
Mr. Scher. We all--we all have--you know, everyone gets to
see the exercises going on in different perspectives. I would
argue that a Russian exercise on its border out of its garrison
that is oriented towards NATO allies is something that we need,
as an alliance, to understand and respond to. It is certainly a
potentially vicious cycle, and wonders--you know, but I would
argue that we, in the alliance, have done nothing to make it
clear that we--we have done nothing that says we are looking to
invade Russia. Russia has done all of--many things that make it
very uncomfortable, and we are there to protect the alliance
and make it clear that our commitment to our allies is as
steadfast as it always has been, and that an invasion of, an
attack on, any ally is the same as if it were on the United
States per our treaty commitment.
Mr. Rogers. I want to thank all the witnesses. Your
testimony has been very enlightening and helpful to these
committees.
And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:10 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 30, 2017

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 30, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 30, 2017

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 30, 2017

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. Please discuss your views on the risks of the treaty
currently being negotiated to ban nuclear weapons. Is it inconsistent
for a NATO member who just signed on to the Warsaw Communique to now
sign on to this treaty? What about non-NATO members who rely on our
nuclear umbrella?
Mr. Rose. I oppose the current efforts to negotiate a nuclear
weapon ban treaty. Such a treaty would be fundamentally at odds with
long-standing U.S. and Alliance defense and deterrence policies. A key
objective of the proponents of the treaty is to undermine U.S. extended
deterrence. I urge the United States and its allies not to participate
in the negotiations, and not become parties to the treaty if one is
negotiated.
Mr. Rogers. Why does Russia's violation matter? Is this something
that has to be confronted? Why?
Mr. Rose. The INF Treaty has served the security interests of the
United States and its allies in Europe and Asia for almost thirty
years. The Treaty is not just a bilateral arms control treaty between
the United States and Russia, but goes to the heart of Eurasian
security. However, it is clear that Russia no longer sees the INF
Treaty as in its interest and is unlikely to return to compliance.
Therefore, a strong--but proportional--political and military response
is required by the United States and its Allies to effectively address
Russia's violation. I would recommend that the United States and its
Allies should impose a ``countervailing strategy'' that seeks to
enhance deterrence by holding critical Russian assets at risk. That
response should also include ``limited'' cruise missile defenses that
would deny Russia significant military benefit from the deployment of
the new cruise missile. These response options should be implemented in
a way that maintains Alliance unity and places the blame for the demise
of the INF Treaty squarely where it belongs: with Russia.
Mr. Rogers. How long was the INF violation teed up in the
interagency before the policy decision was made to call Russia's
conduct a violation?
Mr. Rose. I was not directly responsible for this issue at the
State Department until I became assistant secretary in December 2014,
after Russia was declared in violation of the INF Treaty.
Mr. Rogers. Do you believe Russia will return to compliance with
INF? Do you think we could effectively verify a return to compliance?
How? Please be specific.
Mr. Rose. I believe that it is unlikely that Russia will return to
compliance with its obligations under the INF Treaty for a variety of
reasons, which I outlined in my written statement. That said, if Russia
were to a make a decision to return to compliance with the treaty, I do
believe it could be done in a verifiable manner. This would likely
require resuscitating the INF Treaty verification protocols, which
expired in 2002, or similar measures.
Mr. Rogers. Is it possible to take certain steps to convince them
to return to compliance? How? By doing what?
Mr. Rose. Again, I believe it is extremely unlikely that Russia
will return to compliance with its obligations under the INF Treaty for
a variety of reasons, which I outlined in my written statement.
Mr. Rogers. Then Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Brian
McKeon testified on two occasions that DOD was going to recommend three
categories of military response options to convince Russia to return to
compliance with the treaty. These included active defenses, and
counter-force and countervailing military capabilities. What are some
examples of these kinds of capabilities? Did they ever get developed?
Mr. Rose. I would defer to my colleague Robert Scher who was
actively involved in the development of these options when he served as
assistant secretary of defense for strategy and capabilities. That
said, many of the response options that I recommended in my written
testimony are consistent with the military options that Under Secretary
McKeon noted in his.
Mr. Rogers. If the Russians were developing more than one system
that violated the treaty, what would that mean for their intent to
return to compliance? How would such a fact influence how the U.S.
should proceed on developing its own capabilities?
Mr. Rose. I cannot confirm whether or not Russia is developing
additional systems that violate the INF Treaty. However, if they were
developing additional systems, it would only strengthen my view that
Russia is unlikely to return to compliance. Therefore, I recommend
moving forward with the military response options that I outlined in my
written testimony, in particular developing a conventional variant of
the Long-range Standoff (LRSO) cruise missile, and facilitating the
sale of air- and sea-launched cruise missile capabilities (e.g., JSSM-
ER and Tomahawk) to allies.
Mr. Rogers. Are you familiar with the recommendations to confront
Russia's violation made by then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
General Martin Dempsey? Did you support them? How many of these
recommendations were implemented by the administration? If none, why?
Mr. Rose. I am familiar with those recommendations, but was not the
assistant secretary of state at the time they were made.
Mr. Rogers. Would you support R&D, as distinct from flight test or
acquisition, of the long-range stand-off weapon (also known as LRSO) in
a ground- or sea-launched option? Would such R&D violate the INF
Treaty?
Mr. Rose. I support the development of air- and sea-based variants
of the LRSO. While R&D of the ground-based variant of the LRSO would
not violate the INF Treaty, I would not recommend the development of a
ground-based version of the LRSO at this time. Such a move could
generate strong political opposition among some NATO allies, as we saw
in the early 1980s, and provide an opening for Russian wedge-driving.
U.S. and Allied military requirements can be met with air- and sea-
launched cruise missiles, with less risk of political controversy.
Mr. Rogers. It occurs to me that testing a sea-launched Tomahawk
cruise missile, of which we have several thousand missiles in
inventory, on a fixed-test stand would not violate the treaty. Am I
right? What if we then demonstrated the ability to mate it to a mobile
ground launcher, but didn't flight test it? Would that violate the
treaty? Would these actions send the Russians a powerful message?
Mr. Rose. It is my understanding that testing a sea-launched cruise
missile on a fixed-test stand would not violate the INF Treaty. While
demonstrating the ability to mate a Tomahawk on a mobile ground
launcher and not testing might not be a ``violation'' of the treaty, it
would be inconsistent with the ``spirit'' of treaty and could raise
political concerns among allies. Furthermore, I'm not convinced that it
would have much of an impact on Russian thinking. I believe that U.S.
and Allied military requirements can be met with air- and sea-launched
cruise missiles, with less risk of political controversy. Therefore, I
recommend moving forward with the military response options that I
outlined in my written testimony, in particular developing a
conventional variant of the Long-range Standoff (LRSO) cruise missile,
and facilitating the sale of air- and sea-launched cruise missile
capabilities (e.g., JSSM-ER and Tomahawk) to allies.
Mr. Rogers. Isn't it a false narrative that developing ground-
launched cruise or ballistic missiles at an intermediate range means
we're redeploying nuclear-armed Pershing IIs in Germany or the U.K.?
Isn't this a false narrative spun by Russia and their allies?
Mr. Rose. It is my understanding that the United States currently
has no plans to develop, or deploy, intermediate-range ground-launched
cruise or ballistic missiles, nuclear or conventional, to Europe.
Mr. Rogers. Do you have any doubt that Russia is violating the
treaty? Why then do some allies not agree with the U.S. position? Is it
a political choice or are they really not convinced?
Mr. Rose. I have no doubt that Russia has violated the INF Treaty.
However, during my tenure as assistant secretary of state, I had access
to significant intelligence information related to the issue. Allies
have not had access to the same level of information. Therefore, I
would strongly encourage the U.S. Government to make additional
intelligence information on the subject available to allies.
Mr. Rogers. I gave you a copy at the hearing of the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff's report from 2013 that lists at least four
validated military requirements that call for the U.S. to use military
capabilities prohibited by INF. It appears to be the case that our
adherence to this treaty has a very real price for the U.S. and our
military forces, in that we cannot meet these validated military
requirements. Do you agree? How might such capabilities be useful in
countering A2/AD in Asia?
Mr. Rose. I believe that the United States can meet its current
military requirements without deploying INF Treaty-prohibited systems.
However, as I noted in my written testimony, I am not necessarily
opposed to the development of such a capability in the future if: 1)
Russia fails to return to compliance with the INF Treaty; and 2) and
the United States requires such a capability to meet its military
requirements. However, I remain concerned about where we would deploy
such a system if it were eventually developed. History has shown that
deployments of ground-based missile systems remain politically
controversial in democratic countries. For example, the deployment of
U.S. INF-range ballistic and cruise missiles in Europe in the 1980s was
highly controversial. Furthermore, the recent deployment of a Terminal
High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) missile defense system to the
Republic of Korea (ROK), though strictly a defensive system, has proven
to be controversial both within the ROK, and in the region.
Mr. Rogers. What are some of the factors the U.S. should consider
prior to the extension of the New START treaty, which isn't required
until 2021?
Mr. Rose. A U.S. decision to extend the New START Treaty should be
based two overarching factors. First, is extension of the treaty is in
the national security interest of the United States and its allies?
Second, is Russia is in full compliance with its obligations under the
treaty?
Mr. Rogers. Please discuss your views on the risks of the treaty
currently being negotiated to ban nuclear weapons. Is it inconsistent
for a NATO member who just signed on to the Warsaw Communique to now
sign on to this treaty? What about non-NATO members who rely on our
nuclear umbrella?
Mr. Scher. The discussions underway to ban nuclear weapons are not
in our interests or in the interests of our allies. Any ally who
believes in the security assurances of the United States and NATO
should not participate in the nuclear weapons ban negotiations, nor
consider signing any such treaty. These discussions have set a
dangerous course that if realized would destabilize NATO and undermine
global security. While there are some who will state that this treaty
is just aspirational, consideration of a nuclear ban runs counter to
how the United States and its allies should think about the deterrent
value of nuclear weapons and how we seek to deter nuclear war. As such,
signing on to the treaty would be in direct conflict with Alliance
statements in the Warsaw Communique and elsewhere and would severely
damage the Alliance and the extended deterrence commitments of the
United States in Europe and East Asia.
Mr. Rogers. Why does Russia's violation matter? Is this something
that has to be confronted? Why?
Mr. Scher. Russia's violation of the INF treaty is dangerous from
an operational and political perspective. It also undermines the
relevance of treaties and arms control treaties beyond the INF treaty.
From an operational perspective, the intermediate-range missiles
that Russia is building provide Russia with another capability to hold
NATO forces and territory at risk. While we can address the threat from
these missiles in different ways, their presence forces us to pursue
costly defenses and additional offensive strike capabilities for the
defense of NATO.
On the political side, the continued violation falls into a pattern
of Russian actions that threatens its neighbors, weakens strategic
stability, and defies international norms. Russia's behavior also has a
direct impact on the validity and purpose of international agreements.
If there is no reaction to their violation of the treaty, the entire
system of arms control is weakened and calls into question
international agreements globally.
Mr. Rogers. How long was the INF violation teed up in the
interagency before the policy decision was made to call Russia's
conduct a violation?
Mr. Scher. I took up my position overseeing these issues within the
Office of the Secretary of Defense after the State Department
officially announced that Russia was violating the INF treaty in July
2014. Hence, I do not know how long the interagency community was
examining the evidence before making that formal declaration.
Mr. Rogers. Do you believe Russia will return to compliance with
INF? Do you think we could effectively verify a return to compliance?
How? Please be specific.
Mr. Scher. I do not believe that Russia will return to compliance
with the INF treaty. However, it continues to be in the best interest
of the United States to try to convince Russia to return, even as we do
more to counter the operational and political threat from the
deployment of the violating system for reasons noted in my testimony.
I am not an expert on verification, but I do know from many
discussions that verification would be very difficult and likely
require an expansive and intrusive regime that Russia would be unlikely
to accede to. However, if for some reason Russia were to claim to want
to come back into compliance, this kind of intrusive compliance regime
should be a part of any deal that the United States would accept.
Mr. Rogers. Is it possible to take certain steps to convince them
to return to compliance? How? By doing what?
Mr. Scher. As noted, I believe it unlikely that the Russians will
agree to come back into compliance with the INF treaty. The only way to
get Russia to consider compliance is by convincing Russian leaders that
fielding the violating system will ultimately be costlier operationally
and politically than returning to the treaty and that will require the
coordinated military and political approach of the United States and
the NATO alliance. For example, on the military side of the equation,
Russia would need to see that because of the violation, the balance of
forces between it and NATO had shifted and that the Alliance had become
increasingly unified and militarily potent.
Mr. Rogers. Then Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Brian
McKeon testified on two occasions that DOD was going to recommend three
categories of military response options to convince Russia to return to
compliance with the treaty. These included active defenses, and
counter-force and countervailing military capabilities. What are some
examples of these kinds of capabilities? Did they ever get developed?
Mr. Scher. Active defenses would include some point-missile defense
systems we currently have in inventory such as the Patriot systems and
some additional systems we have or could develop to target cruise
missiles. Counter-force and countervailing capabilities are strike
capabilities we have across the armed forces that would either directly
target the violating systems or target other critical capabilities in
Russia. The U.S. military currently has many such systems, but is
always looking to improve its strike capabilities.
Mr. Rogers. If the Russians were developing more than one system
that violated the treaty, what would that mean for their intent to
return to compliance? How would such a fact influence how the U.S.
should proceed on developing its own capabilities?
Mr. Scher. I believe that the Russians do not intend to return to
the treaty now, but certainly the development of any additional,
violating systems would make me even more certain about that fact.
However, an additional system on their side does not change my calculus
about the United States developing its own intermediate-range cruise
missile. That should be done when and if the Administration, in
coordination with Congress, believes 1) that this type of capability is
needed for offensive purposes, 2) is a better investment than other
strike capabilities, 3) increases strategic stability.
Mr. Rogers. Are you familiar with the recommendations to confront
Russia's violation made by then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
General Martin Dempsey? Did you support them? How many of these
recommendations were implemented by the administration? If none, why?
Mr. Scher. I am generally familiar with the recommendations made by
then Chairman Dempsey and support them as credible options that were
rightfully presented to the President for his decision. I believe that
very few were implemented by the Obama Administration but do not know
what has happened since. In some cases, the recommendations were
assessed to not be operationally necessary at the time and would, in
fact, reduce strategic stability and run counter to the efforts being
undertaken to try to convince Russia to return to compliance with the
Treaty.
Mr. Rogers. Would you support R&D, as distinct from flight test or
acquisition, of the long-range stand-off weapon (also known as LRSO) in
a ground- or sea-launched option? Would such R&D violate the INF
Treaty?
Mr. Scher. As I understand it, R&D for a ground-launched variation
of the LRSO could be done in a way that does not violate the INF
treaty--although that ultimately is a determination made by treaty
lawyers at the Department of State. Assuming that my initial
understanding is true, I would support such R&D at this time.
Mr. Rogers. It occurs to me that testing a sea-launched Tomahawk
cruise missile, of which we have several thousand missiles in
inventory, on a fixed-test stand would not violate the treaty. Am I
right? What if we then demonstrated the ability to mate it to a mobile
ground launcher, but didn't flight test it? Would that violate the
treaty? Would these actions send the Russians a powerful message?
Mr. Scher. I believe that the actions you describe would send a
clear message to the Russians that they would view as a direct
consequence of their violation of the Treaty. I am not a lawyer and
cannot formally comment on whether or not that would be a violation of
the treaty, although based on what has been briefed to me, it would not
seem to be a violation.
Mr. Rogers. Isn't it a false narrative that developing ground-
launched cruise or ballistic missiles at an intermediate range means
we're redeploying nuclear-armed Pershing IIs in Germany or the U.K.?
Isn't this a false narrative spun by Russia and their allies?
Mr. Scher. Yes, it is not true that simply developing ground-
launched cruise missiles or ballistic missiles at an intermediate range
means that it is inevitable that these capabilities would be redeployed
into Europe or that they would be nuclear armed. In fact, any such new
capability would have applications globally and could more easily be
conventionally armed.
Mr. Rogers. Do you have any doubt that Russia is violating the
treaty? Why then do some allies not agree with the U.S. position? Is it
a political choice or are they really not convinced?
Mr. Scher. I do not have any doubt that Russia is violating the
treaty. I cannot speak for other nations about why they have not made
the same statements. It is, however, critical that the United States
continue to share as much intelligence as possible to make it
abundantly clear that Russia is in violation of the INF Treaty, and I
believe as Russia continues to deploy these systems, that will become
an easier task.
Mr. Rogers. I gave you a copy at the hearing of the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff's report from 2013 that lists at least four
validated military requirements that call for the U.S. to use military
capabilities prohibited by INF. It appears to be the case that our
adherence to this treaty has a very real price for the U.S. and our
military forces, in that we cannot meet these validated military
requirements. Do you agree? How might such capabilities be useful in
countering A2/AD in Asia?
Mr. Scher. If the United States made the determination to withdraw
from the INF treaty, there would be capabilities militarily useful for
our forces that DOD could then develop. However, I do not believe that
simply because these systems would be militarily useful or that they
fill validated requirements necessarily means that they are the only,
or even the best way, to address those requirements. Hence, pursuing
any such capabilities would have to be done with an overall look at
what options are available to meet the military requirements in a way
that best reinforces strategic stability and supports U.S. interests.
The value of intermediate range systems in Asia would be our
ability to locate them within the range of many systems China installed
and developed to keep some U.S. systems out of range of Chinese forces.
While this could have some operational advantages, it would also
present more fixed targets to any adversary. Beyond this reality, we
also have other systems that can penetrate and/or survive in the
Pacific.
Mr. Rogers. What are some of the factors the U.S. should consider
prior to the extension of the New START treaty, which isn't required
until 2021?
Mr. Scher. I believe that the New START treaty, if implemented as
agreed to, remains in U.S. interests and that extending New START makes
sense. However, given recent Russian actions in regards to the INF
treaty and its other aggressive actions, extending it early should only
be done if we have confidence that it would be implemented in
accordance with U.S. views of the treaty.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. COOPER
Mr. Cooper. Should the United States withdraw from the INF Treaty
or the New START Treaty? Why/why not?
Mr. Rose. I believe that continued implementation of the New START
Treaty is in the national security interests of the United States for
several reasons. First, it places limitations on the number of
strategic nuclear systems that Russia can deploy against the United
States and our allies. Second, through New START's on-site inspection
regime, data declarations, and notifications, the Treaty provides the
United States with key insights into Russian strategic nuclear forces
that we might not have access to without the Treaty. Third, according
to the U.S. Department of State's Annual Report on Implementation of
the New START Treaty, Russia is adhering to its obligations under the
Treaty. Indeed, the Reagan Administration had serious concerns about
the Soviet Union's compliance with the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM)
Treaty, as result of its building of the Krasnoyarsk ballistic missile
early warning radar. However, these concerns did not prevent the United
States from negotiating and ratifying the INF Treaty in 1988, because
despite concerns about Soviet compliance with the ABM Treaty, it was
felt that the INF Treaty was in the national security interest of the
United States. In my view, the same holds true for the New START Treaty
today.
Mr. Cooper. Should the United States and NATO countries pursue
cruise missile defense to counter the Russian INF violations? Why/why
not?
Mr. Rose. Russia is deploying the new GLCM as part of its overall
A2AD strategy to deny the United States and its NATO Allies access to
critical ports, airfields, and command and control nodes during a
potential conflict. In response, the United States and NATO should
deploy ``limited'' cruise missile defenses to protect key Alliance
assets in the event of a conflict with Russia. While I support the
deployment of ``limited'' cruise missile defenses, I would caution
against moving forward with the deployment of larger set of missile
defenses aimed against Russia, especially against its strategic
deterrent. Such an approach would be extremely expensive,
technologically challenging, and could undermine strategic stability.
Mr. Cooper. Why did Russia develop and deploy the SSC-8 in
violation of the INF Treaty? In addition to responding strongly to
Russian violation, should we address Russian alleged concerns, and if
so, how?
Mr. Rose. In my view, Russia developed and deployed the SSC-8 in
violation of the INF Treaty for a variety of political and military
reasons, which I outlined in my written testimony. From 2013 to 2016,
the United States attempted--unsuccessfully--to resolve Russia's
noncompliance with the INF Treaty through diplomatic efforts. During
those discussions, the United States directly addressed each of
Russia's alleged concerns about U.S. compliance with the INF Treaty.
Based on this history, I believe it is unlikely that Russia will return
to compliance with the treaty.
Mr. Cooper. This is currently prohibited by law per a congressional
mandate in the national defense authorization, but should we have a
channel that allows military-military dialogue with Russia to discuss
strategic stability issue, particularly in a crisis? Why/why not?
Mr. Rose. I believe that is in the mutual interest of United States
and Russia to initiate strategic stability talks to help prevent
misperceptions and miscalculations.
Mr. Cooper. Should the United States withdraw from the INF Treaty
or the New START Treaty? Why/why not?
Mr. Scher. The United States should not withdraw from the INF
treaty right now. It continues to be in the best interest of the United
States and our Allies to do everything we can to bring Russia back into
compliance, even if we eventually fail. However, I do believe that
there is a range of actions that the United States should take within
the bounds of the treaty to improve our operational position and make
it more likely that Russia might see it in their interest to return to
compliance.
I believe that the New START treaty remains in our interests given
that it reduces the number of deployed nuclear weapons and established
a solid verification regime, especially as Russia continues to
implement that treaty.
Mr. Cooper. Why did Russia develop and deploy the SSC-8 in
violation of the INF Treaty? In addition to responding strongly to
Russian violation, should we address Russian alleged concerns, and if
so, how?
Mr. Scher. I cannot speak to why Russia violated the INF treaty,
nor do I believe that they had any reason to do so. As they have not
admitted to deploying this system, I have also not seen any publicly
stated rationale for why they have developed the violating system.
Russia certainly talks about how it is threatened by NATO, but given
what has transpired over the past few years, Russia has been the
aggressor on its periphery, not the Alliance.
Mr. Cooper. Does the Russian deployment of this missile threaten
the U.S. ability to defend the United States and our European allies?
Does it threaten our nuclear deterrence capability?
Mr. Scher. At this point, I do not believe that this missile
threatens the ability of the United States to defend ourselves and our
Allies, and it does not significantly threaten our nuclear deterrence
capabilities overall. However, the violation is not just a political
statement; it is a real military capability. This system, especially if
deployed in greater numbers, would have a measurable effect on the
strike capability of Russia and would directly threaten NATO forces and
territory, including possibly part of the air leg of the nuclear triad.
Threatening our air leg would force the United States and NATO allies
to spend more money on protection of the Alliance and more money on
systems that could strike Russia in order to maintain the level of
security we currently enjoy.
Mr. Cooper. This is currently prohibited by law per a congressional
mandate in the national defense authorization, but should we have a
channel that allows military-military dialogue with Russia to discuss
strategic stability issue, particularly in a crisis? Why/why not?
Mr. Scher. I believe that there is often a benefit to talking with
other nations. Whether or not a military-to-military channel is the
right approach depends on the particulars of the case. Given that
strategic stability is much more than just a military concern, I am not
convinced that such military talks between the United States and Russia
would be the best approach. However, I do believe that there is value
in retaining this channel as an option and not have it be specifically
restricted by law as it could be helpful to those seeking to find the
best way to enhance strategic stability. And, yes, it would be
particularly useful to have open channels of communication in the event
of a crisis.
Mr. Cooper. Should the United States withdraw from the INF Treaty
or the New START Treaty? Why/why not?
Mr. Wolfsthal. The United States has a vested interest New START's
continued full implementation and the United States should not withdraw
from New START. New START provides critical insights into Russian
nuclear developments and also provides the only constraint on Russia
nuclear modernization. It provides a critical element in an otherwise
destabilized relationship with Russia and should be preserved as long
as Russia continues to comply with its terms. It should be extended for
five years if the Executive Branch and U.S. military believe that we
can achieve our goals of deterrence and reassurance under the mutual
constraints adopted under the agreement. I do not believe the United
States should withdraw from the INF agreement unless the U.S. military
determines that we have to develop and deploy a system denied to us by
the terms of the agreement. Even then, it would be preferable for us to
pursue such a program as a counter-measure under the INF given Russia's
violations of the agreement. U.S. withdrawal from the INF is a favor to
Russia and would enable Russia to claim we, not they, are responsible
for the demise of the agreement.
Mr. Cooper. Should the United States and NATO countries pursue
cruise missile defense to counter the Russian INF violations? Why/why
not?
Mr. Wolfsthal. The missile defense options within our technical and
military capability will make no significant impact on Russian or
European military thinking, deterrence or reassurance. Moreover, the
decision to deploy missile defenses in Europe was made to protect NATO
allies from Iranian missile capabilities. Russia remains convinced that
this is cover for American ambitions to direct missile defenses against
Russia to deny it a retaliatory capability to deter American military
actions. As such, any decision to direct the European Phased Adaptive
Approach to missile defense against Russia has significant political
and diplomatic implications. If there is no significant military gain
and directing missile defense against Russia adds to the damaging
political narrative in Europe that the united States is undermining
strategic stability in Europe, then such steps should be approached
cautiously. I do not believe at this time that EPAA should be
redirected against cruise missiles and even if it is, it is unlikely to
have any significant military capability.
Mr. Cooper. Why did Russia develop and deploy the SSC-8 in
violation of the INF Treaty? In addition to responding strongly to
Russian violation, should we address Russian alleged concerns, and if
so, how?
Mr. Wolfsthal. Russian actions suggest that they are seriously
concerned about the expansion of NATO and the growing ability of the
United States to hold at risk strategic assets in Russia without
resorting to use of nuclear weapons. Russian military doctrine now
reserves the right to escalate to the use of nuclear weapons if it is
facing a conventional military defeat with strategic implications, and
their strong pursuit of precision strike conventional and nuclear
capabilities on land, air and sea are consistent with this effort.
While I have no doubt that Russia is in full violation of the INF
Treaty, Russian thinking on the issue is unclear. Some officials in
Russia may not be aware that the testing and development of such
missiles is prohibited. However, if media reports of actual deployments
are accurate, any such distinction is mute. Russia is in violation of
the INF Treaty. I do believe that it is worth the effort to seek to
preserve the INF Treaty and to bring Russia back into compliance. If a
dialogue at a high enough level could be initiated, there is a chance
that Russia would agree--in exchange for certain American actions or
inaction--to reverse course and come back into compliance with the INF
Treaty. Moreover, making such an effort would steady the resolve of
NATO allies and should Russia refuse to come back into compliance, make
a strong NATO response easier to achieve.
Mr. Cooper. Are there non-military responses that have yet to be
used to respond to this violation? Which ones would you recommend?
Mr. Wolfsthal. I am a strong advocate for naming and shaming Russia
actions. I believe that we should declassify a large majority of the
information that confirms Russia's violations with our allies and to
call Russia out in multiple international and legal form for their
actions. Russia takes great pride in being a depository state for the
nuclear nonproliferation Treaty and for being a responsible nuclear
superpower. Making clear that their actions are no longer responsible
and are a major detriment to international peace and security is one
way to create pressure on Russia to return to compliance and avoid such
destabilizing actions.
Mr. Cooper. This is currently prohibited by law per a congressional
mandate in the national defense authorization, but should we have a
channel that allows military-military dialogue with Russia to discuss
strategic stability issue, particularly in a crisis? Why/why not?
Mr. Wolfsthal. The lack of a strategic stability dialogue with
Russia is a major concern and adds to the danger that an accident or
conflict could escalate out-ofcontrol. Russian high-level officials or
convince the United States is seeking to undermine the current
political leadership control of the country and to deny Russia what it
sees as it's rightful place in European global affairs. This paranoia
can only be addressed through direct and sustained dialogue including
national leadership and high-level military officials. This is in no
way a reward for Russian actions but a necessary step to manage the
strategic competition that is growing between two nuclear superpowers.
Mr. Cooper. Russia was also in violation of the Anti-Ballistic
Missile Treaty (ABM) with the construction of its Krasnoyarsk ballistic
missile early warning radar. Did the Russians eventually resolve those
concerns? How many years did it take?
Mr. Wolfsthal. In contravention of the ABM treaty Russia built the
radar system that was capable of performing battle management functions
for missile defenses. It took five years for the United States and
Russia to address these concerns and to bring Russia back into
compliance.
Mr. Cooper. You mentioned in your testimony that you do not believe
the Long-Range Stand-Off Weapons is necessary. Why?
Mr. Wolfsthal. The United States currently has five different means
of delivering nuclear weapons globally. The Air Force has determined
that a new Stealth bomber is necessary to replace the aging fleet of
strategic B-52 and B-2 bombers. The goal of a Stealth bomber is to
penetrate enemy defenses and delivered it's payload at close range. The
cost for developing a Stealth bomber a significantly higher than for
developing a standoff strategic bomber aircraft. It makes little sense
to invest the extreme sums of money necessary to develop a truly
stealthy bomber and also invest considerable psalms to develop a long-
range standoff missiles. I am in favor of bought building either a non-
stealthy long-range bomber and a long range stand off missile OR a
stealth bomber with gravity bombs. I am not in favor of spending scarce
resources on a redundancy and is redundant to our land and sea based
ballistic missiles.
