- GOOD FOR BUSINESS: PRIVATE SECTOR PERSPECTIVES ON CLIMATE ACTION

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GOOD FOR BUSINESS: PRIVATE SECTOR
PERSPECTIVES ON CLIMATE ACTION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
October 20, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-9

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov

Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-331                      WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CLIMATE CRISIS
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

KATHY CASTOR, Florida, Chair
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana,
JULIA BROWNLEY, California             Ranking Member
JARED HUFFMAN, California            GARY PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         BUDDY CARTER, Georgia
MIKE LEVIN, California               CAROL MILLER, West Virginia
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
------
Ana Unruh Cohen, Majority Staff Director
Marty Hall, Minority Staff Director
climatecrisis.house.gov

C O N T E N T S

----------

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Page
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and Chair, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................     2
Hon. Garrett Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Select Committee on the
Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     3

WITNESSES

Corley Kenna, Head of Communications and Policy, Patagonia
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Prepared Statement...........................................     8
Gilbert Campbell, Founder and CEO, Volt Energy Utility and Volt
Energy
Oral Statement...............................................     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    11
The Hon. Mark Menezes, Former Deputy Secretary of Energy, U.S.
Department of Energy; Former Chief Counsel for Energy and
Environment, U.S. House Energy and Commerce Committee
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Prepared Statement...........................................    16
David Edsey, Climate Director, Technical Underwriting, Zurich
North America
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Prepared Statement...........................................    24

APPENDIX

Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Corley Kenna..    47
Questions for the Record from Hon. Dan Crenshaw to Corley Kenna..    48
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Gilbert
Campbell.......................................................    51
Questions for the Record from Hon. A. Donald McEachin to Gilbert
Campbell.......................................................    53
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to David Edsey...    54
Questions for the Record from Hon. A. Donald McEachin to David
Edsey..........................................................    54

GOOD FOR BUSINESS: PRIVATE SECTOR
PERSPECTIVES ON CLIMATE ACTION

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 20, 2021

House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:29 p.m., in Room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Kathy Castor
[chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Castor, Bonamici, Brownley,
McEachin, Casten, Graves, Palmer, Carter, Miller, and Gonzalez.
Ms. Castor. Committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
As a reminder, members participating in a hearing remotely
should be visible on camera throughout the hearing.
As with in-person meetings, members are responsible for
controlling their own microphones. Members can be muted by
staff only to avoid inadvertent background noise.
I would like to remind members that per guidance of the
Attending Physician, on July 27, members, staff, and all others
physically present in an indoor U.S. House of Representatives
space, including a hearing room, are required to wear a mask
unless they are seeking, or are under recognition of the chair.
In addition, statements, documents, or motions must be
submitted to the electronic repository, to

[email protected]
.
Finally, members or witnesses experiencing technical
problems should inform committee staff immediately.
Well, good afternoon, everyone. Welcome to our committee
meeting, Good for Business: Private Sector Perspectives on
Climate Action.
Today, we will hear about business action to fight the
climate crisis, and I ask unanimous consent for member----
Speaker. This meeting is being recorded.
Ms. Castor. That is good.
I ask unanimous consent for member opening statements and
question periods to be limited to 3 minutes because of votes on
the floor.
Without objection, so ordered.
I now recognize myself for 3 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Welcome again to our outstanding panel of witnesses.
The climate crisis has had a brutal impact on our nation
this year. Not only did we experience the hottest month on
record this summer, we have also had more disasters 9 months
into this year than in any other year in our history. We have
suffered 18 climate fueled major disasters in 2021, and that
has left us with a price tag of over $104 billion in damages,
and it is often working families and communities of color
that--who shoulder the cost.
Climate change is also harming America's businesses.
Extreme weather events increase uncertainty and instability for
workers and entrepreneurs, many of whom are one disaster away
from losing their livelihoods.
A growing number of companies are taking matters into their
own hands, but they cannot do it alone. It is time to chart a
better path, and build a more equitable and resilient economy.
The right climate investments can create millions of good
paying jobs, protect small businesses, and ensure prosperity
across America. And, with the help of America's business
leaders, we can make sure this progress is good for both our
climate and our economy.
Here is the thing: solving the climate crisis will be good
for business. That is why car manufacturers are doubling down
on electric vehicles, and utilities are investing in
renewables. America's top business leaders understand that
embracing sustainability will help them attract talent and
deliver innovative products, which is why more companies are
taking action to be part of the solution as we lead global
markets towards a clean energy future.
Hundreds of global companies have already started setting
targets to reduce their corporate emissions, and over 100
companies have goals to eventually run entirely on clean
energy. Some major businesses are already at that point,
running their facilities on 100 percent clean energy, and
others, like those represented by our witnesses here today, are
doing their part to put us on the right path.
We are also seeing the world's leading investors take
action. Just this week, the Ford Foundation announced it will
stop investing in fossil fuels, and, instead, focus its energy
portfolio on renewables. More than 30 other large investors
have committed to invest only in companies with targets to
reach net zero emissions by 2050, and a global financial
alliance to deliver on the promises of the Paris Agreement by
leveraging more than $70 trillion in assets, these investors
understand that climate action is good for business.
Moving our economy toward clean energy is an economic
imperative. We know climate progress means millions of good
paying jobs. It also means increased innovation, boosted cost
savings, and improved investor confidence. So I look forward to
today's discussion.

Opening Statement of Chair Kathy Castor

Hearing on ``Good For Business: Private Sector Perspectives on
Climate Action''

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

October 20, 2021

As prepared for delivery

The climate crisis has had a brutal impact on our nation this year.
Not only did we experience the hottest month on record this summer;
we've also had more disasters nine months into this year than in any
other year in history. Our communities have endured an unprecedented 18
major disasters in 2021, including severe storms, historic floods,
raging wildfires, and record-breaking heat waves. These disasters have
been costly, leaving behind over $104 billion in damages. And it's
often working families and communities of color who shoulder the costs.
Climate change is also harming our nation's businesses. Extreme
weather events increase uncertainty and instability for workers and
entrepreneurs, many of whom are one disaster away from losing their
livelihoods. A growing number of companies are taking matters into
their own hands, but they cannot do it alone. It's time to chart a
better path and build a more equitable and resilient economy. The right
climate investments can create millions of good-paying jobs, protect
small businesses, and ensure prosperity across America. With the help
of America's business leaders, we can make sure this progress is good
for both our climate and for our economy.
Here's the thing: solving the climate crisis will be good for
business. That's why car manufacturers are doubling down on electric
vehicles and utilities are investing in renewables. America's top
businesses leaders understand that embracing sustainability will help
them attract talent and deliver innovative products. Which is why more
companies are taking action to be part of the solution, as we lead
global markets toward a clean energy future.
Hundreds of global companies have already set targets to reduce
their corporate emissions--and over 100 companies have goals to
eventually run entirely on clean energy. Some major businesses are
already at that point, running their facilities with 100% renewable
energy. And others, like those represented by our witnesses here today,
are doing their part to put us on the right path.
We're also seeing action from the world's leading investors. Just
this week, the Ford Foundation announced it will stop investing in
fossil fuels and instead focus its energy portfolio on renewables. More
than 30 other large investors have committed to invest only in
companies with targets to reach net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. And
a global financial alliance that includes more than 160 global firms
has agreed to work together to deliver on the promises of the Paris
Agreement, by leveraging more than $70 trillion in assets. These
investors understand that climate action is good for business.
Clean energy will also help working families, as we take steps to
avoid the price volatility of fossil fuels while making electricity
more affordable for the average American. Investors and shareholders
are already demanding greater transparency on climate risks. And as
they look to their financial futures and listen to the people they
serve, institutions and pension funds are shifting capital away from
fossil fuel activities and other risky investments.
Moving our economy toward clean energy is an economic imperative.
We know climate progress means millions of good-paying jobs; it also
means increased innovation, boosted cost savings, and improved investor
confidence.
I look forward to today's discussion.

The chair now recognizes the ranking member, Mr. Graves of
Louisiana, for an opening statement.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I want to thank you
for holding this hearing today and for the witnesses for your
participation.
Madam Chair, as we have discussed at many of these
hearings, it is important that we take action, but it is
important that we take action that is science based, that is
evidence based. What much of the folks who pontificate on
climate change and clean energy policy have been talking about
in recent years--excuse me--recent months, has been this clean
energy plan that is included in the reconciliation package.
Yet, when you look at--excuse me--when you look at the
actual policies that are embedded in there, even independent
reviews by Congressional Research Service have found that this
does not guarantee that we are going to be moving in the right
direction, but it does guarantee higher prices for all
consumers.
Madam Chair, as we move forward in a direction of a clean
energy future, we must do it--we must do it in a way that is
based upon evidence. And you look back, for example, at the
Clean Power Plan. The Clean Power Plan, Madam Chair, what we
did is we lifted the restrictions. We lifted the sanctions. We
didn't put mandates on energy companies, yet they took an
objective that was set for 2030, and during the Trump
administration, were able to hit that target in 2019, to hit
that target 11 years earlier, not just hit it, but exceed it.
And, Madam Chair, you know that that target--do you know
how much we subsidized? Do you know how much we mandated? Do
you know how much we required of companies to actually hit that
target at all or hit it, much less, 11 years early? Zero. There
were no mandates. There were no restrictions. We let innovators
innovate.
And so, Madam Chair, we don't need a clean energy plan in a
reconciliation package. What we need to do is we need to build
upon the successes. We need to learn from the failures of the
past and realize that the best way for us to move forward in a
clean energy direction is we must--we must let innovators
innovate. Don't come in and restrict it to certain
technologies. That has not resulted in the outcomes that we
need.
And, most importantly, Madam Chair--and I hope that this is
something that we can all agree on as we head to the Convention
of Parties in Scotland, is I hope that we could all agree upon
what we need to be doing is we need to be focusing upon the
global, the global outcomes here and stop looking myopically at
the United States as though we can solve all the world's
problems.
We need to make sure that China is held accountable in an
enforceable mechanism, and in a way that we result not in
increasing four tons of emissions for every one ton the U.S.
reduces, but actually results in global emissions going down.
That needs to be the end zone. That needs to be the objective
of the COP, and that means holding countries like China
accountable to doing something to move in the right direction,
not to increase their emissions by 50 percent over the next 9
years.
So, Madam Chair, I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses, and yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Now we will welcome our witnesses, and I encourage members
to go and vote and return for their testimony and questions.
First, we will go to Representative Casten to introduce
David Edsey.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am pleased to introduce David Edsey, who is the Climate
Director for Zurich North America, where he leads the
development of insurance and service solutions to address
climate change mitigation and adaptation.
I should give a plug to Zurich here that one of your great
competencies is you had the wisdom to hire my wife for many
years, who has, of course, moved on to other things since, so
no current conflicts.
David has expertise in climate change risk, mitigation, and
resilient strategies with more than 25 years of experience in
insurance and litigation. For over a century, Zurich North
America's corporate headquarters has been in the Greater
Chicago area. In 2016, Zurich moved closer to my own district
in suburban Schaumburg, where they employ over 53,000 people.
As future climate events are projected to cause a $1.2
trillion loss to the U.S. economy, and as more companies are
experiencing more intensity and variability from extreme
weather events that impact production capacity and operational
costs, David offers a valuable perspective on how the private
sector can play a role in determining short term climate risk
and identify opportunities to implement mitigation and
adaptation actions.
Thank you, David, for being here, and I look forward to
hearing more about Zurich's work.
Ms. Castor. Next we will go to--the chair recognizes
Representative Brownley to introduce Corley Kenna.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And, as I made a promise, I will be brief. But I am
delighted to introduce Ms. Corley Kenna today from Patagonia.
As Ms. Kenna outlined in her testimony, Patagonia has
leaned in on the climate challenges confronting businesses as
the planet warms and extreme weather events that threaten
supply chains. Patagonia was founded by Yvon and Malinda
Chouinard, who are two of the truest champions of the
environment and the greatest stewards of our country's natural
resources.
I am so proud to have Patagonia in my congressional
district. Patagonia offers paid leave, on-site childcare,
flexible work schedules, and competitive wages and benefits.
They have always been a forward-looking company.
Patagonia is absolutely proof that corporations can be both
good stewards of the environment, good to their workers, good
for their communities, while still making a reasonable profit,
producing high-quality products.
So, with that, Madam Speaker, we thank Ms. Kenna for her
testimony, and looking forward to it today.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Welcome, Ms. Kenna.
And thank you, Rep Brownley.
Next we will go to Representative McEachin to introduce
Gilbert Campbell.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Madam Chair.
It is my pleasure and privilege to introduce to the
committee Mr. Gilbert Campbell. He is the Founder and CEO of
Volt Energy Utility, a national renewable energy firm that
finances and develops utility-scale solar and energy storage
projects.
He also cofounded Volt Energy, a minority owned and
operated distribution generation solar development company, and
serves on the board of the Solar Energy Industry Association,
and the American Association of Blacks in Energy.
Lastly, but certainly not least, Mr. Campbell received the
White House Champions of Change Award from President Obama, for
his advocacy promoting the inclusion in the clean energy sector
and providing STEM education opportunities for young people
across the country. He has received numerous other awards for
his work to make the energy sector more equitable and more
diverse.
Mr. Campbell, my friend, it is good to see you today. Thank
you for appearing. I look forward to your testimony.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep McEachin.
Next we will go to Ranking Member Graves to introduce Mark
Menezes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I am honored to introduce the Honorable Mark
Menezes, who happens to be from the great state of Louisiana--
Hahnville, if I remember right, or at least Hahnville High.
What is better than being a graduate of LSU? Doing it two times
over. He is a two-times LSU grad.
I had the honor of working with Secretary Menezes on the
Energy and Commerce Committee as he served as Chief Energy
Counsel for the committee, but he went on in advising many
private sector clients on energy and electricity policy, and
served as Deputy Secretary of the Department of Energy under
the previous administration. And just a fantastic guy, a good
friend, and when he takes that mask off, you are going to see
an amazing resemblance to Henry Winkler, as he looks a lot like
the Fonz.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you for that, Ranking Member
Graves.
Without objection, the witnesses' written statements will
be made part of the record.
Ms. Kenna, we are going to start with you. You are now
recognized to give a 5-minute presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF CORLEY KENNA, HEAD OF COMMUNICATIONS AND POLICY,
PATAGONIA; GILBERT CAMPBELL, FOUNDER AND CEO, VOLT ENERGY
UTILITY AND VOLT ENERGY; HON. MARK W. MENEZES, FORMER DEPUTY
SECRETARY OF ENERGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY; FORMER CHIEF
COUNSEL FOR ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT, U.S. HOUSE ENERGY &
COMMERCE COMMITTEE; AND DAVID EDSEY, CLIMATE DIRECTOR,
TECHNICAL UNDERWRITING, ZURICH NORTH AMERICA

STATEMENT OF CORLEY KENNA

Ms. Kenna. Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves,
and members of the committee.
And I really appreciate that kind introduction,
Representative Brownley, and this opportunity to speak before
the committee.
My name is Corley Kenna, and I lead the Communications and
Policy team at Patagonia. Patagonia is a $1 billion business,
with brick-and-mortar stores in 19 states and 2,000 employees
in the U.S., 3,000 globally.
We partner with hundreds of small and large businesses in
every single state in the country, and we are a part of an
outdoor industry that generates nearly $800 billion in revenue
each year and supports more than 7 million jobs, and we help
improve mental and physical well-being.
But, more than that, we are a community. We are hikers and
hunters, surfers, and anglers. We are bikers and birders,
climbers and skiers. We live in urban and rural areas, and we
vote for liberals and conservatives. The one thing that we all
have in common is our love for the outdoors and a desire for
clean air, clean water, and a healthy planet.
The climate crisis is not an abstract theory. It is an
urgent threat to our business and our community. To paraphrase
conservationist David Brower, there is no business to be done
on a dead planet.
Extreme temperatures, wildfires, polluted air, warming
winters, eroded coastlines, and dried up rivers prevent our
community from exploring and enjoying the outdoors. They also
threaten our operations. Just this year, we had to close our
distribution center in Reno because of bad air quality caused
by wildfires exacerbated by the climate crisis. In 2017, we had
to shut down our headquarters for a whole month because of what
was then California's largest wildfire.
And, just as we have an interest in acting because our
business and community is affected by this crisis, we recognize
we have a responsibility to act, because every part of our
business contributes to the climate crisis. Our supply chains
and our financial partners rely on fossil fuels, the same
fossil fuels that are destroying the planet we all depend on.
Patagonia is working to reduce and eliminate our scope
three carbon emissions, and we are proud that in just 4 years,
we won't use any virgin petroleum fiber sources in our
materials. We have donated nearly $150 million to thousands of
groups working on the most pressing environmental challenges,
and we use our brand voice to advocate for solutions to the
climate crisis.
But Patagonia and other companies committed to aggressive
carbon reductions can't do this alone. There are simply some
things that only government can do.
The Build Back Better Act offers a bold and urgent
opportunity to address the climate crisis before it is too
late, and to give working families the support that they
deserve. The climate investments of this budget reconciliation
package would accelerate the clean energy economy, create
thousands of new jobs, and promote greater climate resilience
by conserving our public lands. These are not wish-list items,
but critical actions needed to stave off impending climate
disaster.
Patagonia is willing to pay a higher corporate tax rate to
fund this critical legislation, but we also urge Congress to
eliminate tax subsidies for oil and gas companies. The United
States spends $20 billion annually subsidizing fossil fuels. It
is time to shift those investments to a clean and just future
for people and planet.
This is the defining challenge of our era. The good news
for Congress is that not only is this legislation needed, but
it is popular among your constituents. And the climate
investments, in particular, are supported by many in the
American business community.
Special interests can spend millions of dollars to lobby
against the bill, but make no mistake; the American people want
to see these game-changing investments in our planet and our
future. They want to see it happen before it is too late.
So thank you again for this opportunity to testify today,
and I look forward to any questions you might have.
[The statement of Ms. Kenna follows:]

BEFORE THE HOUSE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS

UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

``GOOD FOR BUSINESS: PRIVATE SECTOR PERSPECTIVES ON
CLIMATE ACTION''

October 20, 2021

Corley Kenna

Head of Communications and Policy

Patagonia

Good afternoon, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and
members of the Committee. My name is Corley Kenna and I lead the
Communications and Policy team at Patagonia. Thank you for this
opportunity to speak before this important committee.
Patagonia is a one-billion-dollar business with brick-and-mortar
stores in 19 states and 2,000 employees in the US, 3,000 globally. We
partner with hundreds of small and large businesses through our
wholesale business in every state in the country. And we are a part of
an industry that generates nearly $800 billion in revenue each year,
supports more than seven million people and helps improve mental and
physical well-being. We are proud that earlier this year, consumers
named Patagonia as the company with the best reputation in America.
But more than a business, we are a community. We are hikers and
hunters, surfers and anglers, birders and bikers, skiers, and climbers.
We live in urban and rural areas, and vote for liberals and
conservatives. The one thing that we all have in common is our love of
the outdoors and a desire for clean air, clean water, and a healthy
planet.
Along with the thousands of US businesses in our industry,
Patagonia depends on a stable climate and healthy, protected lands and
waters. The climate crisis is not an abstract theory, it is an urgent
risk to our business.
To paraphrase David Brower, there is no business on a dead planet.
Extreme temperatures, wildfires, polluted air, warming winters,
eroded coast lines and dried-up rivers prevent our community from
exploring and enjoying the outdoors. They also threaten our operations.
Let me share with you one very granular example. Just this year, we had
to close our Reno distribution center repeatedly due to bad air quality
caused by wildfires exacerbated by climate change.
And just as we have a responsibility to act because our business
and community is affected by this crisis, we also recognize we have a
responsibility to act because every part of our business contributes to
the climate crisis. When you grow things, make things, move things, and
sell things, you leave behind carbon. Our supply chains and financial
partners rely on fossil fuels--the same fossil fuels that are
destroying the planet we all depend on.
And we take our direct responsibility seriously. Patagonia is
working to reduce and eliminate our scope three carbon emissions and
are proud that in just four years we won't use any virgin petroleum
sources in our materials. We have donated nearly $150 million to
thousands of groups working on the most pressing environmental
challenges and use our brand voice to advocate for solutions to the
climate crisis.
But Patagonia and other companies committed to aggressive carbon
reductions--can't do this alone. There are simply some things that only
governments can do.
We need help scaling and incentivizing programs that won't worsen
the climate crisis, and that will increase the pace of urgently needed
emissions reductions and a just, clean energy transition.
The Build Back Better Act--offers a bold and urgent opportunity to
address the climate crisis before it's too late, and give working
families the support they deserve. It's vital to the people and planet
on which our company and the rest of the outdoor industry rely. It is
an imperative investment in communities affected most on the frontlines
of this crisis, the majority of whom are low income, Black, Indigenous
and other people of color. Communities that are already vulnerable and
suffering serious and lasting health issues due to poor air quality
exacerbated by climate change.
Bold investments to protect our planet could not only ease the
worst effects of the climate crisis but offer an opportunity for
innovation and job creation. And it is obvious that corporate America
sees this opportunity. Look at prominent advertisements from the most
well-known brands--they draw your attention to how these companies are
working to curb their emissions and do their part to address this
crisis.
Patagonia is proud to be a certified B-Corporation, which requires
us to look beyond profit and consider people, planet and the long-term
in every business decision we make. And we have been glad to see other
businesses and organizations make similar commitments to consider not
just their shareholders but their full community of stakeholders in
their business plans.
These corporate commitments, along with bold and aggressive
investments from our elected leaders, will create the conditions for
the systemic change required for a healthy planet and thriving
communities. Government support will also catalyze further business
investment and innovation--making our economy more competitive and
resilient while strengthening our global leadership.
The climate investments of this budget reconciliation package would
accelerate the clean energy economy and create thousands of new jobs.
For example, the Civilian Climate Corps provides a great opportunity to
train and diversify the workforce that we will need as we move to a
renewable energy economy. In addition, the Build Back Better Act would
also protect threatened landscapes such as the Arctic National Wildlife
Refuge.
In total, these investments would accelerate America's leap to
clean, renewable wind and solar power and promote greater climate
resilience by conserving public lands. These are not wish list items,
but imperative actions needed to stave off impending climate disaster.
Beyond climate, this legislation also prioritizes the needs of
working families. For the last 50 years, Patagonia has offered paid
sick leave, parental leave, and onsite childcare to our employees--and
we've reaped the benefits through our ability to maintain a robust and
engaged workforce. Yet, nationally, fewer than 21 percent of workers
have access to paid family leave through their employers. Attracting
and retaining top talent and a speedy economic recovery depend on
enabling people to return to the labor force by addressing the urgent
issues of paid leave and childcare availability.
People say that it's easy to talk about what should happen, and a
whole lot harder to talk about how. Patagonia is willing to pay a
higher corporate tax rate to fund this critical legislation. Further,
we also urge Congress to eliminate tax subsidies for oil and gas
companies. The United States spends $20 billion annually subsidizing
fossil fuels. It's a mistake that costs American taxpayers more than
$649 billion each year when considering health, environmental, and
climate externalities. It's time to shift those investments to a clean,
just future for people and the planet.
This is the defining challenge of our era. The good news for
Congress: Not only is this legislation needed but it is also popular
among your constituents and the climate investments are supported by
many in the American business community. Special interests can spend
millions of dollars to lobby against this bill, but make no mistake,
the American people \1\ want to see these game changing investments in
our planet and our future--and they want to see it happen before it's
too late.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to any questions you may have.
Thank you.

--------------
\1\ Data for Progress, Vox. Build Back Better Toplines. 12 Oct.
2021. Web: https://www.filesforprogress.org/datasets/2021/10/dfp-vox-
bbb-oct12-toplines.pdf.

Ms. Castor. Thank you, Ms. Kenna.
Mr. Campbell, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for a
presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF GILBERT CAMPBELL

Mr. Campbell. Thank you.
Chairwoman Castor--Ranking Member Graves had to step for
the vote--members of the select committee, I am honored to sit
before you today to testify on today's hearing, Good for
Business: The Private Sector Perspectives on Climate Action.
As Congressman McEachin mentioned, I am the cofounder of a
company called Volt Energy. I started the company 10 years ago
to develop rooftop solar and solar carports for companies all
across this country, ranging from the Cheesecake Factory's
corporate headquarters in California to projects in Colorado
with Subaru, where we work with a lot of underrepresented
community projects as well. We work with a lot of Historically
Black Colleges and Universities. We also work with churches,
synagogues, and other faith institutions across the country to
make sure that they are able to reduce their carbon footprint
with solar energy. I am here today to share why I strongly
support the Build Back Better Act. While I am a small business
owner--while I am here as a small business owner to talk about
the financial implications that it is having--the climate
disaster is having on businesses, I am here as a concerned
citizen first.
I know how divided our nation is on pretty much everything,
and I am an eternal optimist, but I really hope the climate
crisis--as it was mentioned earlier, it really is the
opportunity for us to really tackle the biggest crisis our
world is facing.
This really shouldn't be viewed as a red or blue partisan
issue. I truly hope that we can view this as a red, white, and
blue opportunity to lead on a global stage for the biggest
issue, again, facing our nation and the world.
Ranking Member--excuse me--Congressional Member Graves
talked about let innovators innovate. At Volt Energy Utility,
which is a utility scale company that I founded, that is
exactly what we are doing.
What we are doing currently, we have created this concept
called the Environmental Justice Power Purchase Agreement, and
through a Power Purchase Agreement is how most corporations buy
renewable energy. And one of the things that we wanted to do
differently was we understand the importance of environmental
justice and tackling environmental justice.
What does the term--what does environmental justice mean?
It is defined as the fair and equitable distribution of both
environmental burden and environmental benefit. For far too
long, communities of color and rural communities have been on
the wrong side of that ledger only dealing with the
environmental burden, but have not participated with the
environmental benefit.
Our Environmental Justice Power Purchase Agreement, we work
with some of the largest companies in the world--we just
recently announced a large project with Microsoft--where the
concept is this: We cannot develop utility scale solar projects
in places like Washington, D.C., in Baltimore, in Philadelphia,
in New York City, and a lot of inner cities across the country.
We don't have the space to develop large utility scale
projects.
What we can do is develop those projects, which has been
done all throughout the country, in rural areas. Our focus is
on a concept called emissionality, where we are looking to
develop projects where the grid is the dirtiest. We want to be
able to clean up--and why is that so important? To improve
health outcomes for people living in those communities.
However, we can't lose sight of the other communities,
minority communities, that have suffered for so long with
energy burden and environmental injustices, so we are taking a
percentage of our revenue in partnership with the corporations
we work with to make investments in communities of color, to
address environmental health, to address economic justice, to
create a pipeline of students coming out of HBCUs that will
take on these jobs of the future.
But we can't do this alone. We need the Federal Government
to support the work that we are doing to tackle climate change.
This is an effort that can be a public-private partnership and
really get us back out--we are coming out of a time in our
nation where we are coming out of COVID, an unprecedented
pandemic. People are looking to get back to work.
Climate change is that solution. It is the biggest issue,
again, that we are facing. And my business colleagues--I had
the opportunity to be part of a press event recently, and we
talked about how climate change is making the supply chain very
difficult for businesses to do what we do--to order the
materials that we need, to develop the projects that we do.
I will also note that over 1,000 business leaders have
signed letters of support for Build Back Better. The American
Sustainable Business Council, E2, and Clean Energy for America
have organized letters from businesses calling on Congress to
pass historic investments through reconciliation to combat
climate change.
And, in closing, not only does climate change pose a threat
to our economy and our communities; this issue transcends race
or politics. Whether one lives in the city, suburbs, rural
communities, it already adds to disproportionate burdens on
communities of color, and the Build Back Better Act is
essential to mitigating these harms, to providing important
opportunities that advance job creation here at home, U.S.
competitiveness abroad, and environmental equity across our
country.
For all these reasons, I strongly support the legislation.
Thank you for the opportunity to share my thoughts on the Build
Back Better Act.
[The statement of Mr. Campbell follows:]

Testimony of Gilbert Campbell

Founder and CEO, Volt Energy Utility

The Select Committee on the Climate Crisis Hearing

``Good for Business: Private Sector Perspectives on Climate Action''

October 20, 2021

Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis, I am honored to be invited to testify
on today's hearing ``Good for Business: Private Sector Perspectives on
Climate Action.'' My name is Gilbert Campbell, and I am the Founder and
CEO of Volt Energy Utility, a national renewable energy firm that
finances and develops utility-scale solar and energy storage projects
for large corporate clients, municipalities, and other institutions.
Volt Energy Utility recently executed the first Environmental Justice
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) with Microsoft, to supply Microsoft with
250 megawatts (MW) of utility-scale solar energy, that will benefit
rural and minority communities across the country.
In 2009, I co-founded Volt Energy, a national distributed
generation solar development company. Volt Energy successfully
developed solar projects for numerous public and private sector clients
including: Accenture, Exelon/Pepco, The Cheesecake Factory, Subaru,
District of Columbia Government, Howard University and Wake Forest
University.
Currently, I serve on the Board of Directors at The Solar Energy
Industries Association (SEIA), The Renewable Energy Buyers Alliance
(REBA), and The American Association of Blacks in Energy (AABE).
I am here today to share why I strongly support the Build Back
Better Act. We are facing the biggest crisis of our lifetime, and that
is the climate crisis. If we just look at the intensification of
extreme weather events that transpired just this year, it is clear the
devastating impact that climate change is having on our nation.
According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA),
in the first nine months of this year, extreme weather and climate
disasters in the U.S. have taken more then 538 lives and cost more than
$100 billion. We have all witnessed the devastating wildfires in the
west, hurricane after hurricane in the gulf region, flooding in the
Northeast, and heatwaves all across the country. Our nation is still
financially recovering from extreme weather events last year, like
Hurricane Harvey. If we fail to get more resilient and control climate
disaster spending, there could be catastrophic implications for
communities across the country, for the economy and for the federal
budget.
While I am here as a small business owner to talk about the
financial toll and implications that climate change is having on
businesses across this country, I am a concerned citizen first. I know
how divided our nation is on literally everything, but the climate
crisis should not be viewed as a red or blue partisan issue, but rather
as a red, white, and blue opportunity to ensure that our kids,
grandkids, and future generations will be blessed with opportunities
many of us have received.
This is our moment to do what we have always done well and that is
to lead on the global stage on big issues. Currently, we are lagging
behind other countries in one of the biggest economic transitions in
modern history. Other countries' investments in clean energy--and the
new jobs they have created--far exceed the United States.

2 million Chinese work in solar, compared with
over 230,000 Americans in solar.

320,000 Europeans work in wind energy, compared
with 117,000 Americans.

Brazil has three times as many jobs in solar
heating and cooling as we do in the United States.

The global vehicle market is swiftly shifting to
Zero Emission Vehicles. If our auto industry is going to
compete in the global market, we need to invest in Clean
Vehicles here at home.
The Build Back Better Act's investment in clean energy and clean
vehicle innovation, financing, manufacturing, and deployment will
contribute to US global competitiveness--and will ensure we create jobs
in the process.
Entire businesses are suffering and going under from the extreme
weather events highlighted above, and tens of thousands of other
businesses are broadly impacted by supply chain and labor disruptions
stemming from these extreme climate events. From the agriculture and
food processing industries to the hospitality and transportation
sectors, climate change has affected productivity and financial
resources.
I recently joined a press event with fellow CEOs and business
leaders, many of whom offered specific examples of the direct impacts
of climate disasters as well as the resulting effect of supply chain
disruptions. All of the participants called on Congress to pass the
Build Back Better Act. As one business leader from the hotel sector
expressed: ``We can invest now, or we can pay tenfold later to clean up
more disasters.''
I will also note that over 1000 business leaders have signed
letters in support of the Build Back Better Act. The American
Sustainable Business Council (ASBC), E2 (Environmental Entrepreneurs),
and Clean Energy for America (CE4A) organized letters from businesses
urging Congress to pass historic investments through reconciliation to
combat climate change and make our country stronger and more resilient.
I have, and will, continue to work with a wide range of key
stakeholders from all political parties, electric utility companies,
oil and gas companies, businesses, energy trade associations, and
others to tackle this important issue. However, the Build Back Better
Act is not only essential to mitigate environmental harms; it also
presents an opportunity for our great nation to make overdue
investments in our infrastructure that incorporates clean technology
which reduces carbon emissions. The Act will create millions of good
paying jobs in every corner of America, and wealth creation
opportunities for small businesses.
President Biden has set an ambitious goal to decarbonize our power
sector by 2035. According to the Solar Energy Industries Association
(SEIA), my industry, solar energy, currently accounts for only 4% of
our electricity generation. With only 4% of the energy generated, the
solar industry currently has over 10,000 businesses and over 230,000
workers . In a recent study, the Department of Energy highlighted that
in order to fully decarbonize our power grid by 2035, solar energy will
have to account for 45% of our electricity generation. Again, at 4%,
there are 10,000 businesses and over 230,000 solar workers in this
nation. Imagine how many more small businesses will be created and how
many more American workers will have good paying jobs.
If we are going to tackle climate change and decarbonize our power
sector, we also will have to make significant investments in our aging
grid infrastructure to account for the new renewable energy generation
coming online, including transmission, distribution, and
interconnection. Currently, there are hundreds of Gigawatts (GWs) of
renewable energy projects waiting to be connected to the grid, but due
to backlogs and costs, they are sitting in the queue. Build Back Better
Act investments in our grid infrastructure will provide greater grid
reliability, which is vitally important as extreme weather events shut
down power for days and weeks, resulting in significant financial loss
for businesses and is a major burden for American citizens.
We must also prioritize investments in communities of color that
have long suffered from environmental injustices. Environmental justice
is defined as the ``fair'' distribution of environmental benefits and
burdens. For far too long, underserved minority communities have been
on the wrong side of the ledger and have incurred extreme environmental
burdens and minimal environmental benefits. According to the American
Lung Association, an estimated 141 million American live in counties
with unhealthy levels of air pollution. In lower income communities of
color, there are greater exposures to higher levels of air pollution.
This chronic exposure is believed to worsen underlying diseases,
including many that represent risk factors for severe cases of COVID-
19. African American communities have suffered the burdens from
discriminatory environmental policy and regulations but have not
benefited from the job growth and wealth creation stemming from clean
energy. According to a recent analysis titled Help Wanted: Diversity in
Clean Energy Jobs, African Americans only represent 8% of the clean
energy workforce, and during COVID-19, workers of color have lost jobs
at a faster rate and have been slower to be rehired compared to their
white counterparts. Over the last two weeks, I have had the privilege
of talking with students at both Howard University and Clark Atlanta
University, two prominent Historically Black College and Universities
(HBCUs). We discussed the intersection of environmental justice and the
clean energy investments needed in their communities. The students are
strong proponents of Build Back Better, especially because of several
provisions that are geared towards providing greater climate equity.
Here are some of the investments in the climate bill that will bridge
the climate equity gap:
1.  National Clean Energy and Sustainability Accelerator
(called the Greenhouse Gas Reduction fund in the Build Back
Better Act)--is based on the state green bank model. This is
critical to addressing the financing issue.
a.  Not only does the investment require 40% of
investments from the accelerator go to communities most
impacted by climate--including communities of color, it
also
i.  provides technical support to business
leaders to help them package their projects for
financing and
ii.  provides for flexible financing--which
can help homeowners, farmers and small
businesses who may have resources but not have
high FICO credit rating. They can look at other
factors like consistency of paid utilities to
assess credit worthiness.
2.  In efforts to ensure that investments in clean energy are more
affordable and accessible so that there is less need for financing, the
Build Back Better Act also includes:
iii.  Tax credits--with bonus credits for
underserved communities and communities with
high energy burdens
iv.  Investments in clean vehicle
infrastructure to ensure it reaches communities
of color;
v.  Energy efficiency loan and grant programs.
vi.  Consumer incentives for energy efficient
appliances
In short, climate change poses a threat to our economy and our
communities. This issue transcends race or politics or whether one
lives in cities, suburbs or rural communities. Climate change adds to
the already disproportionate burdens on communities of color. The Build
Back Better Act is essential to mitigating these harms by providing
important opportunities that advance job creation here at home,
increasing US competitiveness abroad and expanding environmental equity
across our country. For all these reasons, I strongly support the
legislation.
Thank you for this opportunity to share my thoughts on the Build
Back Better Act.

Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, Mr. Campbell.
Next, we will go to Mr. Menezes. You are now recognized for
5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF HON. MARK W. MENEZES

Mr. Menezes. Thank you, Chair Castor, Ranking Member
Graves, and members of the select committee. I thank you for
the invitation to testify before you this afternoon.
I appear before you as a private citizen, not in any
official capacity, and my testimony is my own.
My testimony will be on the Clean Electricity Performance
Program, commonly referred to as the CEPP, that is part of the
budget reconciliation package pending before Congress. As has
been reported, the CEPP was created for two reasons: one, as a
mechanism to comply with the Senate's Byrd rule's restrictions
against policy changes in the budget reconciliation process;
and, two, to compel electric utilities to add clean electricity
within its tight scoring window.
I submit the CEPP is a solution to a Senate process
problem, and not an emissions problem. It is unnecessary for
two reasons. One, the electric sector leads all other sectors
in actual quantifiable emission reductions since 2000. These
reductions are the reason the U.S. leads all other countries in
actual reductions since 2000.
Two, the electric sector is viewed as the solution, not the
problem to reducing our nation's emissions. All comprehensive
plans to obtain emission reductions or net zero goals call for
greater electrification of the economy.
As Congress incents, or mandates, the electrification of
sectors of the economy, utilities will have to increase
generation to meet the increased demand. Is the CEPP, which
penalizes utilities unable to meet clean electricity
requirements, a rational reaction? The CEPP requires all
electric utilities--co-ops, munis, and the investor-owned
utilities--to increase their clean electricity by 4 percent
each year from 2023 to 2030, or pay the government $40 for
every megawatt hour below its mandated target.
To say this is a very aggressive timetable is an
understatement. The average rate nationwide of bringing new
renewable generation online is 1 percent per year over the past
10 years. As I have said, reconciliation rules do not allow for
a longer timeline of compliance.
And it is quite possible the CEPP, if enacted as drafted,
would make electricity less reliable, potentially increase
costs to consumers, and not do much to improve the environment.
Now, why do I say that? With the CEPP's relatively short
timeline for compliance, the only clean electricity source is
likely to be solar, which as an intermittent resource, does not
assure reliability.
I have been unable to find any review of the CEPP by either
NERC or FERC, those entities mandated by Congress to develop,
implement, and enforce the electric reliability standards of
our nation's bulk power system. Considering the great concern
expressed by Congress just this year about electric reliability
in California, Texas, and elsewhere, one would wonder why
Congress hasn't insisted on getting views from those with the
statutory obligations to keep our grid reliable.
The CRS points out that the CEPP will put compliance costs
on Federal taxpayers as well as electricity consumers. It
estimates it will cost Federal taxpayers $150 billion over 10
years.
Now, truly, the grants in the CEPP are intended to reduce
costs to ratepayers so they do not bear the direct costs of
this transition to clean electricity. However, as the CRS
points out, no one really knows for certain who will bear the
expected cost and how much. In the long run, consumers might
pay more. Imagine explaining to grandma living on fixed income
why she has to pay more to meet the CEPP requirements.
Nor is it apparent that the CEPP will do much for the
environment. Indeed, as the CRS points out, the CEPP does not
guarantee reductions. The CRS alerts Members of Congress that
under the CEPP, electric utilities may face costs or other
constraints, such as siting challenges, state and local
regulatory requirements, reliability risks on achieving CEPP
targets. Plus, utilities might decide to pay the penalty rather
than expend the high capital costs to reduce emissions.
And were the CEPP to be enacted as drafted, it is likely
there will be unintended consequences. As the sector adds more
and more intermittent renewables to comply with the CEPP, more
reliable backup power--power will be needed because battery
storage capacity can't be built quickly enough. A project
underway in California today to add state-of-the-art, 4-hour
battery storage to a 350-megawatt solar project for 2022
started in 2015, 7 years from start to coming online.
Finally, the CEPP may very well stop the development of
zero emitting nuclear development and CCS deployment. Both
nuclear and carbon capture technologies simply cannot be
permitted and built in time. What happens to the $4.5 billion
Louisiana Clean Energy Complex announced last week by Air
Products and the Governor of Louisiana to use CCS to capture
and permanently sequester 5 million tons of carbon a year? What
happens to the small modular nuclear reactors being pursued out
west that the taxpayers and private industry have spent
enormous amounts of resources to develop and deploy?
And, by the way, the photovoltaics that will cover our
landscapes to meet the CEPP, very likely horse and buggy
technology. Today, our labs have developed disruptive liquid
crystalline technologies that could replace today's solar
panels with coatings as cheap as paint. You can read about it
all in this book. Even John Kerry called this potential that
may very well save the Earth.
Finally, all this is not to say there couldn't be
improvements to the CEPP as drafted. I have offered some
suggestions in my written testimony.
I thank you and look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Menezes follows:]

Testimony of the Honorable Mark W. Menezes

Former Deputy Secretary

U.S. Department of Energy

Former Chief Counsel, Energy and Environment

U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce

Before the U.S. House Select Committee on Climate Crisis Hearing on

``Good for Business: Private Sector Perspectives on Climate Action''

Wednesday, October 20, 2021

Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the Select
Committee:
Thank you for the invitation and opportunity to testify before you
today on the important question of whether Congressional efforts to
take meaningful climate action will be good for business. Today, I
appear before you as a private citizen, not in any official capacity,
and my testimony is my own opinion informed by over 30 years of
experience in the public and private energy policy sectors.
To be sure, Congressional climate action can be good for business.
While at DOE, we carried out Congressional direction promoting
technology that would be good for business, good for consumers, and
good for the environment. We know advancing affordable technologies is
both necessary in reducing domestic emissions and is vital to reducing
emissions globally--particularly in developing nations where
affordability is paramount. If we miss the opportunity to leverage
domestic action to reduce global emissions, then we will have
accomplished little.
Not all climate legislation is good for business, or consumers, or
even the environment. Some provisions could be harmful to all three.
In that regard, I would like to focus today on the Clean
Electricity Performance Program, commonly referred to as ``the CEPP''
that is part of the budget reconciliation package before Congress. As
the members of this Select Committee are well aware, it's not unusual
for Congress to take several Congressional sessions to consider
transformative, controversial measures, proceed through regular order,
to ensure a complete record in order to survive judicial scrutiny. But
that's not the case here. Other than the House Energy and Commerce
markup without a legislative hearing, there is a dearth of evidence in
the Congressional record or even the public record as to why this CEPP
is necessary. This lack of transparency and objective analysis is not
inconsequential as the CEPP would transform a sector of the economy
that every business and every family in America pays for and relies on
daily. It is deserving of significant vetting. I would note that this
Select Committee spent over a year hearing from stakeholders before the
majority released a staff report that contained over 700
recommendations. While that report was embraced by the Speaker, it is
the CEPP, which was neither considered nor included in the 700
recommendations, that is pending before Congress.
The interesting thing about the CEPP, from my point of view, is
that, except for those who were involved with its creation, no one else
was aware of it until it was released a few months ago from Evergreen
Action. A recent article confirmed that as of a year ago, the concept
itself didn't even exist calling its invention ``an acrobatic feat and
calculated to get past arcane Senate rules'' on reconciliation.\1\
Congress, think tanks, academicians--all serious minded people who want
to contribute to solving climate challenges in the policy arenas in
meaningful ways--have not had much time to independently analyze or
model this approach, described as both an incentive and a penalty,\2\
because no one saw the proposal, outside of ``The Third Way, a center-
left think tank, Evergreen Action, an environmental policy outfit, and
the Natural Resources Defense Council, the nonprofit advocacy group,''
\3\ until about a month ago. And apart from a committee markup, there
have been no hearings or testimony on it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Meet the CEPP, the biggest federal climate policy you've never
heard of | Grist.
\2\ House Proposes Strong Clean Electricity Performance Program |
NRDC.
\3\ See FN 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As I will explain, the CEPP is a solution to a process problem, not
an emissions problem. Since the CEPP was designed to bypass a process
problem it was limited in utilizing tools and policies that could have
led to an efficient and cost effective solution. This process
intentionally ties the hands of Congress and the potential negative
impacts of the CEPP are a result of these process restrictions.
The CEPP, I believe, is unnecessary for two reasons. One, the
electric sector leads all sectors in actual, quantifiable greenhouse
gas emissions reductions since 2000. In fact, these reductions have
been of such magnitude that the U.S. leads all other countries in
actual GHG emissions reductions since 2000.\4\ These are actual
emission reductions, not pledges or public statements that the U.S.
will get to ``net zero'' or achieve some clean energy standard by a
certain date. Other countries and sectors do not come close to matching
the actual reductions of the U.S. electric sector. The electric and
power sector continues to reduce emissions at a faster pace than other
sectors.\5\ Emission reductions in this sector have been so significant
and lasting that today it is the transportation sector that leads U.S.
emissions.\6\ One would wonder why the CEPP targets the sector that has
demonstrated a commitment and has achieved success reducing emissions
without federal government mandates. Indeed, one Senate critic of the
CEPP has wondered why there is even a need for incentive payments to
companies already doing everything they can to reduce emissions while
ensuring safe, reliable and affordable power.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Global CO
2
emissions in 2019--Analysis--IEA.
\5\ U.S. energy-related CO
2
emissions declined by 11% in
2020--Today in Energy--U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).
\6\ Microsoft Word--MER S11 (eia.gov) at 198.
\7\ What a clean electricity payment plan means for gas, CCS--E&E
News (eenews.net).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second reason that the CEPP is unnecessary is that the electric
sector is viewed as the solution, not the problem, to reducing our
nation's emissions. All comprehensive plans to obtain emission
reductions or ``net zero'' goals call for greater electrification of
the economy. Where electrification makes sense and where it does not is
a worthy policy debate, but increased electrification is going to be
part of the solution. Recognizing this better efficiency, it is not
surprising that other provisions contained in the budget reconciliation
legislation increase the use of electricity.\8\ Indeed today, almost
all new electric generation being built today is renewable and natural
gas,\9\ with the exception of the emission-free Vogtle nuclear facility
in Georgia. Natural gas complements the addition of renewable power on
the grid for several reasons: 1) it can be added in incremental amounts
to meet generation capacity requirements as intermittent sources stop
producing, 2) it can respond quickly to demand changes, and 3) has
lower environmental compliance, fuel, and operating costs.\10\ As
Congress encourages the electrification of sectors of the economy,
utilities will have to increase generation sources to meet the
increased demand. Is the CEPP, which penalizes utilities unable to meet
clean electricity requirements, a rational reaction?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ R46934.pdf (fas.org) at 4.
\9\ Electricity generation, capacity, and sales in the United
States--U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).
\10\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The CEPP was created, as has been reported, as a mechanism to
comply with the Byrd Rule restrictions against policy changes in the
budget reconciliation process.\11\ Any policy change would be subject
to a ``point of order'' which would then require 60 votes in the Senate
for consideration for final passage. As of last week, it was not known
if the Senate Parliamentarian would rule that it in fact satisfies the
Byrd Rule.\12\ It also was created to compel electric utilities to add
clean electricity sources to their generation mixes in a scoring window
to comply with the Byrd Rule. The reconciliation process does not allow
for long-term policies to be considered. Thus, the CEPP had to require
taxpayer action (on paper) within an unreasonably short time frame to
achieve emission reductions targets announced by the Biden
Administration in preparation for the upcoming COP26 meeting in
Glasgow.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ FN 1.
\12\ FN 8 at 7 (FN 29).
\13\ Joe Biden to reveal US emissions pledge in key climate crisis
moment | Climate crisis | The Guardian.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let's take a minute to look at each of these reasons for its
creation. The CEPP requires all electric utilities (co-ops, munis, and
IOUs) (referred to as ``eligible electricity suppliers'' in the CEPP)
to increase their ``certified clean electricity'' by 4% each year from
2023 to 2030 or pay the government $40 for every MWh below its mandated
target. To say this is a very aggressive timetable is an
understatement. The average rate nationwide of bringing new renewable
generation online is one percent per year over the past 10 years.\14\
Reconciliation rules do not allow for a longer timeline of compliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ FN 8 at 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The other factor at work here is that the Biden administration has
increased dramatically its emission reduction goals. On ``day one'',
the President announced the ambitious goals to reach net zero emission
economy-wide by 2050 and a carbon-free power sector by 2035. Only three
months later, at a ``Leaders (sic) Summit on Climate'' on April 22nd,
he announced a new goal of ambitious reductions by 2030.\15\ These are
not insignificant changes over a very short period of time. These new
numbers reverberate throughout all sectors of the economy. All sectors
had to immediately revise project capital expenditures, ensure supply
chains, implement meaningful management and sustainable policy changes
to meet these new goals. Teams of engineers had to recalibrate
operational facilities and design, financial managers reassessed access
to capital markets and debt issuance, Wall Street and rating agencies
had to again reassess risk and value. The cost of doing business in the
U.S. likely increased dramatically all in a matter of three months
because the President simply decided to increase reduction goals. This
announcement alone is driving U.S. companies to change. The CEPP is
piling on.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ FACT SHEET: President Biden Sets 2030 Greenhouse Gas Pollution
Reduction Target Aimed at Creating Good-Paying Union Jobs and Securing
U.S. Leadership on Clean Energy Technologies | The White House.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indeed, it's possible the CEPP, if enacted as drafted, would make
electricity unreliable, increase costs to consumers, and not do much to
improve the environment. With the CEPP's relatively short time line for
compliance, the ``clean electricity'' sources needed to be added will
be mainly solar which, as an intermittent resource of electricity, does
not assure reliability. The grants in the CEPP are intended to reduce
costs to ratepayers so they do not bear the direct cost of this
transition to ``clean electricity.'' However, for reasons explained
later, no one really knows for certain who will bear the expected costs
and how much. In the long run, customers might pay more.
Of all the statutory changes under consideration today by Congress
to address climate, the CEPP is likely not good for business or for
American families.
Let's now discuss those three aspects: reliability, costs to
consumers and the utility companies, and environmental consequences.

Reliability
Mandating a rapid increase throughout the entire power sector of
``clean electricity'' in the time frame to meet an arbitrary budget
scoring window will result in only a very few energy sources
qualifying. Of the energy sources allowed under the CEPP--renewable
energy (wind, solar, hydro, geothermal), maybe fossil with CCS, maybe
biomass--only solar, possibly some wind, will be able to be brought
online in time to meet the CEPP's aggressive timelines.\16\ These power
sources are variable and intermittent and need transmission upgrades to
accommodate integration into the power grid. There is insufficient time
under the stringent CEPP timelines to build the necessary transmission
to meet the CEPP mandates while keeping rates affordable and ensuring
reliability.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ FN 8.
\17\ Ditto Says House Clean Energy Plan Creates Unachievable
Transition Timeframe For Public Power | American Public Power
Association.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some claim that batteries will take the place of traditional power
generation. Our current state of effective battery technology is 4
hours and it takes years to site, permit and build. Long Duration
Energy Storage (LDES), possibly the ``holy grail'' of grid storage is
still years away from development and deployment.\18\ In California, a
4-hour, 350-megawatt battery storage project scheduled to come online
in 2022 has been under development since 2015 (a seven-year period for
one project).\19\ There simply isn't enough storage available in time
to maintain reliability, and even if there were, it would be enormously
expensive. A study by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in 2019
predicted the cost of 4-hour battery storage ranging between $124 and
$328 per kilowatt hour in 2030.\20\ As comparison, the average cost of
electricity here in the District of Columbia is about 12 or 13 cents
per kilowatt hour (kWh).\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Energy Storage Grand Challenge Energy Storage Market Report.
\19\ California Scrambles to Find Electricity to Offset Plant
Closures--WSJ.
\20\ Cost Projections for Utility-Scale Battery Storage: 2020
Update (nrel.gov).
\21\ Electricity Rates by State >> (October 2021)
2

necessary to produce it. That means higher-carbon oil produced by
foreign competitors will take its place in the oil market.
Both nuclear and carbon capturing technologies simply cannot be
permitted and built in time. And that means the world, not just the
U.S., but the entire world is going to lose out on technology that we
would otherwise build, test and export. It will be the U.S.--the
world's technological leader--building new technologies that can be
exported around the world to supply reliable power with low emissions
and low cost. All credible experts agree that global deployment of
carbon capture technologies is essential to reducing global emissions.
It is foreseeable that global emissions would miss out on reductions
that could have been made across the world because this proposal will
set back our technological leadership, about which I know quite a bit
from my time at DOE, implementing the clean energy programs Congress
assigned to us.
Congress should conduct hearings specifically on the CEPP to
determine if it is in fact, ``good for business.''
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, another interesting aspect
of the CEPP is that it is part of a ``roadmap'' proposed by Evergreen
Action comprised of several mechanisms that Congress should enact to
achieve emission reductions in the electricity sector. Most of the
reductions would be obtained through the extension and enhancement of
tax credits, not the CEPP. It is my understanding DOE has reviewed some
of these provisions and has indicated that full implementation of the
tax package provisions under consideration would result in a 73% clean
electricity sector mix by 2030. Thus, the CEPP's role is to obtain the
remaining 7%. It seems an overreach to enact a program that will
increase the federal deficit by $150 billion over the next 10 years
\32\ to achieve an additional 7% clean electricity sources when the
U.S. is building renewables at an already historically high pace. It
has been reported some utilities will expend more capital by several
factors to comply with CEPP than expended in the past 15 years. One
major utility, which has already announced plans to add 16,000 MW of
renewables-over half of its current load-has raised questions about the
impact of the program on market prices and failing to take into
accounts the costs to build and upgrade transmission systems.\33\
Layering on an administratively burdensome and costly CEPP regime to
get to the administration's goal of 80% in 2030 appears to be
excessive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ FN 8.
\33\ Major utility questions Biden's signature climate plan--E&E
News (eenews.net).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, the CEPP does not specify how revenue collected would be
used and directs the Department of Energy to administer the
program.\34\ For a Department whose missions are to conduct basic
science research, maintain our nuclear security systems, cleanup
environmental wastes at the Manhattan Project sites, and develop
breakthrough technologies in the energy sector, this would be an
entirely new challenge for it. From my experience in employing
qualified people into the service ranks at the Department, under
current hiring processes, DOE would not be able to get the number of
people in place in time to carry out the aggressive timetable set forth
under the CEPP. Congress would have to change the hiring process. The
Executive Branch cannot hire qualified candidates as efficiently as the
Legislative Branch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Speaking of roadmaps to meeting emission reduction targets, I
typically encourage policy makers to read the Lawrence Livermore Lab
Foundation's ``Getting to Neutral.'' \35\ It was prepared at the
request of the state of California to determine if the state could meet
what it considered to be a very aggressive ``net zero'' goal by 2045.
The scientists that performed the analysis and published the study
determined the state could achieve its goal with existing technologies
at a cost of between $5 billion to $15 billion annually to the citizens
of California. Importantly for policy makers, the report assumed no
statutory changes by the state or federal government. It does not call
for the ban or elimination of fossil fuels. It recognizes fossil fuel's
continued role in our economy and its role in achieving net zero goals.
The report concludes that California would need to put CCS on existing
point sources, develop pipelines to transport carbon and its geologic
storage capacity to ensure permanent sequestration with monitoring,
better land management of forests and wetlands to increase biomass and
biofuels production and increase natural carbon sinks, and to employ
existing direct air capture technologies. The report goes on to suggest
other technologies capable of deployment today including carbon
weatherization with rocks and use of cellulosic ethanol. All
technologies are currently available for use. Congress could consider
creating a fund for continued development of these technologies and
incent deployment nationwide. There is no need for Congress to pass
legislation penalizing anyone for not reaching arbitrary reduction
goals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Getting_to_Neutral.pdf (llnl.gov).

Suggested improvements to the CEPP
All this is not to say there couldn't be improvements to the CEPP
as drafted. While it would take significant improvement to overcome the
flaws of the current construct, I haven't met one industry,
corporation, NGO, not-for-profit, trade association or person who does
not want to be part of the solution to achieving emission reduction
goals. All are willing to work on new proposals as they are made aware
of them. You have probably heard from the munis and co-ops as well as
the investor-owned utilities that some ``tweaks'' to the CEPP should be
considered. Supportive suggestions include language being considered by
the tax committees: eliminating penalty exposure for failure to meet
annual percentage targets if the load serving entity meets even higher
clean electricity standards, and similarly, eliminating the penalty for
failure to reach the 80% target by 2030 if annual progress targets are
met; increase the annual averaging mechanism to lessen the severity of
penalties to avoid either increased cost of electricity to consumers or
increasing capital costs that result in increased rates to consumers.
In addition to those improvements, other suggestions include
allowing state public utility commissions to determine whether
compliance payments should be recovered in retail rates removing the
express or design a mechanism to have benefits flow to customers and
remove the compliance payment paid by the utilities; spreading out the
acquisition amounts more than the 4% target in a given year be allowed
for use in meeting compliance requirements across the full ten-year
timeframe in recognition of the fact that capital is expended in
varying amounts depending on the specific projects, not uniformly over
a certain time period; and giving credit for early action and removing
the compliance payment should there be any ``backsliding'' due to the
vagaries of renewable power caused by low hydro, low wind, solar
generation from year to year for utilities already achieving 85% clean
electricity. These are just a few of the many suggestions that have
been reported in the press.
But in the end, as a former Chief Counsel to an authorizing
committee, I believe the best approach is to use regular order to
develop policies and programs outside of the reconciliation process. A
fair, open and transparent process always results in opportunities to
participate in bipartisan debates. In the end, one might not prefer the
outcome but none can complain about the process.
Members of the Select Committee, this concludes my prepared
statement. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today and I
look forward to answering your questions.

Mr. Casten [presiding]. I apologize. Thank you for your
testimony.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Edsey for your prepared
remarks.

STATEMENT OF DAVID EDSEY

Mr. Edsey. Thank you.
I would like to thank Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves,
and Congressman Casten for the introduction, and the other
members of the committee for inviting me to address you today
on this issue of such extreme importance to our entire country
and the world.
My name is David Edsey, and I am employed by Zurich North
America, one of the largest commercial insurance companies in
the U.S., as its Climate Director, a role which my employer
created as part of its broader response to climate change.
In addition to our casualty and specialty lines of
insurance, Zurich insures the commercial properties of
thousands of U.S. companies against physical damage caused by
flood, windstorm, hail, wildfire, and other extreme weather
events. Our property policies also pay for our customers' lost
business income resulting from damage to their property, power
outage, or damage to their supply chain due to extreme weather
events.
In short, Zurich, like all other property insurers, is
dramatically exposed to extreme weather events, now made more
frequent and severe due to anthropogenic climate change. The
science of climate change and, in particular, the recent IPCC
Sixth Assessment Report, are extremely alarming to Zurich, not
only with respect to its own exposure, but also due to the
potentially devastating impacts to our customers, communities,
the economy, our ecosystems, and the humanitarian toll likely
to fall upon the most vulnerable on this planet.
In response to this threat, Zurich has prioritized helping
our policyholders and communities adapt to the effects of
climate change in reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For
example, in alignment with the Paris Agreement, we have
committed to achieving net zero emissions by 2050 in our own
operations, in our investment portfolios, and in our
underwriting portfolios, and have already made significant
progress towards these targets.
We are also sponsoring the not-for-profit Instituto Terra,
which is restoring nearly 2,000 acres in Brazil's Atlantic
Forest by planting 1 million trees, and restoring biodiversity.
We are also collaborating with the Resilient Cities Network
to create a multiyear program to strengthen climate resilience
and address social inequities in vulnerable communities,
beginning initially with Houston and Boston.
Zurich has made and embarked on many other climate-related
commitments and initiatives, including maintaining a prominent
presence at the upcoming COP 26 Conference in Glasgow.
Now, of course, Zurich is not alone amongst companies
making net-zero emission commitments or financial companies
committing to climate impact investment. But the commitments
from industry and commerce, though impressive and growing,
would not be enough to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions by
2050 in order to keep global warming in check. Decisive
governmental action is needed.
As Zurich recently stated in our Closing the Gap on Climate
white paper, certainty around political commitment to net zero
and the policy actions that will implement those commitments
are fundamental to making progress. Without this clarity, it
will be difficult to make the investment case for new low-
carbon technologies, or to create the pipeline of investable
green projects required to really scale green financial
markets.
Zurich, therefore, applauds the important work of all of
the members of this committee and its staff in developing
recommendations on the policies needed to solve the climate
crisis. Transforming our society on the scale required to meet
this challenge will be monumental. To align with science to
limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, broad and bold
public policies need to be enacted that will enable a reduction
of our greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent by 2030 and 100
percent by 2050. And so, it is urgent that we put those
policies in place now.
As Congress considers climate legislation, Zurich supports
a clean electricity program, as the foundation of a net-zero
economy is a clean grid to meet the growing demands of
electrified vehicles, buildings, and industries. We further
support the extension of tax credits supporting the use of
renewable electricity and the purchase of electric vehicles.
We also support public investments in EV charging
infrastructure, green hydrogen, and carbon capture and storage.
Zurich has also long held that a meaningful global price on
carbon is the most efficient way to achieve net zero outcomes.
Done correctly, a price on carbon would allow economic
incentives to reduce emissions.
The response to this crisis cannot be overdone and will
require the combined efforts of all citizens, communities,
businesses, and levels of government. It will also require an
unprecedented level of international cooperation, especially to
advance emerging economies onto carbon-free platforms, to
protect the world's natural carbon sinks, and to share carbon
reporting and pricing mechanisms.
Thank you again for allowing me to address you this
afternoon, and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Edsey follows:]

Testimony of David Edsey

Director of Climate

Zurich North America

``Good For Business: Private Sector Perspectives on Climate Action''

U.S. House of Representatives Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

October 20, 2021

Good afternoon. I would like to thank Chairwoman Castor, Ranking
Member Graves and other members of the committee for the opportunity to
testify before the Select Committee. My name is David Edsey, and I am
the Climate Director for Zurich North America.
I am here today to provide an overview of how Zurich views climate
risk, how Zurich is addressing the issue of climate change within our
own operations, how we incorporate climate change thinking into our
market activities, and how we engage with society more broadly to help
advance climate awareness and action. Following the release of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report this summer, as
COP 26 quickly approaches, and as Congress continues to evaluate public
policy responses to climate change, today's hearing is particularly
timely.
Zurich North America is part of Zurich Insurance Group, a leading
multi-line insurer that has been serving its customers in global and
local markets for 150 years. With approximately 55,000 employees,
Zurich provides a wide range of property and casualty, specialty and
life insurance products and services in more than 215 countries and
territories. Zurich's customers include individuals, small businesses,
and midsize to large companies, as well as multinational corporations.
With nearly 8,700 employees in the United States, Zurich has called the
greater Chicago area home for over a century.
In addition to our casualty and specialty lines of insurance,
Zurich also insures the commercial properties of many of the largest
corporations in the US in addition to thousands of midsize companies.
Our property policies will pay for physical damage caused by flood,
wind and storm surge from hurricanes, hail, wildfires, and other
extreme weather events, in addition to loss of business income
resulting from those damages. Our property policies may also pay for
our customers' lost business income resulting from a power outage or
from damage to their supply chains from an extreme weather event.
In short, Zurich, like many other property insurers, is
dramatically exposed to the increased frequency and severity of extreme
weather events brought about by anthropogenic global warming. The
scientific research of climate change, and in particular the summary of
findings in the recent IPCC 6th Assessment report, are therefore
extremely alarming to Zurich not only with respect to its own exposure,
but the potentially devastating impacts to our customers, the economy,
our ecosystems, and the humanitarian toll likely to fall upon the most
vulnerable on this planet.
This, year, the U.S. has once again seen climate records broken.
Through September, 2021 has brought 18 weather and climate disaster
events with losses exceeding $1 billion each across the U.S., and this
year is four events shy of the 2020 record for the most disasters on
record in a calendar year.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/national/202109.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over the last 18 months, it has become clear that no person or
place is immune from disasters or disaster-related losses. As an
insurer tasked with helping communities, individuals and businesses
recover from a catastrophe, we are at the forefront of realizing and
quantifying the large-scale consequences of inaction. Furthermore, we
have direct insight into the difficulties and challenges in quickly
returning to ``normal'' after catastrophe strikes.
While we cannot eliminate risk or prevent all losses from
occurring, we can expedite the return to ``normal,'' by reducing
impacts and accelerating recovery. As an insurer, we are continually
looking for solutions to limit exposure and minimize risk before
disaster strikes. Our analysis and risk assessments have identified
climate change as perhaps the most consequential and complex risk
facing society today. It is intergenerational, international, and
interdependent.
Climate change poses an array of challenges potentially impacting
every aspect of our society and economies across the globe. From an
insurance coverage perspective, many assets may simply become
uninsurable if action is not taken to eliminate greenhouse gas
emissions and strengthen and adapt our infrastructure. Zurich is
committed to helping its policyholders, individuals and communities
adapt to the effects of climate change, while at the same time taking
action to help bring about the transition to net-zero.
Addressing Climate Change Within Our Own Operations
Zurich was the first insurer to sign the UN Business Ambition
Pledge for a 1.5+ Future, committing to reach net-zero operational GHG
emissions by 2050. Zurich was also a founding member of the UN Net-Zero
Owner Alliance, committing to hold a net-zero carbon investment
portfolio by 2050. Zurich was also a founding member of the Net-Zero
Insurance Alliance, committed to reducing their underwriting portfolios
to net-zero emissions.
In 2016, ZNA moved its U.S. corporate campus in Schaumburg,
Illinois, to an award-winning headquarters that has earned LEED
Platinum
'
certification, the highest rating from the U.S.
Green Building Council. The distinctive design underscores our
commitment to resilience, collaboration, and innovation.
More recently, Zurich completed a major redevelopment of our global
headquarters, Quai Zurich Campus. With our own climate pledges in mind,
we are aiming to achieve LEED Platinum certification for the overall
campus. Highlights of that redevelopment include:

power supply in all the buildings comes from 100%
renewable sources,

photovoltaic systems on roof surfaces,

lake water used for heating and cooling,

no use of fossil fuel in the building,

rainwater captured, stored, and used for sanitary
systems, and

electric vehicle charging stations.
Zurich became carbon neutral as of 2014 through its ambitious
internal carbon emissions reduction efforts and by offsetting remaining
emissions. We have decreased our own CO
2
emissions by 50%
percent, eliminating over 150,000 tons of CO
2
from our
operations since 2007. While we are proud of our record, we continually
assess our own impact and actions. In fact, just last month Zurich
announced additional commitments to achieve our goal of being a net-
zero emissions business by 2050. Those new commitments include:

reducing remaining greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by
2025 and by 70% by 2029,

reducing air travel-related emissions as of 2022 by
70% compared with their pre-pandemic level,

new company vehicles will be electric or hybrid, with
the goal to eliminate internal combustion engine-only vehicles
from the fleet by 2025,

implementing a sustainable buildings program in an
additional 50 offices by the end of 2022, and

setting a new energy efficiency ambition for real
estate once the target to switch to 100% renewable power across
the Group is reached next year.
While proud of our record, we recognize that as an insurance
company we are relatively small emitters of carbon and the true impact
comes from our marketplace role as an institutional investor and an
insurer of risks.
How are we engaging on Climate Change?
Zurich continues to be a leading voice on the urgent need for
action to address climate change. Beyond our own operational actions,
Zurich is leveraging our expertise to educate and shape a more global
response to the climate crisis. We are investing in and helping
communities become more resilient. We are helping our customers
navigate the transition to a net-zero emissions economy by providing
products and services that lower their emissions and strengthen their
resilience to climate change. And, we are sharing broadly our knowledge
and engaging stakeholders and policy makers at every level.
Building Resilience in Our Communities
Insurers play a critical role in assisting communities,
individuals, and businesses recover when catastrophe strikes.
Importantly, the industry also plays a vital role in improving
community preparedness and risk management before the disaster hits. In
furtherance of this mission, Zurich has undertaken a series of
initiatives to apply the analytics of insurance to a much broader set
of stakeholders. Our goal is to demonstrate the effectiveness of
investing in pre-event resilience.
In 2013, Zurich launched its Global Flood Resilience Alliance, a
multi-sector partnership focusing on finding practical ways to help
communities strengthen their resilience to floods. In 2020, we further
extended the program through 2024 with the goal to increase third-party
investments dedicated to pre-event resilience by $1 billion. We seek to
do this by rolling out best-practice community programs that
demonstrate the value of resilience-building and advocating for more
investment in resilience.
Last week, Zurich announced a collaboration, through Zurich's
charitable foundation, with Resilient Cities Network to create a multi-
year program designed to strengthen climate resilience and help address
social inequities in vulnerable communities in Houston and Boston.
Zurich has committed $3 million to the program. Resilient Cities
Network will identify neighborhoods and bring together community and
government partners for the program. The program is expected to attract
additional funding and generate policy support, which together will
amplify successful, resilience-building projects. While the initial
focus is on Houston and Boston, the program will expand to scale best
practices in other cities, building urban resilience throughout the
United States.
Another approach we take is to share our knowledge about resilience
through the publication of our Post-Event Review Capabilities, or
PERCs. To date, we have completed 18 PERCS globally. In the United
States, we have conducted four (4) such reports covering flooding
events in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Houston, and wildfires in
California. The PERCs systematically and holistically analyze disaster
events, what led to the disaster, and identify actionable
recommendations to enhance resiliency.
In March of this year, ZNA provided testimony to the House
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, Subcommittee on Economic
Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency Management. In summary,
our testimony stressed the need for infrastructure investments to focus
on pre-disaster mitigation and sustainability.
From our perspective, prevention and resilience-building are not
just about humanitarianism, they are about the more effective use of
scarce funds, preventing loss, and speeding economic recovery. Our own
post-event studies conducted after significant flood, drought and
wildfire events show that every $1 spent on resiliency resulted in $5
of savings post-disaster. Other research, such as the frequently cited
National Institute of Building Science's (NIBS) Mitigation Saves
Report,\2\ has confirmed our assessment and, in some cases shows an
even stronger cost benefit ratio. The evidence shows that investing in
pre-disaster mitigation can limit losses, accelerate recovery, and is
overall responsible budgeting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://2021.nibs.org/files/pdfs/
NIBS_MMC_MitigationSaves_2019.pdf; page 2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importantly, Zurich is directly engaging with our customers.
Through Zurich Resilience Solutions, our customers (and other
businesses) can tap into our expertise to help them quantify climate
change risk, by providing insights on current and potential future
risks, and by identifying more specific mitigation and adaption actions
that they can implement. We are able to provide a holistic, detailed,
and catered approach that goes beyond the physical risks associated
with extreme weather, and address some transition risks, which could
include liability, regulatory and compliance, environmental, social and
governance (ESG) integration.
Investing in resiliency and mitigation helps to make individuals,
communities, and businesses better prepared for disaster and recover
more quickly when disaster does strike. As outlined previously, we are
making investments to enhance resiliency in communities around the
world. Governments, at all levels, play a vital role in strengthening
community resiliency by investing in sustainable infrastructure that is
designed to withstand the impacts of extreme weather and climate
change. We were pleased to see that the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act includes significant funding for pre-disaster mitigation and
urge Congress to pass this important legislation.
In addition to direct investment in resiliency, Congress should
require that federal agencies consider future conditions and the impact
of climate change in the development, planning, and design stages of
federally funded projects. Beyond the planning and design stages,
Congress should incentivize the development and enforcement of modern,
consensus-based codes; encourage sound land use planning; and ensure
transportation networks are interconnected and appropriately sized to
reduce vulnerability.
Congress should also incentivize the use of industry best practices
and standards that go beyond consensus-based codes, particularly high-
risk areas or to meet a specific need. Examples of this include the
Institute for Business and Home Safety (IBHS) Fortified standard and
the Institute for Sustainable Infrastructure (ISI) ENVISION standard.
With regard to sustainability standards, the House Appropriations
Committee has recognized their value and importance by including report
language in the FY22 Financial Services and General Government
appropriations bill directing the General Services Administration (GSA)
\3\ and encouraging the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to
develop sustainability standards for federal buildings and federal
capital projects.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.congress.gov/117/crpt/hrpt79/CRPT-117hrpt79.pdf;
pg. 73.
\4\ https://www.congress.gov/117/crpt/hrpt79/CRPT-117hrpt79.pdf;
pg. 40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Transition to a Low Carbon Economy
As set forth above, Zurich has imbedded mitigating climate change
into its corporate DNA and is working to reduce its own operational
greenhouse gas emissions and those within its investment and
underwriting portfolios. Zurich, of course, is not alone amongst
companies that have made net-zero emission commitments to align with
the Paris Climate Agreement. Nor is Zurich alone amongst financial
companies that have committed to invest in the technologies and
industries needed to reach 2050 net-zero targets.
But the commitments from industry and commerce, though impressive
and growing, will not be enough to halve the emission of GHGs within
the next 9 years and stop them altogether within the next 29 years in
order to keep global warming to below 1.5+C. Decisive governmental
action is needed.
Last month, Zurich released a white paper--Closing the gap on
climate action.\5\ The paper outlines some of the key public policies
needed and actions that corporations can take to address the climate
crisis. While recognizing that progress has been made, the paper
concludes that much more needs to be quickly done. Our hope is that the
paper serves as a call to action and provides a framework for
companies, policymakers, Congress, the Administration, and world
leaders as they develop policies and strategies to mitigate and adapt
to climate change.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.zurich.com/knowledge/topics/climate-change/closing-
the-gap-on-climate-action.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To further assist our customer and business with the transition to
a net-zero economy, we are expanding our offering for the renewable
energy sector and further strengthening our clean energy underwriting
capabilities to offer a more complete suite of products and services,
tailored to support our customers' transition.
When it comes to public policy initiatives, Zurich has long-held
that a meaningful price for carbon at a global level is the most
efficient way to achieve net-zero outcomes. We recognize the
significant challenges associated with establishing a price on carbon.
But, done correctly, a price on carbon would align economic incentives
to reduce emissions, provide signals to investors that low-carbon
investments are valuable, and could help identify exposure to potential
stranded assets. A carbon-price would also help to stimulate investment
into clean technology and innovation required for a transition to a
net-zero.
Climate change is a global risk and in order to achieve the
transparency that investors need, standardization of data is required.
The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) has
created a useful framework for companies to start to address the
corporate governance, risk management, scenario-playing, and
measurement aspects of either adapting to or mitigating the impact of
climate change. This approach should form the basis of information that
investors and other stakeholders can use to target investment and
policies enabling a transition to the low-carbon economy.
The investments required to transition to a low carbon economy are
too large for the public sector to meet alone and financing the
transition remains a significant challenge. However, governments can
play a key role in incentivizing private investment. As Zurich recently
stated in our Closing the Gap on Climate white paper,

Certainty around political commitment to net-zero and the
policy actions that will implement those commitments are
fundamental to making progress. Without this clarity it will be
difficult to make the investment case for new low-carbon
technologies or to create the pipeline of investible green
projects required to really scale green financial markets.

Zurich therefore applauds the important work of all the members of
this committee and its staff in developing recommendations on the
policies needed to solve the climate crisis. Transforming our society
on the scale required to meet this challenge, and doing much of this
before 2030 as is necessary, will be monumental. The Majority Staff
Report of this Committee on Solving The Climate Crisis published last
June appropriately sets forth a broad and bold array of policy
recommendations which would certainly put us on the right trajectory if
adopted into our public policy.
Looking at the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, we applaud
the inclusion of investments in the development and research on carbon
capture technology and hydrogen power; electric vehicles and EV
infrastructure; energy efficiency and renewable energy; and modernizing
the electric grid.
We also urge Congress to consider additional financial incentives,
such as tax credits or rebates, to encourage business and individuals
to invest in low-carbon and carbon sequestering technologies,
electricity generation, buildings, materials, products, and vehicles.
As noted previously, the investment needed to address the climate
crisis is too big for governments alone. Congress should expand bond
initiatives, including green bonds, that could leverage private
investment and risk sharing. As the foundation of a net-zero economy
will be a clean electric grid powering the increasingly electrified
transportation and building sectors, Congress should prioritize public
policies supporting the growth of the renewable energy industry and
improvements to our electric grid efficiencies.
The response to this crisis cannot be overdone and will require the
combined efforts of all citizens, communities, corporations, small
businesses, and all levels of government. It will also require an
unprecedented level of international cooperation, especially with
respect to supporting emerging economies' growth onto carbon-free
platforms, protecting the world's natural carbon sinks, and sharing
necessary technologies and carbon-pricing mechanisms.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to present our views on
addressing climate change.

Mr. Casten. Thank you.
Thank you to all the witnesses. The chair will now
recognize Ms. Bonamici for 3 minutes of questions.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Acting Chair Casten and Chair
Castor and Ranking Member Graves, but thank you, especially to
the witnesses. I have read all of your testimony, and I
appreciate that you are here today.
A study released in September by the Department of Energy's
Solar Energy Technologies Office and National Renewable Energy
Laboratory found that, with the proper policies in place, solar
energy could make up 40 percent of the U.S. power sector by
2035, which is a thirteen-fold increase over the current
proportion of solar power electricity. The study also projected
an increase in total solar energy jobs from 230,000 in 2021 to
up to 1.5 million by 2035.
To phase out fossil fuels and spur the job growth needed to
achieve such an increase, we must rapidly increase investment
in workforce development. Over the past few decades, investment
in the public workforce development system has declined
significantly, and currently the system is not prepared to
train the thousands, if not millions, of new industry
professionals in the renewable energy industries who will be an
important part of reaching our decarbonization goals.
So, last week, I wrote a letter with 35 of my colleagues in
support of preserving as much workforce development funding as
possible in the Build Back Better Act, robust funding, which is
important, that will increase career counseling; career and
technical education; on-the-job training programs, including
registered apprenticeships. So making this investment is a
priority in the Build Back Better Act, and it is necessary to
facilitate this transition to a green economy, help meet our
nation's decarbonization goals and, importantly, create good
paying jobs.
So my question is, Mr. Campbell, what are your current
workforce challenges at Volt Energy? And, on the broader solar
sector, how do you expect these challenges to compound as the
transition to renewable energy accelerates, and what can
Congress do to build a diverse, clean energy workforce?
Mr. Campbell. Thank you, Congresswoman. All great
questions.
And I just want to first add on a little bit to what you
said about the 40 percent. There is a recent DOE study that
said if we get to 100 percent decarbonization by 2035, it will
require solar to get to between 40 and 45 percent, but let's
talk about where solar is now.
Solar only accounts for 4 percent of our nation's
electricity generation, but it accounts for 100,000 businesses
in the solar industry, including mine. It also accounts for
230,000-plus Americans with good-paying jobs working in the
solar industry.
So we are at 4 percent now, 100,000 businesses, 230-plus
thousand employees. We get to 40 percent, what is the growth as
far as wealth creation? What is the growth as far as jobs? We
cannot afford not to make these investments.
And, specifically, the question as far as some of the
workforce challenges that we are facing, we are scaling our
business. We are putting our money where our mouth is. We are
hiring a lot of people to help us address environmental
justice, even though, you know, our core business is developing
solar projects.
But one of the challenges that we are facing is we are
looking to hire people that look like America. And for far too
long, our communities of color have not been engaged in this
space, and it is really hard to find diverse talent in this
space.
So part of what----
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that, Mr. Campbell.
Unfortunately my short time has expired, but I appreciate that,
and I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. And apologies to all for our short
timing, but I appreciate your flexibility.
The chair will now recognize Mr. Graves for a far-too-brief
3 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Menezes, Secretary Menezes, I want to thank you, again,
for coming.
In my opening statement and your testimony, you talked
about this CEPP effort in the reconciliation package. You led
the agency under this extraordinary reduction, again, beating
targets that were set by the Obama administration.
Can you talk a little bit about the strategy that you all
used to do that and how--if you were given a magic wand, how
you would sort of chart a course moving forward in a clean
energy direction?
Mr. Menezes. Thank you, Ranking Member Graves, for the
question.
Yeah. At the DOE, we had a policy--you remember, we are in
the executive branch--and it was innovation over regulation. We
certainly had options to issue regulations--EPA does,
Department of the Interior--but generally, we took the view to
get out of the way and to focus on really developing the
technologies. We were all of the above. We were very excited
about all the technologies.
We saw industry, consumers--people were moving in the
direction of green energy. There were many opportunities. Look
at all that we have accomplished. We have accomplished so much
in the electricity sector without a carbon tax, without a
mandate, that it is almost hard for the government to catch up
with what is going on.
So research and development dollars, basic research. We
talk about this technology in solar. Solar is a great thing. We
have a lot of sun.
The problem that we have, and we have got to really focus
on is, as much of intermittent renewable as we have, whether it
is solar, which is fantastic, wind, still you need ramping
technology. Now, everybody is saying we have got battery
technology, and that is why I have referred to what is going on
in California. We are building it, it's a 4-hour battery. That
is the state of the technology there.
So our national labs, indeed universities, everybody is
trying to figure out how to get at least 10 hours of battery,
and that is the challenge. But, when we get there, it may be
breakthrough technology. It may not be the lithium ions. It may
be new technologies, but it is really an exciting opportunity.
But we are simply not there yet to be able to, I think,
withstand the CEPP, which really confines things to a very
small window.
Mr. Graves. Yes or no. Do you think, if the CEPP were
enacted, it would result in higher energy prices--electricity
prices for those making less than $400,000 a year?
Mr. Menezes. Well, that is what the CRS seems to be
alerting Congress to, because we really don't know who is
ultimately going to bear the cost. We do know that it is both
the taxpayers and ratepayers.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
I just have a little bit of time left, but, Ms. Kenna, I am
curious. Would Patagonia support a Federal certification for no
slave labor as a condition of Federal subsidies as it comes to
a clean energy future?
Ms. Kenna. Excuse me. Sorry. Thank you. Hi. Are you able to
hear me?
Mr. Graves. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Kenna. Okay. Sorry about that. Thank you for your
question.
My sense is, is you are asking a question about the
situation in China with the Uyghurs in Xinjiang, and Patagonia
actually made the decision early last year to stop sourcing
altogether--stop sourcing cotton altogether from that region.
And just want to get back to why we are here today, which
is that the business community supports investments in climate,
and we need it both so that we can--as I understand from your
staff, that you like to get outdoors and have fun, our
community does, too. We need these investments so that we can
recreate, have fun outside, and because they are critical to
our bottom line.
Mr. Graves. Yeah. And, Ms. Kenna, I know I am out of time,
but I just wanted to clarify. I wasn't speaking about
Patagonia's own materials or products. I am talking about for
energy products, but we can clarify that on the record. Thank
you for your answer.
Ms. Castor [presiding]. Thank you.
And Representative Casten, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Casten. Representative Casten was suppressed. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Menezes, I want to thank you for your testimony, and I
want to start with two points you raised that I totally agree
with. Number one, we have to push to electrify everything as
quick as we can, or as much as we can to decarbonize. And,
number two, that will require a rate of decarbonization and
deployment of renewables beyond anything we have ever achieved.
I agree.
The reason that we have done that is because our job today
is not to justify delay or make excuses for inaction. I think
our predecessors have set that bar too high. We have run out of
time, and we have to act. And so, I would urge us all to be
inspired by both the fact that we electrified rural America in
a decade.
As Condoleezza Rice says, our job is to make the impossible
seem inevitable in retrospect. So let's not be constrained by
our ambition. Let's get it done.
Two points of yours I disagree with are the reliability and
the price. France; Ontario, Canada; a couple Scandinavian
countries all achieved over 80 percent clean energy without any
detriment in reliability. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Menezes. Two Scandinavian countries?
Mr. Casten. Two Scandinavian countries. I mean, Ontario did
this in basically a decade. They decided to get rid of their
coal, and I haven't seen any hiccups in the Ontario grid.
Mr. Menezes. I mean, I am not aware of any studies on that,
but I am happy to look at them.
Mr. Casten. You haven't seen a lot of newspaper reports
about outages in Ontario. Let's at least be more ambitious than
Ontario.
On the question of pricing, you know, you have got
experience in the coal industry. How many must run hours does a
typical coal plant have where they would shut off if they could
because of the economics, but they can't afford to dial it back
and are losing money for their shareholders every hour, for a
typical coal plant?
Mr. Menezes. Yeah. Well, I don't know the exact number,
but, yeah, with the low-cost natural gas, I mean, coal plants
basically were taken offline, and they were reserved in must-
run capacity, but they weren't running in the energy markets.
Mr. Casten. Yeah, and the gas, it factors down. You said
low-cost natural gas. Is the capacity factor of the gas fleet
lower or higher than the nuke fleet?
Mr. Menezes. In the combined cycle units? The combined
cycle units----
Mr. Casten. Yes.
Mr. Menezes [continuing]. Are more efficient than the
coal----
Mr. Casten. I know, than the nuclear fleet. Which has a
higher capacity factor, the nuclear fleet, or the combined
cycle fleet?
Mr. Menezes. I think the nuclear fleet.
Mr. Casten. Yeah, because it is cheaper, right?
Mr. Menezes. Well, when it runs 96 percent----
Mr. Casten. Are you aware of anybody who owns a solar panel
or a wind turbine or a geothermal plant or a hydro plant who
wakes up in the morning and says, I better check to see if it
makes sense for me to run today?
Mr. Menezes. Only when consumers need the electricity is
when they really absolutely have to have it, and so what we
find is that, when the system is stressed is when they need it,
not when they want it. And it is--we need to divine our--design
our system to be able to produce electricity when it is needed
the most----
Mr. Casten. Well, and I guess what I am suggesting----
Mr. Menezes [continuing]. and that prices don't go through
the roof, right? I mean, that is--like we said, that is----
Mr. Casten. Well, let's be very clear. As you mentioned, we
have NERC, we have FERC to cover the reliability. They do an
excellent job, and I trust them.
Every time we build a zero-carbon energy asset, we build a
plant that does not require fossil fuel to run, and it has
driven down the cost of energy. I know that, because that was
my entire career. And we are on the cusp of the greatest wealth
transfer in our history from the energy producing sector to
energy consumers. Let's get out of the way and run forward.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Menezes. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Rep. Casten yields back.
I don't know if Rep. Gonzalez is on or not.
Otherwise, we will go to Rep. Miller. You are recognized
for 3 minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chair Castor and Ranking Member
Graves, and thank you to all of you all for being here today.
I want to echo the thoughts of several of my colleagues and
note the Clean Energy Performance Program is a performative
agenda pushed by liberal activists. I applaud my colleague,
Senator Manchin, from my home state of West Virginia, for
seeing through what the CEPP pretends to offer, and
understanding that wind and solar energy generation cannot and
will not ever have the ability to power our country on its own.
CEPP, as currently written, would rob investment in these
future technologies, as only a small sliver of so-called
renewables would be eligible for these government handouts,
incentivizing some technologies and companies over others.
I have long been a proponent of an all-of-the-above energy
policy that takes into account the necessity to use fossil
fuels to ensure Americans have affordable baseload power while
continuing to innovate in technologies that bring them closer
and closer to carbon neutral.
While I appreciate the lofty goals set by many of my
colleagues, I often find myself pondering this practicality of
implementing their grand visions, and have found myself living
around communities that have been destroyed by the good
intentioned ambitions of government leaders.
McDowell County, located in my district of southern West
Virginia, is one of those communities. Once a thriving area
with a population well over 100,000 people, it was obliterated
by former President Obama's war on coal. Now there are in the
teens, less than 20,000 people that remain in McDowell County,
where the cost of their daily lives only continue to rise as
out-of-control inflation continues to take hold, and rising gas
prices cuts into their paychecks for every mile they now have
to drive to jobs in neighboring counties and states.
While some of my colleagues on this committee today may say
that West Virginia is irrelevant--bless your heart--I would
like you to note that our small but mighty state is the fifth
largest energy producer, and you are welcome for keeping your
lights on this winter.
Mr. Menezes, could you briefly explain how enhanced oil
recovery works, and how this process can create carbon-negative
oil and gas?
Mr. Menezes. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question.
I made reference to the carbon capture technologies that
may be at risk if CEPP goes into play right now. Congress has
enacted the 45Q tax credits, and what carbon capture,
utilization, and storage allows to happen is, you can take
captured carbon, and you can push it down into oil fields or
formations that have been essentially depleted, or at least
what was able to get out of them, you know, when you first took
the oil out, so there is plenty underground in those
formations.
You take the captured carbon, and you pump it down
essentially into those wells, and it brings additional oil up.
And, while it does, some of it stays in. When it comes up, that
carbon that is with the oil is separated and put back down in,
and it is constantly recycled so that over time, there is more
captured carbon that stays down and is permanently sequestered
in that oil field than it is in producing the barrel of oil.
And the emissions are offset over time then--basically it
is a negative-emissions outcome.
Mrs. Miller. Is my time up? Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Miller.
Mrs. Miller. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next, we will go to Congresswoman Brownley. You
are recognized for 3 minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Kenna, I wanted to ask you a couple of questions. First
is: Why should the business community really care about passing
climate legislation?
Ms. Kenna. Sorry about that. Thank you. Thanks so much for
that question.
The business community should--does care about climate
investments, and, in particular, these climate investments,
because, frankly, the cost of inaction is not an option.
The costs are only going to go up, and already we are
seeing the effects of this climate crisis. It is affecting our
ability to enjoy and recreate outside. And it is affecting our
bottom line. And, as a business that is part of an $800 billion
industry, we need a healthy planet both so we can get outside
and do our business.
Ms. Brownley. Well, thank you for that.
And you mentioned your bottom line, and could you elaborate
a little bit more on why climate investment is important to
your bottom line and to others and their bottom line?
Ms. Kenna. Absolutely. So, you know, our company is made up
of people who like to get outside, and we were founded for that
reason, and we are still in business today, because we fight
for those same places to get outside.
As a business that has been also engaged on protecting
these places, we know that public lands contribute immensely to
the health and economic vitality of local communities, from the
ecosystem services of clean water and air to healthy
communities for kids and families, to the recreation and
outdoor industry that we are a part of.
National parks, national wildlife refuge, monuments, and
other lands and waters, they account for $45 billion in
economic output, and nearly 400,000 jobs nationwide, many of
which are in communities in rural areas and with close
proximity to public lands.
This Build Back Better Act offers a bold and urgent
opportunity to address this crisis and support our bottom line.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you for that. And I certainly thank
Patagonia for their investments in our nation's outdoors, our
nation's public lands. You have certainly played your part.
Last question, quickly, is: If you could talk just a little
bit about, you know, embracing renewable energy in your
facilities. Are you? If you are, where are you? If you could
talk a little bit about that for a minute, or for 9 seconds.
Ms. Kenna. Yeah. Yeah. Great question.
So we are. In our owned and operated facilities,
absolutely. We are very near to having 100 percent reliance on
renewable energy. In your district, you have seen probably our
campus. We have solar panels here. But the bulk of our
emissions comes from our supply chain, and we are committed to
reducing our emissions all the way through.
We are also using the whole-of-business approach to push on
our community and our policymakers to advance community-driven
solutions to support a transition to renewable energy and
nature-based climate solutions.
Ms. Brownley. Terrific.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair. And I invite the committee to
go visit a forward thinking company in my district, and visit
Patagonia.
Ms. Castor. Love Ventura County.
Ms. Kenna. Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next, Representative Gonzalez, you are
recognized for 3 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Madam Chair. I am going to start
with Ms. Kenna and Mr. Campbell, just some quick yes or noes. I
think you have said already today you believe we need bold,
urgent action to stop climate change today, correct?
Ms. Kenna. Yes.
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. Yes or no. Do you support a $27 billion
investment for grid infrastructure?
Mr. Campbell. Yes.
Ms. Kenna. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. What about $21.5 billion investment for clean
energy demonstrations to research carbon capture?
Mr. Campbell. Not as well-versed on carbon capture, so I
can't opine on that.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay. Clean energy demonstration projects,
though, generally.
Mr. Campbell. Generally, I would say yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay. Yes or no. $6 billion investment to
support the existing civil nuclear fleet?
Mr. Campbell. No.
Mr. Gonzalez. No? Not fans of nuclear?
Mr. Campbell. No.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay. I guess that would make sense
considering the business model.
I respectfully disagree on that.
Having said that, I wanted to go through that primarily
to--well, and then one final thing for Ms. Kenna. You said the
cost of inaction on climate goes up with each passing day,
correct?
Ms. Kenna. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez. So mostly yes answers to those questions, so
I guess my thought is: What justification could there possibly
be for my Democratic colleagues and for those who believe we
need bold, urgent climate action, and the cost of inaction goes
up with each passing day, not to put up a bipartisan
infrastructure package today which has the exact investments
that I just outlined?
I see no possible logic. If you are going to sit here and
argue that every day we waste is a day that climate gets worse
when we have a bipartisan package that we could put up, it
would pass--I think, I hope, I would vote for it--and we need
to do that.
Mr. Campbell, I am going to stay with you and talk about
inflation for a second. Solar sector has not been immune to the
supply chain disruptions and rising commodity prices. Price of
silicone, for example, has increased 300 percent in just the
past few months. One of the pillars of the CEPP would
incentivize utilities to go green by rewarding them for
shifting to wind and solar energy. If the bill only stimulates
demand for solar panels but doesn't solve the underlying supply
chain issues, wouldn't that further drive up inflation?
Mr. Campbell. Possibly, but I--Congressman Gonzalez, I
would also like to highlight, when I started my company in
2009, we are--take a step back. We are developing a 139-
megawatt project in Missouri, which would cost us about $160
million to build. Eleven years ago, that would have cost us
over $900 million to build. So, due to smart climate
legislation, the cost of solar has drastically come down. But,
like any other industry, we are not immune to inflation.
Mr. Gonzalez. Right. And the raw material, silicone,
though, that has gone up by 300 percent, the raw material of
silicone?
Mr. Campbell. I am not aware of that fact, Congressman.
Mr. Gonzalez. Okay. I cite the statistics on that.
My bottom line is, we have urgent climate action. We need
to make the investment. We should put up the bipartisan
infrastructure package, which a lot of people agree on.
And, secondly, we can't be immune to inflation. We can't be
spending $3.5 trillion when the economy is already overheating.
It is horribly irresponsible.
And, with that, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Gonzalez.
I will recognize myself for 3 minutes for questions.
Mr. Edsey, you've testified that insurers are increasingly
thinking about their exposures because we are--these extreme
climate-fueled weather events are just coming more frequently.
They are more costly. And it is not just insurers. It is my
neighbors back home in Florida. Our property insurance rates,
flood insurance, and people now are connecting it to the
climate crisis.
So tell us how Federal action would really help us address
the increasing cost of climate when it comes to insurance
rates?
Mr. Edsey. Sure. Thank you, Chairwoman Castor. Thank you.
You know, we have done studies that every dollar spent on
building up resiliency saves $5 in post-event repair work. So
certainly, any investment from the public sector or from the
private sector into fortifying properties against climate
change and increased flood and increased hurricanes are going
to, you know, save money down the line.
You know, being an insurance company, we are in the
business of assessing risk and managing risk, helping our
customers manage that risk, helping our customers mitigate the
risk, so we take the science of climate change very seriously.
And, so, when you look at mitigation, the efforts that we
could take as a society and the world in investing in lowering
greenhouse gas emissions is going to be the most valuable
investment we can make at this time in order to lessen the
severe weather effects of climate change in the future.
Ms. Castor. And those costs on businesses and consumers
alike. So reducing greenhouse gases. We also think that local
communities need additional tools to help build resiliency. I
remember I was a young lawyer working for the State of Florida
after Hurricane Andrew, and, at that time, the State of Florida
stepped up, and they improved their building codes. And it was
kind of held up over time as a very important move. It probably
has saved businesses and consumers' costs over time. But now
those codes and standards haven't kept up.
What is important for the Federal Government to do to
partner with local communities to make sure we have the
appropriate building codes and standards in place?
Mr. Edsey. Definitely. Whatever the Federal Government can
do to encourage local, consensus based, you know, up-to-date
standards on building codes is going to help those local
communities respond. And, in more vulnerable areas, what should
be supported is for high hazard risk standards. There is the
FORTIFIED Standards, and IBHS has FORTIFIED Standards to
fortify against wildfires and flood.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you very much.
Thank you for putting up with us today on the in and outs,
and I want to thank all the members for being very efficient.
Are there any members who have not had an opportunity to
ask a question today? Terrific.
Well, I want to thank all of our witnesses--if we can
Ms. Bonamici. Can I ask a quick question?
Ms. Castor. Yeah. Why don't we--since Rep. Escobar is
coming back from the vote and Mr. Carter is going to come on in
just a second, Rep. Bonamici, I will recognize you for 3
minutes for an additional question.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I really, again, want to thank you all for being here
today. And I want to ask Ms. Kenna a question.
I represent a district in the Pacific Northwest, and the
outdoor recreation industries are very, very important to our
quality of life and to our economy, so I wanted to ask you, Ms.
Kenna, in sort of general terms, how has the climate crisis
affected your business?
But, also, once we get on this path to a clean energy
economy and address the climate crisis, how will that
positively affect your business?
Thank you.
Ms. Kenna. Yeah. Thank you so much for that question.
I had the pleasure this past weekend of spending some time
with some of the ambassadors, the athletes in our communities.
These are world-class bikers and skiers and climbers, anglers,
and they report, with each year, they are seeing these effects
of the climate crisis more and more. And so, that is part of
our community. And then, of course, there is our bottom line,
and how we operate our business, our supply chain, our
distribution center, and our headquarters.
As I mentioned in my testimony, we have had to shut down
our Reno distribution center several times this year already
because of smokey skies from these really severe wildfires.
In 2017, our headquarters here in Ventura had to shut down
for a month. And that was a fire that was here on our campus.
At the time, it was the largest one since. And I believe, each
year since then, we have seen bigger and bigger fires.
So, without a doubt, this is having an effect on our
business and on our community.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you.
And I just want to note that last year we had the horrific
wildfires and smoke. This year we had the heat dome, where more
than a hundred people lost their lives in Oregon because of the
extreme heat.
And I was recently hiking at Mount Hood, and I have never
seen it more brown. Usually there is snow there and skiing year
round. That is not happening now because the temperatures are
so high and the heat.
So thank you so much for your testimony.And I yield back.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Bonamici.
Next we will go to Rep. Gonzalez for his second round of
questions.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you.
I want to start with Ms. Kenna again and just talk about
the nuclear point a little bit more.
Patagonia thrives and is built around the notion that we
should all be able to enjoy the outdoors, we should all be able
to enjoy the natural habitat. I am a customer of yours, I love
your products, and appreciate that mission, and I share it.
That being said, the opposition to nuclear strikes me as
somewhat misguided. I guess I would like to hear your thoughts
on it more, given that we know for sure that if we put solar
and wind all over the country, that there is a natural habitat
destruction and a biodiversity problem that you just can't get
away from, as far as I know.
But I am curious for your thoughts on that. Because my view
is that nuclear actually allows you to solve for that.
Now, the cost of nuclear is too high. There is a lot we
need to do to improve our nuclear infrastructure. I am working
on a lot of those things in a bipartisan way with many of my
colleagues.
But I would love to hear from you why Patagonia would be
against nuclear, given what we know about the biodiversity
challenges associated with solar and wind.
Ms. Kenna. Thank you, Congressman. It is a great question.
And also thanks for being a customer. We appreciate that.
So you are right, we do have a lot of concerns about
nuclear. And I am not a nuclear expert, but what I do know is
that the waste associated with nuclear is incredibly
problematic. We don't have a solution for it. So that is why we
are pushing for investments in wind and solar.
And you are right, we need to be mindful about where we are
putting windmills and solar fields. And it is our point of
view, our perspective, that we should take advantage of
underutilized areas. Brownfields and landfills, for instance,
would make for great locations for wind and solar.
Thank you again for the question.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yeah, thanks for clarifying. Respectfully, I
am personally more concerned about the biodiversity challenges
associated with wind and solar than I am the waste issues
associated with nuclear.
I think the nuclear waste issues are much more solvable
and, frankly, have moved a lot further. I just don't know how
you throw up solar panels all over the country without
destroying the natural habitat.
And that concerns me greatly as somebody who loves the
outdoors, who is passionate about climate, and wants to see my
kids, my grandkids, have the opportunities to enjoy the
outdoors in the same way that you and I have for much of our
lives.
Ms. Kenna. Yeah. Mr. Gonzalez. So with that, I thank you
for clarifying. And I yield back.
Mr. Casten [presiding]. I commend the gentleman for
finishing under time. I think that is a first here on this 3
minute panel.
The chair will now recognize Ms. Escobar on the TV screen.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Really appreciate all of our witnesses who are here today
sharing their expertise. And I will be as brief as I can in my
question, but first some quick context.
We know that the Federal Government alone, nor the private
sector alone, can do this. We have to achieve a place where we
are saving our planet together. That includes consumers,
individuals, local governments, you name it.
And in my community, we have formed--my office has formed a
Climate Crisis Advisory Committee, and our focus right now is
bringing all parties together, sitting around the same table,
so that we can ensure that each sector and each stakeholder
creates a climate action plan.
Mr. Campbell, thank you so much for your work as a leader.
As I mentioned, we are developing our climate action plan. And
as more communities develop these plans, we really have a
tremendous opportunity to ensure that there is equity for
minority communities who are frequently left out.
My own community is economically disadvantaged and about 85
percent Latino, and it is frequently left out of Federal
packages, and local governments don't have a whole lot of money
to fund plans like this.
But given your leadership in developing the first
Environmental Justice Power Purchase Agreement, how can
communities of color plan ahead in order to realize the
benefits of a clean energy transition? What are the things you
think we need to be looking out for, planning for?
Mr. Campbell. Great question, Congresswoman Escobar, and
thank you for sharing your comments.
So a couple things. I think first, in communities,
particularly of color, there needs to be a little bit more
education around the impacts of climate change, both to prepare
from a resiliency standpoint but also to understand the
opportunities.
As I mentioned before, communities of color shouldn't only
suffer environmental burdens--they shouldn't suffer at all--
they should also participate from environmental opportunities.
I recently had the opportunity, piggybacking on your point,
to speak to over 50 students at Howard University two Fridays
ago, at 4 p.m., about climate change and solar.
I can speak for myself as a graduate of Howard University.
When I was in college, I don't think I would have been at 4
o'clock on a Friday talking about climate change and
sustainability.
However, these students have a direct ask for the members
before this committee and before Congress in general: They want
you to invest in their future. They come from communities, like
yours, Congresswoman Escobar, where for far too long they have
seen family members suffer from respiratory diseases. It has
played out in COVID.
They want these investments from Build Back Better to
invest in their future to make sure that, A, they are breathing
clean air, which should be a fundamental necessity, but they
have opportunities to get good career jobs in renewable energy,
in sustainability, and to be able to start their own
businesses.
So I just ask everyone to be thoughtful of making a down
payment for future generations. Thank you.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Casten. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Mr. Menezes, I want to start with you, because your
testimony pretty much focused on the Clean Electricity
Performance Program, CEPP.
And I have to say that I read your testimony, and I heard
most of it earlier, and I have to agree with you. I think you
are absolutely spot on here. And I think it is going to
negatively affect reliability, I think it is going to increase
cost to consumers, and that it is going to have environmental
consequences.
And one of the things that you have highlighted in this is
that it is likely to kill the development of nuclear power
because of its limited 10-year timeframe.
As you pointed out, CEPP will have the most significant
climate action in our country's history. There is no question
about that. Yet it passed out of the E&C in the markup, during
the markup, and really never had a single hearing by itself as
it should have.
And this is important to me because Plant Vogtle, where we
have two of the only nuclear reactors under construction
currently in the country, it sits right outside my district in
Georgia. And Plant Vogtle, once it goes online, it will provide
Georgia with reliable clean energy for up to 60 to 80 years--60
to 80 years--clean reliable energy.
It will power over 500,000 homes, and that would be the
equivalent of being carbon free and would be the equivalent of
removing over one million cars from the roads each year, and to
me, that is an incredible investment.
I just want to ask you, how would CEPP affect the
development, in your opinion, how would CEPP affect the
development of nuclear energy in our country since it is the
only reliable, emission-free source of energy in our country?
Mr. Menezes. Well, thank you for the question.
The difficulty with CEPP is that, again, it is a solution
to a Senate process problem. And so as a consequence, would
there be an opportunity to actually have input from all
stakeholders? You would try to build in more time.
Think about, by having to comply with this within that
budget-scoring window, you are basically picking winners and
losers. And the winners will be solar--nothing wrong with
solar--and maybe some wind, just to be able to meet the CEPP
requirement so you don't have to pay a penalty.
Now, two technologies that we really worry about.
What is going to happen over the next 10 years of the
nuclear breakthroughs that we have?
We may never, unless economic conditions change, we really
might not build another Vogtle Plant in the United States as we
are headed now. But we may very build small modular reactors.
Now, we have some planned out West. At DOE we have been
trying to get the NuScale project built in Idaho.
And recently, we shouldn't forget fusion. The Office of
Science within the Department of Energy has made some recent
breakthroughs in fusion. We have almost kind of forgotten about
fusion. But ultimately, if we can harness fusion, imagine, no
more water pressure reactors Right? No more fission.
So what happens during the CEPP period? Right? Are we
forcing all our technological dollars to go in and try to
figure out how it is that we can get more solar and more wind
by improving the transmission and get the upgrades?
And just one other thing on nuclear, because the Patagonia
witness said some interesting things.
When I was over at the Department, and not many people
really know about this, but in the United States, we are pro or
against nuclear.
But when you step back and look at what is going on in the
world, right now the U.S. is the world's leader in nuclear
technology. And we have a statutory obligation that if we share
any of this great technology, we have to have 123 Agreements,
nonproliferation and non-enrichment for weapons.
Well, what we see--and countries are coming to us and say,
``Please, we would like to build more nuclear,'' because the
IEA has said, if you really want to meet your climate
restrictions, you ought to look at nuclear, invest now, and
over the 40 to 80 years you will have emission clean energy.
Mr. Carter. Right. Thank you.
Mr. Menezes. But Russia and China do not have 123
Agreements, and they will get this technology somewhere else.
And that is if you are anti-nuclear, you ought to be concerned
about that.
Mr. Casten. Sorry. We are going to have to move on. It is a
fascinating conversation, and we may have some chance for
secondary follow-up.
Mr. Graves, I think you are now up for a secondary round of
questions should you have any.
Mr. Graves. Great. Thank you.
Ms. Kenna, I want to clarify my question earlier, because I
think we crossed wires a little bit.
I was specifically asking about, do you believe that if we
provide Federal energy subsidies to companies, such as solar
energy, wind energy, that they should have to abide by a
certification of no slave labor as a condition for being
eligible for those funds?
I apologize if that didn't come across the right way.
Ms. Kenna. No, that is okay, and thank you for clarifying.
I think I will stick to what I know here, which is our own
supply chain, though, and I am glad to get back to you on
that.But certainly with our own supply chain, we have taken a
very strong stance against slave labor and work very hard to
ensure that we keep up to that commitment.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. And, look, I think I have easily got
thousands of dollars' worth of y'all's products, having spent a
lot of time leading wilderness trips for many years.
But I also want to be clear that I have been very
disappointed in seeing the companies stepping out into areas,
just like you said, you said staying in your lane, and watching
Patagonia step out of their areas where I think they have no
expertise. For example, the comment about nuclear. When
California recently shut down the nuclear power plant, they had
to send a letter requesting that they be allowed to violate
their emissions standards because they are going to have to
produce electricity from energy.
The United States has one of the cleanest natural gas
sources in the world. We have reduced emissions better than any
other country in the world--and better than the next 12
emissions-reducing countries--because of our transition to
natural gas under a tight regulatory regime.
And so I do think that we need to be very thoughtful about
how to proceed in a global direction that results in downward
emissions.
Mr. Menezes, I want to ask, with all of your experience in
energy policy, are you aware of any recommendations that
existed prior to a couple of months ago that mirror the CEPP?
Mr. Menezes. No. As I put in my testimony, there have been
recommendations of the task force looking at this to Congress,
some 700 recommendations, the CEPP was not involved in that.
I happen to have--this is a great bible, certainly for
lawyers interested in trying to decarbonize, develop policies--
``Legal Pathways to Deep Decarbonization in the United
States.''
Mr. Graves. Is there a Cliffs Notes version?
Mr. Menezes. There is no nutshell version of this, as I
remind my students. But nowhere in here--nowhere in here--is
any CEPP. And these are serious-minded people that have been
looking at this to try to come up with things like the CEPP,
but CEPP is nowhere.
It is not that they are trying to avoid controversial
topics. Right? I mean, they propose carbon taxes. So they
thought of--they tried to think of everything they possibly
could. And I have looked at this thing, and I have shaken it up
and down, and I just can't find the CEPP anywhere in there.
So, again, as I have said, now as a former staffer, if we
were in a room and the Members said, ``You have got budget
reconciliation that you have to deal with,'' well, we know we
have a limited window to divine something that has to raise
income. It has got to be fees because we don't have
jurisdiction over taxes. We are not Ways and Means.
So tight time window, typically something that will cause
money to come into the Treasury, so that you basically can meet
the payfor requirement so that you don't get 60 votes in the
Senate. This is what this is all about.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. All right, sit tight.
I would like to ask the rest of you, while we are waiting
on additional members to come, I know we have covered a lot of
ground over the past hour or so, are there other questions that
you would like to be able to cover, or topics maybe that you
weren't asked about that you would like to be able to address?
Just give you a couple minutes each.
Mr. Edsey.
Mr. Edsey. Thank you, Ranking Member Graves.
Yeah, I guess I would just like to say that what Zurich,
and from our angle of the business community, what we need is
an orderly transition to net zero.
In managing risk, we take the science and engineering of
risk very seriously. So the message from the IPCC and climate
scientists is we need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
about 50 percent by 2030 and 100 percent by 2050.
So how the public policies are enacted to get us there is
something that Washington and the states need to decide, in
conjunction with the world.
But it is crucial. If we don't get there, then our economy
faces extreme risk. From the insurance industry, we recognize
that risk very acutely.
And so, again, we support the work of this committee. And
we can't help but stress the urgency of it to Zurich and to the
insurance industry and to our economy.
So thank you.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Campbell, do you want to [inaudible]?
Mr. Campbell. Sure. And I would like to answer one of the
questions you mentioned earlier as well.
So our company has signed a pledge, as part of the Solar
Energy Industries Association, not to work with forced labor.
And I will just say this again. Chairwoman Castor mentioned
this earlier. In the 9 months this year, we have spent over a
hundred billion dollars after disaster after disaster--the
wildfires in the West, hurricane after hurricane in the Gulf,
flooding in the Mid-Atlantic, here in the Northeast.
But let's just take a step back. We are at an interesting
time in our nation's history. The business community supports
clean energy.
I was on a conference call today. I am a board member of
the Renewable Energy Buyers Alliance. We have set forth a new
goal of 90 percent, focusing on some of the largest companies
in the world from all industries, getting to 90 percent
decarbonization by 2030 of the power sector.
We also have a great opportunity--and this bill allows for
that as well too--to decarbonize our transportation sector.
We go back and look at--we have talked a lot about
underserved minority communities. Well, guess what the biggest
form of carbon emission is in those communities--the
transportation sector. And we have the opportunity to look at
putting EV charging stations all across this country.
And America has really smart businesses, and these smart
businesses, particularly automobile manufacturers, are making
significant investments in electric vehicles. Almost every car
I could think about is going to have some form of an electric
vehicle in the future. And obviously, lastly, we also have the
opportunity to electrify our buildings--Federal buildings,
commercial buildings, residential buildings--across this
country.
So I just hope that we all recognize that we can no longer
afford to pay inaction for all the events that have happened,
but we have an opportunity to really grow our economy and
really prepare ourselves for the infrastructure that is needed
of the future.
Thank you.
Mr. Graves. Ms. Kenna.
Ms. Kenna. Yeah, thanks for the opportunity.
I will just want to highlight what my panelists have
already said and just reinforce this idea that the cost of
inaction now is far greater than any of the investments on the
table.
Additionally, we haven't talked about it a lot today, but
one of the things that is on the table here that we feel really
strongly about is the Civilian Climate Corps, which we think
would really create new job opportunities in rapidly growing
clean energy, ecosystem restoration, and recreation industries
for both urban centers and rural communities.
And while at the same time, it will inspire a new
generation of conservationists and healthy outdoor recreation
enthusiasts.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
Mr. Menezes.
Mr. Menezes. Yeah, sure, I have something I would like to
talk about.
The Lawrence Livermore Lab Foundation did a report at the
request of California. When California came out with their
``let's get to net zero by 2045,'' they asked the Lawrence
Livermore Lab Foundation to actually see: Can we do it?
And the lab assumed no policy changes, okay, no carbon tax,
no Federal mandates, just current policy. And so the question
was: Can we get there? Right?
They said we can. You can get there. You don't need
Congress to do anything. And you don't have to be anti fossil.
You can accept the fact that we are going to have emissions for
as far as we can see. But what can you do and how can you get
there?
One, put carbon capture technology on all existing
facilities that emit. We have the technology. Let's do it. Can
Congress incent that? Sure, they can do that. You capture it.
Now you got to build pipelines. California has a lot of
permanent places to sequester, so we are able to do that.
Two, land management. Manage your forests, manage your
biomass, and guess what, you can make renewable biofuels, and
you can help reduce the emissions in the transportation sector.
Okay?
And then finally they looked at everything and they said,
with all these reductions, we still need one more thing, we
can't quite get there.
But you know what we have? We have direct air capture
technologies. We have direct air capture technologies that can
actually pull CO
2
right out of the air. We have the
technology today. And Congress has been incenting direct air
capture.
So together we have the means to be able to get to the
goals that we want. We don't have to have things like the CEPP.
We just don't have to come up with these things.
So that is really what I wanted to say.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Menezes, I see you have got a minute left.
If you could maybe talk about, I have watched as you end up
having companies that end up spending a gazillion dollars to
reduce that last ton of carbon to get to zero.
Could you talk about, with the last 45 seconds or so,
should we be doing that and try and focus sector by sector, or
should we be looking at ways to identify less expensive offsets
that are easier to do?
Mr. Menezes. Well, that is right. And Environmental Action
actually proposed a roadmap. It was a combination of a variety
of things. It wasn't just the CEPP.
And so when you look at the roadmap, there were all the
things that we have been talking about. I mean, tax benefits,
moving to EVs, for example.
It is a very comprehensive piece, in that if you have all
the other parts in place, you can get to at least 73 percent of
the 80 percent of the emission target that is set forth in the
Environmental Action Programme.
So essentially what we are doing is we are going to be
spending $150 billion, according to the CRS, on chasing that 7
percent just to get us to that 80 percent reduction by 2030.
So that is what I have to say about that.
Mr. Palmer [presiding]. I thank the gentleman for his
questions. I will now recognize myself for questions.
Ms. Kenna, a recent study found that the Clean Electricity
Performance Program that is being proposed as part of the
Democrat reconciliation bill would result in a 45 percent
increase in electricity prices by 2031 in Arizona, and a nearly
90 percent increase from 2019 rates if the Palo Verde nuclear
plant were to cease operation.
This level of rate hike would have low-income and fixed-
income seniors struggling to pay their bills to keep their
houses warm in the winter.
Is it your company's hope by supporting this bill low-
income families and fixed-income seniors will buy Patagonia
jackets to stay warm when they cannot afford to heat their
home?
Ms. Kenna. Thank you, Congressman.
Look, at the end of the day, we are concerned about the
economy, and we are concerned about the planet.
And the oil and gas markets are volatile by nature, as are
their prices. And we think one way to avoid this volatility is
to expedite the transition to clean energy, which we think is
wind and solar, and to protect our public lands, and to
cultivate these natural climate solutions.
Mr. Palmer. Would you like to see the transition to
renewable energy similar to what they have done in the U.K.? Or
Europe, I mean.
Ms. Kenna. Our interest here is in clean water and clean
air and a healthy planet.
Mr. Palmer. No, I am asking, if you are really interested
in it, then you have kept up with what is going on around the
world. Do you recommend that we transition to renewable energy
like they have in Europe, and particularly in the United
Kingdom? It is a simple yes or no. Or either you don't know.
Ms. Kenna. Look, I think the United States has an
opportunity to be a leader. I do. I really do.
Mr. Palmer. Now, let me tell you, you have been coached to
filibuster the answer. And I will just tell you, if we
transition to renewables the way the U.K. has, last winter they
had 3,000 people die because they couldn't afford to keep their
homes warm enough.
And that is where we would head with this. We are already
talking about a 40 percent increase in household utility costs
just in the United States.
And that is going to be particularly problematic, Mr.
Menezes, in certain parts of the country. I would like for you
to comment on it. Do you think we should transition like the
U.K. and Europe have?
Mr. Menezes. Well, just from the energy point of view, I
mean, just what happened last month. So the U.K. has embraced
wind. They get 25 percent of their energy from wind. It is a
great thing. When it runs, it tends to be cheaper. They have
saved a lot of money. Sometimes it produces too much that they
can use.
But when they--again, and I mentioned this earlier in a
question--when you need the electricity is when you want it. So
you have to have it. Right?
So when the wind stopped blowing last month, you saw
natural gas prices spike. They had to import natural gas from
Russia and the United States, so that was a good thing.
But they had to run a coal plant that had been closed due
to anti-fossil policies that are there in Europe and in the
U.K.
So again, as I have mentioned earlier, we have to develop
the battery technology or the storage technology to be able to
be there when the wind stops blowing and when the sun stops
shining. We haven't gotten there from a technological point of
view.
Mr. Palmer. We are not against renewables, but renewables
from an engineering perspective--and I worked for two
international engineering companies in a previous career--we
are not there for being able to convert to renewables because
our grid is a patchwork grid. It depends on a consistent
baseload. That is not going to happen.
I also want to point out that if we can't go to next-
generation nuclear, if we can't go to maybe more dependence on
natural gas, then it is going to have an enormously negative
impact on low-income people around the world.
There are projections that approximately, because of the
energy crisis right now, that there are about 4 billion people
who don't have access to cleaner energy. They are cooking their
food using wood or animal dung, cow dung, other combustible
materials, which they use inside their homes.
There are about 4 billion people whose life expectancy is
much shorter because of that. We are talking about places like
the Congo and places like that, that need energy to develop for
the benefit of their people.
And I just would like for you to comment on how we can
justify some of these policies that the Democrats are proposing
when it will create enormous harm for people. And not just in
the more impoverished regions of the world, but here in the
United States, when you are looking at a 40 percent increase in
household utility costs. And they are projecting now that
natural gas is going to go to about $10 per million cubic feet.
That is going to force some people, particularly elderly
people, to make a decision on how much they can spend on their
utility bill versus their food and their medicine.
Does that sound like a reasonable policy?
Mr. Menezes. Even the CRS has identified that ultimately it
is the electric consumer that bears the cost of policy changes
in Congress. And with regard to the CEPP, they say, we really
don't know what the outcome is going to be.
With respect to the rest of the world, pulling people out
of poverty, electricity pulls people out of poverty. In India
and in Africa the leaders are trying to bring electricity to
their people. And it is the United States' technology typically
which we export to them. And with our policies, we help to put
that technology in place.
Technology is not limited to the solar or wind. Certainly
it includes all that. But we are trying to also figure out ways
to where we can bring small modular reactors, for example, give
them an opportunity to do that, and use the U.S. technology.
So with the CEPP and other policies, it seems like Congress
is picking winners and losers.
And we haven't even talked about the clean coal
technologies that are in existence here. We still have an
abundance of coal. We can develop and put clean coal
technologies on this, and we can export that technology to the
countries that rely mostly on coal.
When you look at the International Energy Agency's
projections in those developing countries, coal is going to
increase. We have to give them options, because they will not
want to turn away from coal because they want to bring
electricity to their people.
Mr. Palmer. When you talk about picking winners and losers,
I think most of us understand that in the context of favoring
certain industries over others.
But I will tell you right now, the legislation that is
before us, the losers are going to be low-income Americans,
elderly Americans, people who, like I said, are going to be
making some really tough decisions this winter about how much
they can afford to pay for utility bills versus food and
medicine.
With that, the time is expired.
Without objection, all members will have 10 business days
within which to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses. I ask our witnesses to please respond as promptly as
you are able.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:04 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

United States House of Representatives

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

Hearing on October 20, 2021

``Good for Business: Private Sector Perspectives on Climate Action''

Questions for the Record

Corley Kenna

Head of Communications and Policy

Patagonia

the honorable kathy castor
1. Thank you for your leadership on climate action. Just to make it
crystal clear, why should the business community care about passing
climate legislation?
First, thank you for your incredible work on this issue, especially
the emphasis you put on storytelling and bridging divides. At
Patagonia, we know that climate change is everyone's issue and our
business, and our community agrees, whether they're climbers from West
Virginia, anglers from Florida or skiers from California. If you run a
business and care about your employees, customers, and community, it is
a no-brainer to support this legislation. The right thing to do is also
the smart thing to do.
The Build Back Better Act offers a bold and urgent opportunity to
address the climate crisis before it's too late, gives working families
the support they deserve, and will help strengthen the economy. It is
an imperative investment in communities affected most on the frontlines
of the climate crisis, communities that are already vulnerable and
suffering serious and lasting health issues due to poor air quality
exacerbated by climate change.

2. Could you please explain why climate investment is important for
your bottom line as well as for the planet?
These two issues are inextricably bound. To paraphrase David
Brower, there is no business on a dead planet.
Along with the thousands of US businesses in our industry,
Patagonia depends on a stable climate and healthy, protected lands and
waters. The climate crisis is not an abstract theory, it is an urgent
risk to our business. As such, we need help scaling and incentivizing
programs that won't worsen the climate crisis, and that will increase
the pace of urgently needed emissions reductions and a just, clean
energy transition.
Beyond climate, this legislation also prioritizes the needs of
working families. For the last 50 years, Patagonia has offered paid
sick leave, parental leave, and onsite childcare to our employees--and
we've reaped the benefits through our ability to maintain a robust and
engaged workforce. Yet, nationally, fewer than 21 percent of workers
have access to paid family leave through their employers. Attracting
and retaining top talent and a?speedy economic recovery?depend on
enabling people to return to the labor force by addressing the urgent
issues of paid leave and childcare availability.

3. How is Patagonia building a culture of corporate accountability
by connecting your climate priorities to other policy positions?
Patagonia is proud to be a certified B-Corporation, which requires
us to look beyond profit and consider people, planet and the long-term
in every business decision we make. And we have been glad to see other
businesses and organizations make similar commitments to consider not
just their shareholders but their full community of stakeholders in
their business plans.
These corporate commitments, along with bold and aggressive
investments from our elected leaders, will create the conditions for
the systemic change required for a healthy planet and thriving
communities. Government support will also catalyze further business
investment and innovation--making our economy more competitive and
resilient while strengthening our global leadership.
Patagonia is willing to pay a higher corporate tax rate to fund
this critical legislation. Further, we also urge Congress to eliminate
tax subsidies for oil and gas companies. The United States spends $20
billion annually subsidizing fossil fuels. It's a mistake that costs
American taxpayers more than $649 billion each year when considering
health, environmental, and climate externalities. It's time to shift
those investments to a clean, just future for people and the planet.

4. Under Secretary Haaland's leadership, the Department of the
Interior is exploring how to reduce barriers to equity in outdoor
recreation. Could you please discuss how Patagonia views diversity,
equity, and inclusion when it comes to outdoor recreation and climate
solutions?
We can, and should, be doing a lot more to actively engage with
individuals and communities who are historically underrepresented in
the outdoor community, the environmental movement and our own company.
We are working deliberately to create meaningful change by conversing
with and listening to the communities we do not represent adequately.
We supported the Great Americans Outdoors Act and encourage Congress to
pass the Simplifying Outdoor Access for Recreation Act.

5. The Climate Crisis Action Plan recommends smart-from-the-start
siting to expand clean energy deployment while also protecting
wildlife, wildlands, and cultural resources. Do you agree that, with
appropriate policy safeguards, it is possible to advance both
conservation and clean energy deployment?
Yes. We must also double down on our work to help communities get
off fossil fuels and protect nature, the original climate solution. And
we must demand nothing short of systemic change from government and
industry.
Science confirms that nature can reduce a third of the CO
2

we need captured by 2030 to slow catastrophic warming. Given the
science and urgency, we now focus more than ever on the high-carbon
landscapes that can save us, too. Through partnerships with local and
Indigenous communities and our 1% for the Planet program, Patagonia has
supported the protection of Alaska's Tongass National Forest since
2008, with its 17 million acres of old-growth spruce, hemlock, and
cedar that hold hundreds of millions of tons of carbon.
At the same time, communities know what they need to make a just
transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy. We support local
knowledge and activation of climate solutions, particularly with Black,
Indigenous, and other communities of color that have been hit the
hardest, lost the most and had the least say in their climate
realities. Patagonia will expand our support of groups such as the ones
we featured in our recent films DISTRICT 15 (on fighting Big Oil and
Gas in California) and We the Power (on the energy-democracy movement
in Europe). At the same time, we're committed to a new energy system
that gives communities real power.
the honorable dan crenshaw
1. In your testimony, you write that ``Patagonia is working to
reduce and eliminate our scope three carbon emissions and are proud
that in just four years we won't use any virgin petroleum sources in
our materials.''
Is Patagonia willing to totally cease the use of all fossil fuels
and its derivatives--virgin and recycled--in your business's entire
chain of operations from the design and manufacture of fabrics for
clothing to the transport of those products on trucks, rail, and ships
to stores by December 31, 2021?
We believe that the production of all fossil fuels and their
derivatives should be discontinued, and the sooner we move in this
direction the sooner everyone from workers to companies can seize the
economic opportunities that come from clean energy. While the world
cannot stop using fossil fuels overnight, we do need to move beyond
them as quickly as possible if we are to leave a habitable planet for
future generations, and that is what we are committed to doing at
Patagonia. But we need a national plan for the just and speedy
transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy. We need to end tax
breaks for polluters and we need to offer incentives that promote
renewable energy and support conservation. And importantly, we need
jobs programs to support those who transition out of the extractive
industries.
The fossil-fuel industry needs to participate in its own transition
if it is to survive economically the late 21\st\ and 22\nd\ centuries.
Their marketing campaigns imply that they understand this, but it is
our hope that you and your colleagues hold them accountable to their
promises to the planet and communities.
For more information about how we intend to reduce and eliminate
our emissions, please visit www.Patagonia.com/climate-goals

2. In your testimony, you stated, ``The Build Back Better Act--
offers a bold and urgent opportunity to address the climate crisis
before it's too late, and give working families the support they
deserve.''
Is it Patagonia's official position that those men and women
working on our nation's pipeline infrastructure should be laid off from
those jobs despite the fact that pipelines have been shown to provide
the safest and most reliable method to transport crude oil to
refineries?
Patagonia's believes that our country is missing the opportunity to
lead the world on industries of the future. Our government leaders
should make decisions on science and the overwhelming threat of climate
change, not politics.
We honor the men and women who do the work to build, maintain and
repair energy infrastructure. We favor efforts big and small, private
and public, to provide the workers of today the means to hold the jobs
of tomorrow in an electric-powered economy fueled by cleaner forms of
energy such as wind and solar.

3. In your testimony, you stated ``Beyond climate, this legislation
also prioritizes the needs of working families.'' How do you define
`working families' and what metrics should be used in determining how
their `needs' should be prioritized? Should the needs of the building
trades workers be considered in President Biden's Build Back Better
legislation?
A working family, as it was meant, is any family or household in
which a person earns a paycheck from an employer and also supports
loved ones with that paycheck. Some of the needs of working families
that we see in our communities are:

--Access to affordable, high quality child care
--Support to afford and find qualified caregivers for older and
disabled adults
--The ability to take a family or medical leave to care for
themselves or a child or an ill or injured loved one without
falling into financial hardship or forgoing a needed leave

At Patagonia we have found that supporting our colleagues and
providing solutions to the needs listed above benefits our entire
community and our business. We even wrote a book about it called Family
Business and we would be glad to send you a copy.
In terms of the building trades, we are very happy to see that the
Build Back Better Act does take their needs into account, especially
with respect to paid family and medical leave because eligibility
criteria for access to paid leave depends on an earnings history
overall ($2,000 over a recent 8-quarter period) without regard to
whether those earnings came from one employer or multiple employers or
jobs. This reflects the realities of workers who may have multiple jobs
and are hired through hiring halls for their work.

4. In your testimony, you stated, ``Patagonia is proud to be a
certified B-Corporation, which requires us to look beyond profit and
consider people, planet and the long-term in every business decision we
make.''
When Patagonia chooses to fund anti-Line 5 advocacy groups and
documentaries do you consider those workers in the building trades
working to build our nation's energy infrastructure like Line 3, for
example, or are `some people' and their jobs expendable as your actions
seem to imply?
We should stop importing the world's dirtiest oil--Canadian tar
sands. We don't think relying on it is necessary to keep the U.S.
economy running, nor is it necessary to keep U.S. workers employed.
There are great jobs building the energy of tomorrow, today.
Does Patagonia believe that fossil fuels play any role in our
country's energy economy?
In the short run, unfortunately that is the case, but the
transition must begin without delay. For too long, the fossil fuel
industry has not only hidden but misled the American people about the
effects of their pollution. We believe they should be held accountable
for their actions.

5. If the Line 5 pipeline were to be shutdown, how does Patagonia
suggest crude oil be transported to refineries in the Midwest?
We must accelerate our transition to renewable energy, specifically
wind and solar.

7. Are trucks carrying crude oil to refineries a safe way to
transport unrefined crude?
They are safer than a pipeline running under the Straits of
Mackinac.

8. Will an additional 2000 truckloads carrying crude oil to
refineries result in greater GHG emissions?
Yes. It's a balancing act. It's a better short-term risk than a
pipeline leak or spill under waters that are irreplaceable. And this is
precisely why we need accelerate a transition to renewable energy.

9. Will an additional 2000 trucks degrade road infrastructure
resulting in more roads needing to be repaved with asphalt--a fossil
fuel product?
Green infrastructure and the circular economy are making those
projects less environmentally destructive, and electric trucks are
clearly the direction many major shippers are choosing for their
fleets, but we don't disagree that we will be using some byproducts
from fossil fuels for the foreseeable future. The question is how
quickly can we stop taking from the planet and start being motivated by
the benefits of conservation and clean energy?

10. Why is Patagonia clothing so expensive? For a company that has
seemingly placed such an emphasis on helping `working families,' how
does Patagonia justify the cost of a Men's Frozen Range Parka which
retails for $699, for example? Hard to believe many `working families'
are buying $700 winter coats.
We believe one coat that outlasts three coats made for the same
purpose is a good value for the customer able to spend more up front to
save money in the long run. For those who want a lower price point and
for those looking for the most responsible way to shop for jackets, we
invite you to check-out WornWear.com. Buying used extends a garment's
life by about two years which cuts its carbon, waste, and water
footprint by about 82%. And, when you are done with your Patagonia
jacket, we are glad to give you credit towards your next new or used
one.

I can buy an insulated Patagonia jacket for $200 (actually under),
which means instead of giving $140M in grants to environmental issues,
you could have donated 700,000 insulated jackets to the homeless and
those who died from cold-related weather. If 1% of those jackets
prevented deaths, Patagonia could have saved 7,000 people in the past
20 years from dying. Why did Patagonia choose not to do this?
That's a false choice between working to save the planet and
helping human beings. We do both, and we're proud of it. We donate
significant amounts of cold-weather clothing to communities in need and
protective clothing to first responders fighting California and Nevada
fires made worse by climate change. We prioritize support for
grassroots environmental organizations working to protect or restore
ecologically important land and water in their communities.
Please provide us with a list of every product Patagonia designs,
manufactures, and sells that contain any kind of fossil fuel or
chemical feedstock--virgin or recycled.
We believe in transparency. That's why we make this information
freely available and accessible on our website and we encourage you to
check it out: www.Patagonia.com

11. China's dismal record on human rights record is well documented
and, as the Northwest Ohio Building Trades Council letter notes, your
company's mission statement mandates that it, ``cause no unnecessary
harm.'' Given this corporate dictate, how can you justify operating in
a country that openly uses slave labor?
Patagonia takes responsibility for our products, the workers who
make them, and the environmental footprint left behind. We invite you
to learn more about the range of due diligence activities to promote
and sustain fair labor practices, safe working conditions and
environmental responsibility in factories that make our projects. You
can find that information here: https://www.patagonia.com/our-
footprint/working-with-factories.html.
In July 2020, we were public in our decision to exit Xinjiang after
it was clear we were not able to rely on auditors to ensure that our
products were free of forced labor. We no longer source cotton from
China.

12. Why does Patagonia manufacture any of its products in China?
Due to misguided trade policies, much of the US apparel
manufacturing landscape no longer exists. As a result, we search the
globe for the best partners.
Patagonia fought NAFTA and paid for ads in opposition to it because
we feared it would degrade environmental standards and displace
American workers. We also were vocal in our opposition to TPP.
We would welcome a chance to work with you to support policies that
would allow apparel companies like ours to grow organic cotton in Texas
and manufacture in facilities powered by wind and solar with workers
who make a thriving wage the US.

13. Since China is the world's leading GHG emitter and continues to
build out coal fired power plants extensively, in addition to having a
dismal environmental record generally, and given your significant
presence in the country, have you lobbied the Chinese government to
institute mandatory and binding GHG emissions reductions across its
industrial sector? If so, please provide documentation detailing what
you have requested of the Chinese government. If not, why not?
To date our efforts have been focused on appealing to world leaders
to stop hiding behind the excuse of China being a GHG emitter and
working to elect leaders who will prioritize people and planet. That
said, we do support economic penalties for all countries that are
failing to meet their commitments under the Paris Climate Agreement and
we're watching to see which countries are keeping their word after
Glasgow.

14. What percentage of your clothing is manufactured in China?
Less than three percent of our current and spring line is
manufactured in China.

15. Does Patagonia's manufacturing in China contribute to global
warming?
All manufacturing everywhere does. We are honest about our carbon
footprint and encourage companies to do the same. We welcome you to
visit our website our website to learn about why climate is our
business: Patagonia.com/climate-goals.

16. How many shipping containers with Patagonia products are sent
to the U.S. each year?
That information is not readily available.

17. What type of fuel is used to power the engines of the container
ships from Patagonia products?
4% of our total carbon footprint comes from the transportation of
our products. We are a part of the Aspen Shipping Decarbonization
Initiative to address the challenge of maritime shipping
decarbonization, Read more about it here: https://
www.aspeninstitute.org/blog-posts/companies-aim-to-use-only-zero-
carbon-ocean-shipping-by-2040/.

Questions for the Record

Gilbert Campbell

Founder and CEO

Volt Energy Utility and Volt Energy

the honorable kathy castor
1. Climate change is both a crisis and an opportunity. How would
federal investment in the transition to a clean energy economy help
businesses like yours make clean energy more affordable, reliable, and
accessible for all Americans?
Thank you for the question Chairwoman Castor. Federal investments
in the transition to clean energy will accelerate the decarbonization
of our electricity system and help firms like Volt Energy Utility
deliver clean energy that is more affordable, reliable, and accessible
to a variety of stakeholders. An extension of the Investment Tax Credit
(ITC), and incorporating direct pay as an option, provides certainty to
investors and lenders that allows project financing for the solar
projects that we develop in both rural and minority communities.
Additionally, investments in our aging grid infrastructure will allow
for more Americans to have access to affordable, reliable, and
accessible clean energy.

2. There are many cost-effective policy solutions that could be put
in place today to help reduce electricity bills for families while also
reducing carbon pollution. Could you please describe some of the cost-
effective policies you would recommend Congress adopt to expand clean
energy deployment and promote environmental justice?
The climate crisis produces many environmental injustices.
Promoting environmental justice while addressing the climate crisis
requires a multifaceted approach, which we have begun to develop at
Volt Energy Utility.\1\ To address the climate crisis equitably, we
need to make sure that underserved communities have access to the
assets and health benefits of clean energy. The following are examples
of cost-effective policy solutions that would help American families
and especially underserved minority and rural communities:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.voltenergyutility.com/services#environmental-
justice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

National Clean Energy and Sustainability Accelerator:
Referred to as the Greenhouse Gas Reduction fund in Build Back
Better, this strategy is based on the state green bank model
and is critical in addressing the financing issue that plagues
underserved communities.
Not only does the legislation require that 40% of investments from
the accelerator supports communities most effected by climate;
including communities of color, it also:
i. Provides technical support to business leaders to help them
package their projects for financing.
ii. Provides for flexible financing which can help homeowners,
farmers and small businesses who may have resources, but do not have a
high FICO credit rating. They can look at other factors like
consistency of paid utilities to assess credit worthiness.

Improving Affordability and Accessibility of Assets:
The other piece of the asset pie is to make assets more
affordable and accessible, so that there is less need for
financing. Some of these policies include:
i. Tax credits with bonus credits for underserved communities and
communities with high energy burdens
ii. Investments in clean vehicle infrastructure to ensure that
funding reaches communities of color
iii. Energy efficiency loan and grant programs
iv. Consumer incentives for energy efficient appliances

3. How would distributed renewable energy increase the reliability
of electricity for everyday Americans?
Distributed renewable energy is an extremely effective way to
increase the reliability of electricity for everyday Americans. The
extreme weather events amplified by the climate crisis are causing
power outages that have serious health and financial implications to
American families. Distributed renewable energy has demonstrated the
potential to be more resilient, reliable, and in many cases more
affordable, all while decreasing carbon emissions. For example,
distributed solar energy has been found to enhance grid reliability,
redundancy, and resilience. Community benefits include increasing
utility cost savings, reducing peak loads, improving the accuracy and
response times to outages with smart inverter technology, as well as
increasing community's adaptability and independence following a
disturbance.

4. How could inaction on climate change lead to increased
electricity bills for Americans?
Between 2000--2009 the annual average cost of U.S. climate
disasters was around $54 billion (according to NOAA). Between 2010--
2019 the average was about $85 billion. Last year alone, we had $99
billion in climate-related disasters and this year we are on track to
break that record. While our nation is working our way out of a
pandemic that has wreaked havoc on our economy, we cannot afford for
our economy to continue to take the additional hits from disasters
stemming from climate change. This trend is not sustainable and we have
the ability to make the investments to curb these costs. A weakened
economy from climate inaction will absolutely lead to increased
electricity bills for Americans. In Texas, the deadly power outages in
February caused by the deep freeze, left 4.5 million Americans without
power for several days. Many Texas residents incurred astronomical
electricity bills along with the loss of food, productivity, and other
costs associated with a prolonged power outage. Additionally, while the
burdens of costs will be felt across American communities, there will
be a disproportionate impact on communities that reside in substandard
homes with limited energy efficiency. As we experience more high heat
and high cold days, those community members will be forced to spend
more to maintain safe temperatures in homes.

5. How has the solar industry worked to ensure that its supply
chain is free of forced labor and other human rights concerns?
Ensuring that there is an ethical supply chain is of the utmost
importance to the U.S. solar industry. Our country's transition to
renewable energies also provides an opportunity to create energy
systems that primarily consider environmental health and equity. For
example, selecting mining sites for metals needed to produce renewable
technology can be assessed with biodiversity and habitat conservation
in mind to protect the lands and waters revered by indigenous
communities, and shared by other Americans.
I am proud to be a Board Member of the Solar Energy Industries
Association (SEIA), who has been a leader in working to stamp out the
force labor and other human rights issues in the solar supply chain.
Volt Energy Utility was one of over 300 firms that signed SEIA's Forced
Labor Prevention Pledge.\2\ SEIA also led the development of an
industry-led solar supply chain traceability protocol used as a tool
for identifying the source of primary raw materials and inputs and
tracking their incorporation into finished products, including solar
modules.

--------------
\2\ https://www.seia.org/sites/default/files/
Solar%20Industry%20Forced%20Labor%20Prevention%20Pledge%20Signatories.pd
f.

the honorable a. donald mceachin
Mr. Campbell, thank you again for appearing today and for your
continued work to ensure equity and diversity as we continue to move
towards a zero-carbon future.
As you know, I also share a passion for environmental justice.
Low-income and minority communities, those that have been
disproportionally impacted by pollution and have already seen the
effects of climate change, must be a part of the coming energy
transition. And importantly, these communities must be brought to the
table as partners as we move towards a net-zero carbon economy.

1. Mr. Campbell, can you speak to the work you're doing and how
industry can employ innovative solutions, like Volt Energy Utility's
Environmental Justice Power Purchasing Agreement, to ensure these
communities are partners in the transition?
Communities relegated into marginalized positions due to systems of
inequity should be centered in our country's energy transition to
renewables. This ensures equity is built in at the onset of a robust
renewable energy system. Centering marginalized communities, such as
communities of color and low-income communities, also allows for a
diverse array of perspectives and solutions to be advanced across
communities, which can promote efficacious programs. Volt Energy
Utility has designed the EJPPA to serve the dual purpose of assisting
corporate clients to meet and exceed their clean energy milestones and
fulfill their commitment to support programs that increase
opportunities for underserved communities to benefit from the expanding
clean energy economy. The primary funding mechanism established to
identify, evaluate and determine which clean energy-focused causes to
support is the Environmental Justice Community Impact Fund.
For more information about Volt Energy Utility's Environmental
Justice PPA, please visit here: https://www.voltenergyutility.com/
services.

2. What role do you believe Historically Black Colleges and
Universities and other Minority Serving Institutions can play?
At Volt Energy Utility, we value supporting the next generation of
sustainability practitioners. We also value diversifying the
sustainability sector, to enrich perspectives and spur innovation. The
opportunity to include HBCU's in this work is ample, because these
students already bring interdisciplinary thinking to environmental
issues--as they naturally combining social, economic, and other
frameworks in environmental conversations. Cultivating HBCU students'
interests and natural abilities to consider how different systems
intersect, would create new sustainability leaders that are ready to
tackle the complex environmental challenges of our times. These
institutions are critical in advancing a clean energy system and
promoting healthy and sustainable communities.

Questions for the Record

David Edsey

Climate Director, Technical Underwriting

Zurich North America

the honorable kathy castor
1. Why do insurers and reinsurers support federal climate
investment in both emissions reduction and resilience?
As noted in my written testimony, climate change poses an array of
challenges potentially impacting every aspect of our society and
economies across the globe. From an insurance coverage perspective,
many geographical areas and assets may simply become uninsurable if
action is not taken to eliminate greenhouse gas emissions and
strengthen and adapt our infrastructure.
Secondly, the evidence shows that investing in pre-disaster
mitigation can limit losses, accelerate recovery, and is overall
responsible budgeting. Zurich's own post-event studies, conducted after
significant flood, drought and wildfire events, shows that every $1
spent on resiliency up front resulted in $5 savings post-disaster. In
addition to our own analysis, National Institute of Building Science's
(NIBS) Mitigation Saves Report , confirms our assessment and, in some
cases shows an even stronger cost benefit ratio.
Zurich's has identified climate change as perhaps the most
consequential and complex risk facing society today. It is
intergenerational, international, and interdependent. We know that
accumulated greenhouse gas emissions in our atmosphere have already
caused average surface temperatures to increase 1.1+C since the second
half of the 19\th\ Century, resulting in sea level rise, drought,
glacier loss, wildfires, and more frequent and severe weather-related
catastrophes. These adverse impacts pose a heightened risk not only to
the insurance industry but to our entire economy. Without comprehensive
federal action to address both emissions reductions and resilience, the
risk of continued warming and a disorderly transition to face a more
severe climate are only amplified.

2. What steps should the federal government take to support
sustainable, resilient, insurable communities?
Zurich believes that creating sustainable and resilient communities
will take the combined efforts of individuals, businesses, and
government at all levels. That noted, we urge Congress to continue
investing in pre-disaster mitigation. Beyond the investment itself,
Congress should require that federal agencies consider climatological
projections and the impact of climate change in the development,
planning, and design stages of federally funded projects.
Congress should incentivize the development and enforcement of
modern, consensus-based building codes; encourage sound land use
planning; and ensure transportation networks are interconnected and
appropriately sized to reduce vulnerability. Congress should also
incentivize the use of industry best practices and standards that go
beyond consensus-based codes, particularly in high-risk areas or to
meet a specific need or peril. Congress could provide tax incentives to
individuals and business to take steps to harden or fortify their homes
and businesses. Further, Congress should provide support to local
governments and utilities to strengthen and fortify critical
infrastructure against the increased risks of climate change.
the honorable a. donald mceachin
1. The price of natural disasters is increasing, particularly flood
related events, which have cost the nation over $900 billion since
2000. The federal government is working to get a handle on the rising
costs through new mitigation programs, increased investments in
resilient infrastructure and transportation programs and through the
National Flood Insurance Program. What are some innovative ways Zurich
is working with communities to drive costs down to prevent economic
devastation and avoid future losses?
Zurich recently announced a collaboration, through Zurich's
charitable foundation, with Resilient Cities Network to create a multi-
year program designed to strengthen climate resilience and help address
social inequities in vulnerable communities in Houston and Boston.
Zurich has committed $3 million to the program. Resilient Cities
Network will identify neighborhoods and bring together community and
government partners for the program. The program is expected to attract
additional funding and generate policy support, which together will
amplify successful, resilience-building projects. While the initial
focus is on Houston and Boston, the program will expand to scale best
practices in other cities, building urban resilience throughout the
United States.
The Resilient Cities announcement is an extension or our Flood
Resilience Alliance , which was launched in 2013. The Flood Resilience
Alliance is a multi-sector partnership focusing on finding practical
ways to help communities strengthen their resilience to floods. In
2020, we further extended the program through 2024 with the goal to
increase third-party investments dedicated to pre-event resilience by
$1 billion.

References Page

--------------------
\i\ http://2021.nibs.org/files/pdfs/NIBS_MMC_MitigationSaves_2019.pdf.
\ii\ https://floodresilience.net/zurich-flood-resilience-alliance/.

[all]
