- MAKING THE CASE FOR CLIMATE ACTION: CREATING NEW JOBS AND CATALYZING ECONOMIC GROWTH

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MAKING THE CASE FOR CLIMATE ACTION:
CREATING NEW JOBS AND CATALYZING ECONOMIC GROWTH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 20, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-3

www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

44-754                   WASHINGTON : 2021

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CLIMATE CRISIS
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

KATHY CASTOR, Florida, Chair
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana,
JULIA BROWNLEY, California             Ranking Member
JARED HUFFMAN, California            GARY PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         BUDDY CARTER, Georgia
MIKE LEVIN, California               CAROL MILLER, West Virginia
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
------
Ana Unruh Cohen, Majority Staff Director
Marty Hall, Minority Staff Director
climatecrisis.house.gov

C O N T E N T S

----------

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Page
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and Chair, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................     3
Hon. Garrett Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Select Committee on the
Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     4
Hon. Doris Matsui, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California, prepared statement, submitted for the record by Ms.
Castor.........................................................    65

WITNESSES

Hon. Philip N. Bredesen, Executive Chairman of the Board,
Clearloop Corporation; and Former Governor, State of Tennessee
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Prepared Statement...........................................     8
Paul Lau, CEO and General Manager, Sacramento Municipal Utility
District (SMUD)
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Prepared Statement...........................................    12
Leticia Colon de Mejias, Founder, Energy Efficiency Solutions;
Policy Co-Chair, Building Performance Association; and
President, Green Eco Warriors
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Prepared Statement...........................................    18
Heather Reams, Executive Director, Citizens for Responsible
Energy Solutions (CRES)
Oral Statement...............................................    25
Prepared Statement...........................................    26

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Press release from SEIA, ``Solar Companies Unite to Prevent
Forced Labor in the Solar Supply Chain,'' submitted for the
record by Ms. Castor...........................................    54
Fact sheet from the Obama Administration's White House Council on
Economic Advisors, FACT SHEET: The Recovery Act Made The
Largest Single Investment In Clean Energy In History, Driving
The Deployment Of Clean Energy, Promoting Energy Efficiency,
And Supporting Manufacturing, submitted for the record by Ms.
Castor.........................................................    54
Letter from the Outdoor Business Climate Partnership to the
Select Committee in support of April 15, 2021 hearing,
submitted for the record by Ms. Castor.........................    54
Letter from the We Mean Business Coalition to President Biden in
support of U.S. climate target, submitted for the record by Ms.
Castor.........................................................    55
Letter from environmental groups to Congressional leadership on
economic recovery legislation, submitted for the record by Ms.
Castor.........................................................    55
Letter from the Solar Energy Industry Association (SEIA) to Chair
Castor regarding the Select Committee's April 20, 2021 hearing,
submitted for the record by Ms. Castor.........................    63
Report from Rhodium Group, ``Pathways to Build Back Better: Jobs
from Investing in Clean Electricity,'' submitted for the record
by Ms. Castor..................................................    64

APPENDIX

Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Hon. Philip N.
Bredesen.......................................................    66
Questions for the Record from Hon. Garret Graves to Hon. Philip
N. Bredesen....................................................    67
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Paul Lau......    67
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Leticia Colon
de Mejias......................................................    70
Questions for the Record from Hon. Garret Graves to Leticia Colon
de Mejias......................................................    74

MAKING THE CASE FOR CLIMATE ACTION:
CREATING NEW JOBS AND CATALYZING
ECONOMIC GROWTH

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 20, 2021

House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 12:01 p.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Kathy Castor [chairwoman of the committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Castor, Bonamici, Brownley,
Huffman, McEachin, Levin, Casten, Escobar, Graves of Louisiana,
Palmer, Carter, Miller, and Gonzalez of Ohio.
Ms. Castor. All right. Good afternoon. The committee will
come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time. As a reminder, members participating in a
hearing remotely should be visible on the camera throughout the
hearing.
As with in-person meetings, members are responsible for
controlling their own microphone. Members can be muted by
staff, but only to avoid inadvertent background noise.
In addition, statements, documents, or motions must be
submitted to the electronic repository, to

[email protected]
.
gov.
Finally, if any members or witnesses have any technical
problems, please inform the committee staff immediately.
And thanks again for being here today. Thanks for joining
this hearing remotely. We all look forward to getting back to
normal. It is a little bit down the road, but we all look
forward to that time.
Last week, we discussed the physical, economic, and health
impacts of the climate crisis and the escalating costs of
inaction.
Today, we are looking at the benefits for our country and
workers, all of the benefits that come with solving the climate
crisis.
So I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
Well, happy Earth Week, and happy U.S. Climate Action Week.
I am inspired by the growing consensus across the economy,
across the entire country, for clean energy solutions and jobs.
Whether it is public health experts, union leaders,
investors, scientists, farmers, or executives at America's
largest companies, we have grown an enormous coalition that is
ready to solve the climate crisis.
Just last week, some of America's largest employers,
including Walmart, McDonald's, Target, Starbucks, and hundreds
of other businesses and investors, announced their support for
an ambitious new target to reduce our carbon emissions over the
next decade.
In just a couple of days, President Biden will unveil that
new target as he welcomes global heads of state to his Leaders
Summit on Climate and urges other countries to go farther and
faster.
America is ready not only to rejoin the global effort to
keep global climate impacts in check, but lead again. Why?
Because we know we can create millions of jobs and economic
opportunities across America.
Last week, we held a very important hearing on the cost of
failing to act on the climate crisis. So it is only fitting
that today's hearing will focus on the enormous economic
benefits of climate solutions.
Building a clean economy will create millions of good-
paying jobs across every ZIP Code in America, it will jump-
start our economic recovery, and ensure that we can compete in
a world that increasingly runs on clean technologies. Plus, it
will strengthen our resilience while helping reduce costs to
our communities and our neighbors back home.
I cannot overstate the importance of reducing those risks
and costs. Eleven years ago today, an oil rig operated by BP in
the Gulf of Mexico exploded, killing 11 people and ultimately
gushing 4 million barrels of oil into Gulf waters.
The BP Deepwater Horizon oil disaster cost over $60 billion
to clean up. It cost Florida billions of dollars in lost
tourism revenue.
And I had to look those business owners, mom-and-pop shops
on the coast, in the eye during this disaster as that gushed
day after day into the Gulf and really hurt our economy as we
were trying to recover from the Great Recession.
It became a very painful reminder of the need to move to
cleaner energy sources instead of waiting for the next disaster
to strike.
It is time we put Americans to work unleashing that
potential, which will help us avoid those type of catastrophes.
That is what the Democrats on this committee proposed last year
in our Climate Crisis Action Plan. And, according to an
independent analysis of our Action Plan, we could save
Americans more than a trillion dollars annually by 2050 by
solving the climate crisis.
That is because switching to cleaner sources of energy will
unleash enormous economic benefits and health benefits for
America's families. And we can build that future by employing
millions of workers and ensuring they have safe working
conditions and family-sustaining wages.
We have a lot of work to do. Whether it is laying new
transmission lines, replacing lead pipes, or plugging millions
of abandoned oil wells, we will make sure that those job
opportunities go to our middle-class workers.
We can also revitalize the American manufacturing sector
through smart investments and 21st century technologies,
including electric vehicle chargers and batteries that will
power school buses, postal trucks, and more.
Congress has an opportunity to grow jobs across the country
as we advance President Biden's American Jobs Plan.
By invoking America's can-do spirit, rolling up our sleeves
to solve the climate crisis, we will help ourselves, and we
will help the rest of the world.
The United States has emitted more carbon pollution than
any other country in history, accounting for 25 percent of
historical emissions.
While we have cut emissions in recent years, we know from
climate science that we need to do more and invent and
manufacture the technologies in the USA to provide the
solutions to the world.
Today, we have a great slate of witnesses who will
highlight the ways we can do that, reducing pollution, driving
economic growth, and creating good-paying jobs for all
Americans.
I look forward to today's discussion.
At this point, I will recognize Ranking Member Garret
Graves for his opening statement.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
[The statement of Ms. Castor follows:]

Opening Statement of Chair Kathy Castor

Hearing on ``Making the Case for Climate Action:
Creating New Jobs and Catalyzing Economic Growth''

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

April 20, 2021

As prepared for delivery

Welcome everyone. And happy U.S. Climate Action Week! I'm so
inspired by the level of support we've seen across the economy for
clean energy solutions and jobs.
Whether it's public health experts, union leaders, investors,
scientists, farmers, or executives at America's largest companies,
we've grown an enormous coalition that is ready to solve the climate
crisis. Just last week, some of America's largest employers--including
Walmart, McDonald's, Target, and Starbucks--announced their support for
an ambitious new target to reduce our emissions over the next decade.
In just a couple of days, President Biden will unveil that new target,
as he welcomes global heads of state to his Leaders Summit on Climate.
America is ready not only to rejoin the global effort to keep climate
impacts in check but lead again. Why? Because we can create millions of
jobs and economic opportunities across America.
Last week, we held an important hearing on the costs of failing to
act on the climate crisis. So it's only fitting that today's hearing
will focus on the enormous economic benefits of climate solutions.
Building a clean economy will create millions of good-paying jobs
across every zip code in America. It will jump-start our economic
recovery and ensure we can compete in a world that increasingly runs on
clean technologies. And it will strengthen our resilience while helping
reduce costs to our communities.
I can't overstate the importance of reducing those risks and costs.
Eleven years ago today, an oil rig operated by BP in the Gulf of Mexico
exploded, killing 11 people and ultimately gushing 4 million barrels of
oil into Gulf waters. The BP oil disaster cost over $60 billion dollars
to clean up. It cost Florida billions in lost tourism revenue. And it
became a painful reminder of the need to move to cleaner sources of
energy, instead of waiting for the next disaster to strike.
It's time we put Americans to work unleashing that potential, which
will help us avoid future catastrophes. That's what the Democrats on
this committee proposed last year in our Climate Crisis Action Plan.
According to an independent analysis of our Action Plan, we could save
Americans more than a trillion dollars annually by 2050 by solving the
climate crisis. That's because switching to cleaner sources of energy
will unleash enormous economic benefits for America's families,
including health benefits. As we build that future, we'll employ
millions of workers and ensure they have safe working conditions and
family-sustaining wages.
We have a lot of work to do. Whether it's laying new transmission
lines, replacing lead water pipes, or plugging millions of abandoned
oil wells across the United States, we'll make sure those job
opportunities go to our middle-class workers. We can also revitalize
the U.S. manufacturing sector through smart investments in 21st century
technologies, including electric vehicle chargers and batteries that
will power school buses, postal trucks, and more.
Congress has the opportunity to grow jobs across the country, as we
advance President Biden's American Jobs Plan. By invoking America's
can-do spirit, and rolling up our sleeves to solve the climate crisis,
we will help ourselves and the rest of the world. The United States has
emitted more carbon pollution than any other country in history,
accounting for 25% of historical emissions. While we've cut emissions
in recent years, we know from climate science that we need to do even
more, and invent and manufacture the technologies in the U.S.A. to
provide solutions to the rest of the world.
Today, we have a great slate of witnesses who will highlight the
ways we can do that, reducing pollution, driving economic growth, and
creating good-paying jobs for all Americans.
I look forward to today's discussion.

Mr. Graves. All right. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate
it.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today and
the members of our committee.
I also want to remind, as our chair did last week, that our
colleague, Dan Crenshaw, remains in, I guess, in the after-
treatment for his eye issue. And I would just urge all of you
please keep him in your prayers for his full recovery.
Madam Chair, creating American jobs, charting a path for a
clean energy future, reducing emissions should be something
that all of us on this committee, regardless of party
affiliation, ideologies, should be supportive of.
Let me say that again. Job creation, creating jobs here in
America, reducing emissions, charting a path of an America-
based resource, clean energy future is something that we should
all agree upon.
But we also have to keep in mind, in order to realize some
of the benefits that you just cited, this is not something that
we can solely do domestically. This truly is a global issue.
These are global emissions. The emissions must be reduced
across the globe, not just those in the United States.
There are two primary kind of path components that we need
to be very thoughtful of as we move forward. We have got to
develop the innovative energy technologies. And, Madam Chair,
you even cited the innovation of this sort of American spirit
that we have here, where we are able to create these
technologies, where we can create an environment where we let
innovators innovate.
But we have got to do it in a way that protects the
intellectual property, that grounds the jobs in the United
States and doesn't export them overseas, that doesn't allow for
this pirating or theft of our intellectual property, of our
innovative ideas.
We have got to incentivize our workers here to be able to
create and retain the jobs here. We have got to ensure that the
technologies are cost competitive, that they are exportable,
because only then will we actually see this global reduction.
Secondly, we have got to develop and utilize American
resources. Madam Chair, I noted at the last hearing that,
through 2050, we are going to see a 40 percent increase in
global demand for natural gas, for example.
As we have cited from the National Energy Technology Lab's
analysis, U.S. natural gas has a much lower emissions profile
than that of other countries.
And so, if there is going to be a 40 percent increase in
demand globally, let's ensure that that demand is met by U.S.
resources. Let's ensure, as we continue blazing trails and
being the global leader in reducing emissions, it is based upon
U.S. resources.
The Federal Government doesn't do a lot of things well. It
is a very large organization. There is a lot of red tape
involved. The last thing we need to have the Federal Government
doing is picking technological winners and losers.
If we can reduce emissions through unconventional means,
then we should be reducing emissions and pursuing clean energy
strategies regardless of the source. And I am concerned that
some of the paths forward, trying to have the Federal
Government choosing technological winners and losers--and I
only have to cite examples such as Solyndra--as to why that
doesn't make sense for America and for American taxpayers.
Madam Chair, we have often talked about and I have heard
many people on this committee cheer the successful outcome of
the Paris Accords. I want to remind everyone, the Paris Accords
codify a global increase in emissions. We are all here talking
about reducing emissions. We should not be celebrating global
accords that result in the emissions actually going in the
wrong direction.
And that is why I was very excited that Secretary Kerry was
engaging, for example, China, that has increased emissions four
times for every one ton--four tons for every one ton we have
reduced here in America.
Madam Chair, in closing, I have cited some of the lessons
learned in terms of flawed paths forward that have resulted in
lessons learned from us, the Federal Government, not picking
winners and losers, making sure the global accords reduce
emissions, and I have got to point out one other.
Even in the infrastructure package that is being proposed--
and I know that all of us on this committee support
infrastructure--a recent analysis by the National Association
of Manufacturers has indicated that is actually going to result
in a million job losses in just the first 2 years and projected
to result in a loss of 600,000 American jobs each year for 10
years following.
So, Madam Chair, we have got to make sure that we are
pursuing this in a way that is going to result in jobs not just
being created, but being retained here in the United States.
Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Without objection, members who wish to enter opening
statements into the record have 5 business days to do so.
Now I would like to welcome our witnesses. We have a great
panel today. This is a panel that is going to provide us with
great insight on how we can create jobs and catalyze economic
growth as we move forward on climate solutions.
First, the Honorable Phil Bredesen is the former Governor
of Tennessee, the former Mayor of Nashville, and a successful
entrepreneur. He founded Silicon Ranch, one of the largest
solar independent power producers in the country.
Governor Bredesen is now the Executive Chairman of
Clearloop Corporation, a startup in Nashville that partners
with companies to offset their emissions by building new solar
projects in American communities that are looking for new
economic development opportunities.
Next, Mr. Paul Lau, highly recommended from our colleague,
Congresswoman Doris Matsui of Sacramento. He is the CEO and
General Manager of the Sacramento Municipal Utility District.
He was previously the utility's Chief Grid Strategy and
Operations Officer, where he managed power supply and
distributed energy resources. Mr. Lau is also a board member of
the Electric Transportation Community Development Corporation.
SMUD has a long history of innovation. And, again,
Congresswoman Matsui is so proud to represent you all in the
Congress.
Ms. Leticia Colon de Mejias is the founder and CEO of
Energy Efficiency Solutions, a Connecticut-based small business
providing energy conservation services. She also is the Policy
Co-chair of the Building Performance Association and the
founder of Green Eco Warriors, a nonprofit focused on
environmental education for young people.
Finally, Ms. Heather Reams is the Executive Director of
Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions, a nonprofit
organization that engages policymakers and the public on
energy, economic, and environmental security issues. She is
also the Chair of the National Clean Energy Week, which is an
annual forum for discussions around innovative technologies and
policies.
Without objection, the witnesses' written statements will
be made part of the record.
With that, Governor Bredesen, you are now recognized to
give a 5-minute presentation of your testimony. Welcome.
And don't forget to unmute.

STATEMENTS OF THE HONORABLE PHILIP N. BREDESEN, EXECUTIVE
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, CLEARLOOP CORPORATION, FORMER GOVERNOR,
STATE OF TENNESSEE; PAUL LAU, CEO AND GENERAL MANAGER,
SACRAMENTO MUNICIPAL UTILITY DISTRICT (SMUD); LETICIA COLON DE
MEJIAS, FOUNDER, ENERGY EFFICIENCIES SOLUTIONS; POLICY CO-
CHAIR, BUILDING PERFORMANCE ASSOCIATION; AND HEATHER REAMS,
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CITIZENS FOR RESPONSIBLE ENERGY SOLUTIONS
(CRES)

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE PHILIP N. BREDESEN

Mr. Bredesen. You would think by this point I would know
that.
I would say, first of all, thank you, Chair Castor, Ranking
Member Graves, and each of the select committee members for the
invitation to be here today.
Policy debates in the public sector seem to always be
surrounded by a lot of noise and irrelevant information. It is
the nature of the beast. But climate action seems to attract
even more than most.
As a former governor, I sympathize with the challenge that
members of the committee face, taking a complex issue like this
and cutting through the noise to try to understand the big
shapes.
In my testimony today, I want to describe what I believe to
be two of those big shapes in this issue.
The first one is this: the urgent need to better focus our
efforts. I respectfully say to everyone who cares about climate
action that we need to stop chasing every glittering idea and
instead ask ourselves a question: Where is the low-hanging
fruit? Where is the first place to go?
I believe that question has an answer, and that is the
lowest-hanging fruit is the generation of electricity in this
country. Power generation, even after all the progress we have
made with renewables and with natural gas, still creates 25
percent of all greenhouse gas emissions in the United States.
To put that in perspective, our grid today produces more
greenhouse gases than every car on the road and every airplane
in the sky in America. The rise of electric cars and the power
demand that follows will put an even bigger strain on this
grid.
The electric grid is an enormous opportunity for
decarbonization. The tools are already in place. The technology
is mature. The economics makes sense. Renewable energy has been
around a while. It is no longer this year's show horse. But it
really is the workhorse that we need right now to get started
in a serious way.
The second big shape is simply the one that the select
committee is addressing, that climate action is a potent tool
for economic development and job creation. A coalition built
around legislative and regulatory action to compel climate
action, I believe, is too narrow for us to get the job done
today.
Fortunately, there is a broader one waiting to be built
around creating jobs, creating new tax base, and opportunities
for the next generation of entrepreneurs. I think the challenge
we have is to convince skeptics that the economic benefits are
real and they are not just talking points.
Solar generation is a good example. By its nature, it is
highly distributed, with the benefits spread broadly across the
country rather than dotted it in a few places like new
factories would be.
Large tracts of land are needed, and that means rural and
often distressed communities are great candidates for these
investments. In those communities, it creates much- appreciated
local jobs while it is being built. And, once it is built, it
provides tangible local benefits, including, importantly, huge
support for the tax base in these areas for decades to come.
The way that energy is generated in America is really
undergoing a fundamental shift that is going to continue for
decades. In fact, 2020 was the third consecutive year for
record-setting new corporate investment and new renewable
energy projects here in North America. Yet the distribution of
clean energy investments is often disjointed and uneven.
In the United States, the simple fact of turning on the
light can have a significantly bigger carbon impact if you live
in Nashville, Tennessee, for example, than if you live in San
Francisco. That is because the electric grid is broken up into
a number of regions, and they each have a number of different
power sources.
Two years ago, as the chair mentioned, I helped co-found a
startup called Clearloop, with the goal of cleaning up the grid
and expanding access to clean energy by opening up investment
in solar to many more kinds of companies and organizations.
We are shifting the way corporate investments reduce carbon
by trying to bring solar projects to regions of the country
that have the most carbon-intense electric generation. We
believe that doing things this way will achieve deeper and
faster emissions reductions, and also brings good-paying clean
energy jobs and economic investment in regions of the country
that need them.
This week, Clearloop is announcing that Silicon Valley-
based Intuit, Philadelphia's Dropps, Seattle's CoolPerx,
Nashville's NHL team, the Predators, are partnering with us to
help fund the construction of a solar project in Jackson,
Tennessee. That is an area between Memphis and Nashville, in
the heart of rural west Tennessee.
We are just getting started, but what we are proving with
Clearloop is that corporate climate action promotes real
economic investment in communities who are looking to attract
investment and talent. And I believe that, if we focus and use
this change to build American infrastructure where it is most
needed, we can help the American people, we can help our
nation, and we can help our planet.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Bredesen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Philip N. Bredesen, Executive Chairman of
Clearloop Corporation and Former Tennessee Governor

Before the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

``Making the Case for Climate Action:
Creating New Jobs and Catalyzing Economic Growth''

Tuesday, April 20, 2021 12:00 p.m. ET

First, thank you Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves and each of
the Select Committee members for the invitation to be here today.
Policy debates in the public sector seem to be always surrounded by
a lot of noise and irrelevant information--it's the nature of the
beast--but climate action seems to attract even more than most. As a
former Governor, I sympathize with the challenge you face: to take a
complex issue like this, cut through the noise and try to see the
underlying big shapes.
In my testimony today, I want to step back with you and describe to
you what I believe to be a couple of those big shapes.
The first one is this: the urgent need to better focus our effort.
I respectfully say to everyone who cares about climate action: stop
chasing every glittering new idea and instead ask a question. There's a
lot of ideas around, but which of them will really make a difference?
Where's the low-hanging fruit?
That question has an answer: The lowest-hanging fruit is the
generation of electric power. Power generation, even after all the
progress we've made with renewables and conversion to natural gas in
the past decade, still creates 25% of all greenhouse gas emissions in
the United States.\1\ To put that in perspective, American power
generation produces more greenhouse gases than every car on the road
and every airplane in the sky. Half-again as much. The coming boom of
electric cars and the power demand that follows will make the carbon
emissions from our power sector even worse.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-
emissions-and-sinks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The electric grid is an enormous opportunity for decarbonization
and an easy one to clean up with the tools that are already in place.
The technology is mature--nobody has to invent anything. Solar panels,
for example, are efficient, easy to manufacture and continue to get
better. And the economics are there also: solar power today is the low-
cost alternative. Renewable energy has been around a while; it's no
longer this year's show-horse. But it's what we need right now: a
genuine workhorse we can ask and trust to do the job.
The second big shape is simply the one that this Select Committee
is addressing: that climate action is a potent tool for economic
development and job creation. In business terms, climate action
shouldn't be thought of as a cost center, but as a revenue and profit
center. A coalition built around legislative and regulatory action to
compel climate action is too narrow. Fortunately, there's a far broader
one waiting to be built around creating jobs, a new tax base, and
opportunities for the next generation of entrepreneurs. The challenge
we have is to convince skeptics that the economic benefits are real and
not just talking points.
While there are many opportunities to create jobs and wealth
through climate action, renewable energy can be particularly effective
in this regard. Solar generation is a good example: by its nature it is
highly distributed, with the benefits spread broadly across the country
rather than being dotted in a few places like new factories. It needs
large tracts of land that are not too expensive, and that means rural
and often poorer communities are great candidates for these
investments. In those counties, it creates much appreciated local jobs
while it is being built--a large-scale solar facility might use 500 or
600 workers during its construction.
Once a solar project is built, it provides tangible local benefits
for decades. The good news is that clean energy has been on the rise
year over year over the past decade. In fact, after leaving the
governor's office a decade ago, I helped found a company, Silicon
Ranch, that today boasts over 1 GW of owned and operated solar projects
across the U.S.
With Silicon Ranch, we built solar farms across the South where
they oftentimes become the largest taxpayer in the county the day they
open. In some of these communities, a solar power plant is the first
substantial industrial investment in generations. The taxes the project
pays go directly to badly-needed new investments, as a solar plant uses
few public services--it adds no costs to law enforcement, or fire
protection, or the school system. This led to a county giving its
teachers a raise as a direct result of the new tax revenues produced by
the solar project investment.
In Georgia, Governor Kemp, a conservative Republican who has
expressed deep skepticism about global warming, has come to several of
our announcements. He comes because he's seen how these clean energy
projects are boosting some of the poorer rural counties in his state.
His economic development team prioritizes solar development in Georgia
for precisely this reason.
The way in which energy is generated in America is undergoing a
fundamental shift that will continue for decades. Clean energy growth
has been fueled by private sector investment with large tech companies
and manufacturers becoming the largest purchasers of renewable energy
projects through Power Purchase Agreements. In fact, 2020 was the third
consecutive year for record-setting corporate investment in new
renewable energy projects in North America.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://rebuyers.org/deal-tracker/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet, the distribution of clean energy investments is often
disjointed and uneven. In the United States, the simple act of turning
on the lights or plugging in your electric vehicle can have a
significantly bigger carbon impact if you live in Nashville, Tennessee,
than if you lived in San Francisco, California. That's because the
electric grid is broken up into several grid regions, all with a
different mix of power sources.\3\ In fact, every megawatt hour of
electricity consumed by the California Delegation's constituents
generates about 500 lbs. CO
2
, while constituents in Chair
Castor's and Ranking Member Graves' districts get hit with almost
double the carbon pollution every time they flip on the lights for the
same amount of time.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/10/28/climate/how-
electricity-generation-changed-in-your-state-
election.html?utm_campaign=Carbon%20Brief%20Daily%20Briefing&utm_content
=
20201029&utm_medium=email&utm_source=Revue%20Daily
\4\ https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2021-02/documents/
egrid2019_summary_tables.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Two years ago, I helped co-found a startup called Clearloop with
the goal of cleaning up the grid and expanding access to clean energy,
starting in our own backyard. After realizing how partisan politics
were corroding common sense action, I partnered with two younger
Tennesseans, who also believed that we shouldn't wait around for others
to help, instead we needed to take matters into our own hands. We
fundamentally believe that the innovation and benefits of new clean
energy investments should reach all communities around our country
equally. We recognized that between tech companies and small
businesses, there are lots of companies that want to take climate
action, but need more ways to invest in these new clean energy
projects.
The world of corporate sustainability is full of well intentioned
people, but many traditional climate solutions have simply nibbled at
the edges of climate change with programs that lack transparency and
bold action. Clearloop partners with companies big and small to offset
their carbon footprint and expand access to clean energy by cleaning up
the grid with the construction of new solar capacity in American
communities otherwise getting left behind. Clearloop is shifting the
way corporate investments reduce carbon by bringing solar projects to
regions of the country with disproportionately carbon-intense
electricity generation (i.e. dirty grids).\5\ We believe doing things
this way will achieve deeper, and faster emissions reductions. It will
also bring good-paying, clean energy jobs, and spur economic investment
in regions of the country that vitally need them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ http://map.clearloop.us/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This week, Clearloop is announcing that Silicon Valley based
Intuit, Philadelphia based Dropps, Seattle based CoolPerx, and
Nashville's NHL team, Nashville Predators are partnering with us to
help fund the construction of a 1 MW solar project in Jackson,
Tennessee. A city nestled in between Memphis and Nashville and at the
heart of rural west Tennessee.
We're just getting started and have a long way to go as a small
startup, but what we're proving with Clearloop is that corporate
climate action can spur real economic investment in communities looking
to attract more investment and talent. By being intentional about where
we are building these solar projects, focusing on decarbonization, but
also an emphasis on distressed communities, these ``unsexy''
infrastructure investments are the vehicle for growing the tax base in
communities, and building workforce development programs for trades
like electricians.
If we focus, and use this change to build American infrastructure
where it's most needed, we can help the American people, our nation and
our planet.
How can Congress help? Here are some practical steps, not
politicized overarching promises or big spends:

Carve out and cap the capital gains taxes for landowners
selling land for clean energy projects.

Allow FERC to reward utilities that publicize their price
for energy for longer than 5 years.

Reward utilities that publicly share the load data for
interconnection and make the queue system public and transparent.

Ms. Castor. Thank you, Governor.
Mr. Lau, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL LAU

Mr. Lau. Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members
of the committee, thank you for holding this important hearing
and for the opportunity to testify.
My name is Paul Lau, and I am the CEO of the Sacramento
Municipal Utility District, or SMUD as we are called.
SMUD is the Nation's sixth-largest community-owned not-for-
profit utility, serving 1.5 million people in and around
Sacramento, California. We have provided world-class
reliability at affordable rates while protecting the
environment for more than 70 years.
We set goals that are more aggressive than the states, and
doing so helped SMUD achieve many important firsts, including
becoming the first large California utility to have at least 20
percent of our energy come from renewables. And, today, our
power supply is 50 percent carbon free.
It is clear to me what we have done to be a leader simply
isn't enough. I am disappointed and disheartened to report that
Sacramento is the fifth-worst city for ozone pollution. Our
children are 30 percent more likely to suffer from asthma than
the average American kid. Thirty percent is unconscionable.
I am proud and excited to announce that our board of
directors has approved a bold and ambitious goal to completely
eliminate carbon emissions from our power supply by 2030
without compromising reliability or affordability. It is the
most ambitious goal of any large utility in the U.S.
But it is much more than that. It is also a roadmap for
others to follow in pursuing the Biden administration's goal of
achieving a clean power sector by 2035, with benefits for all.
To get to zero, we will increase our renewables and battery
storage by 350 percent. We will retire two gas plants and
retool the remaining three. And we will more than double our
investments in energy efficiency and electrifications.
We will continue to support our customer investments in
rooftop solar and batteries, and pioneer new technologies, like
vehicle-to-grid and virtual power plants, because we know our
customers are an important part of the solution.
Our past effort to be good stewards of the environment
shows how decarbonizing will provide benefits for air quality,
the environment, and public health.
Clean energy infrastructure investment is critical, and we
must ensure the economic benefits are felt by all.
We will invest upward of $4.6 billion over the next 9 years
in clean technology jobs, and a healthier, more just future for
generations to come. More importantly, we will make sure no
community is left behind.
SMUD's plan will create thousands of jobs in the growing
clean sector. Some ask if we can afford the price tag to do all
this. Our answer is: We can't afford not to.
And we won't do it on the back of our customers. We will
maintain affordable rates that today are about 35 percent lower
than our neighboring utilities, leaving over $800 million in
our local economy each year.
And we must partner with our cities, counties,
policymakers, communities, business leaders, the private
sector, and our customers like never before to align resources
to maximum impact for all.
Now, SMUD, we have a long history of supporting
underresourced communities. We have low-income customers
decarbonized through energy efficiency and rooftop solar, and
we will continue to install EV infrastructure and help
customers borrow zero-emission vehicles in e-mobility hubs in
underresourced communities.
Through our Sustainable Communities programs, we identify
neighborhoods most likely to be underresourced due to the lack
of community development, income, housing, employment
opportunities, and transportation, and we invest in them.
Now, through partnerships, we train folks from those
communities to install electrical, solar, and EV-charging
equipment, providing career training and job placements for
over 200 participants and counting.
Younger generations are eager to help. That is why our
partnerships with universities and junior colleges to support
STEM education are so important, and our STEM scholarships come
with paid internships at SMUD.
SMUD spearheaded the development of the California Mobility
Center, a public-private consortium to accelerate clean,
scalable e-mobility technologies and solutions that are poised
to generate $2.5 billion in economic activities and over 8,500
new jobs over the next 5 years.
I couldn't be more proud of all that SMUD has accomplished
over the years, and I am confident that we can and will deliver
our zero-carbon goal, and we are excited to make Sacramento an
example to follow and a region where climate conscious business
wants to be.
Getting to zero by 2030 is not political. It is simply the
right thing to do for our economy, our children, our
grandchildren, and our planet.
And thank you. I look forward to any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Lau follows:]

Written Testimony of Paul Lau

CEO, Sacramento Municipal Utility District

at the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

Hearing on

``Making the Case for Climate Action:
Creating New Jobs and Catalyzing Economic Growth''

April 20, 2021

Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for holding this important hearing on the economic
development opportunities of climate action and for the opportunity to
testify. SMUD supports the important work of this Committee in
identifying and advancing key recommendations from its 2020
Congressional Action Plan for a Clean Energy Economy, and in continuing
to work towards meaningful policy changes that will unleash the
benefits of climate action.
My name is Paul Lau and I am the CEO of the Sacramento Municipal
Utility District, or SMUD. SMUD is the nation's sixth-largest
community-owned utility, operating on a not-for-profit basis to supply
electricity to California's capital region since 1946. Today, SMUD
serves a population of 1.5 million throughout a service territory of
900 square miles situated in the Sacramento Valley of Northern
California.
We appreciate the opportunity to share our experience creating jobs
and economic growth through climate action. SMUD welcomes the chance to
serve as a resource for members of the Select Committee who may wish to
learn more about our work keeping the lights on 24 hours-a-day, 365
days-a-year for residents and businesses in Sacramento, California
while laser-focused on keeping our rates affordable and our operations
environmentally sustainable with every decision we make.
SMUD powers the region's industries and homes using a generation
mix that today is roughly 50% natural gas, 20% hydropower, and 30%
other renewable energy (solar, wind, distributed energy). We are
governed by a seven-member Board comprised of, and elected by, voters
within Sacramento County. Our business model and local governance mean
we are extraordinarily responsive to the wishes of our customers and
local community. That's one reason why our customers consistently rank
SMUD #1 in J.D. Power's customer satisfaction surveys. As a utility,
reliable service, low rates, and environmental stewardship have long
defined the three-pronged approach SMUD applies in serving our
customers.
The devastating effects of climate change continue to impact our
region. Northern California wildfires that made national news in recent
years burned in counties surrounding Sacramento. SMUD implements robust
vegetation management, inspection and maintenance, facility hardening
and situational awareness programs that help minimize the risk that a
wildfire could spread through our service territory or damage our
equipment, facilities and other assets. Such proactive measures have
helped our customers and our region avoid the sorts of catastrophic
fires that are becoming more prevalent as our region logged some the
hottest summers on record over the past few years.
Still, the American Lung Association's ``2020 State of the Air''
reported Sacramento ranked in the top 5 worst U.S. cities for ozone
pollution. And four of the top five are in California. Children in our
region are 30% more likely to suffer from childhood asthma. Like
wildfires, we view this to be a statewide emergency.
That's why we have moved with urgency to reduce our carbon
footprint. SMUD has consistently set and achieved goals that exceed
California's environmental requirements, which are already among the
most stringent in the nation. SMUD was the first large utility in the
state to reach a 20% renewable portfolio standard in 2010, and our
utility adopted a 33% renewable portfolio standard even before this
became a mandate in California.
In 2018, our locally-elected Board adopted an Integrated Resource
Plan to put SMUD on the path to net-zero emissions by 2040. But even as
we geared up for that transition, our Board made the determination that
it was not enough to meet the gravity of the climate crisis. So, last
year they adopted a Climate Emergency Resolution to accelerate that
goal to 2030. We know it won't be an easy road, but the stakes are too
high to not do everything we can to reach zero as quickly as possible.
It will take a coordinated approach to clean energy policy development,
investment, and engaging customers and other stakeholders to take part.
Today, I am proud to announce that our Board is poised to approve
an ambitious plan to surpass its own net zero goal and completely
eliminate carbon emissions from SMUD's power supply by 2030. This would
make SMUD the first large utility in the U.S. to reach absolute zero
carbon emissions, leading the way in context of the Biden
Administration's goal of achieving a clean power sector by 2035. We
just concluded the public comment period on SMUD's technical plan to
accomplish this, which involves deploying existing clean technology,
innovation, retiring and retooling our natural gas plants, and closely
managing financial impacts.
Getting to zero by 2030 will require SMUD to invest upwards of $4.6
billion over the next 9 years. To put this context, SMUD's average
annual revenue in the 3 years ending 2019 was roughly $1.5 billion. Our
zero carbon investments will impact all of SMUD's operations and engage
our customers as part of the solution. We will increase our renewables
and batteries by 3.5 times our current capacity, retire 25% of our
fossil fueled generators and run the rest on clean fuels, and we will
more than double our investments in energy efficiency and
electrification. We'll continue to support our customers' investments
in rooftop solar and batteries as well as focusing on new technologies
like vehicle to grid or virtual power plants, because our customers are
an important part of the solution to reach zero carbon emissions.
Importantly for me, as an engineer and a SMUD customer, as it is to
all our customers, our 2030 Zero Carbon Plan seeks to eliminate carbon
emissions from our power generation activities without compromising
SMUD's world-class reliability or our commitment to affordability. To
be precise on affordability, that means getting to zero by 2030 while
maintaining rates among the lowest in California, on average 35% lower
than our neighboring utility, which effectively keeps over $800 million
in our local economy. So, we see this as an investment not only in
reliable and resilient clean technology and infrastructure, but also in
jobs and a healthier, safer and more just future for generations to
come.
As the state capital of California, Sacramento's largest employment
sector has historically been federal, state and local government.
However, our region's economy today is more broadly based. Government
and transportation are the largest sectors of employment in the area
followed by information technology and financial services, education
and health services, leisure and hospitality and construction. The
Sacramento region also recently updated its Comprehensive Economic
Development Strategy with the U.S. Economic Development Administration,
which identified the greatest growth potential in three industry
sectors: food and agriculture, life sciences, and future mobility.
SMUD's customer base is among the most socio-economically diverse
in the country. The population we serve is approximately 62% Caucasian,
23% Hispanic/Latinx, 17% Asian, 11% African American, 6% multi-racial
and 1% Native American. Currently, the per capita income in Sacramento
is roughly $32,000, median income is $67,000, with approximately 12.5%
of our population living below the poverty line.
As a community partner for nearly 75 years, SMUD is paying
particular attention to ensure the benefits of our zero-carbon future
are felt across all our communities. We do not want to just ``bring
others along.'' That is why we have already held nearly a dozen
community listening sessions on our 2030 Zero Carbon Plan and are
continuing to seek feedback from local stakeholders. SMUD will continue
to engage with our diverse communities as we implement our plan so that
they are all part of the solution. As we aggressively decarbonize our
power supply, we are striving to empower our communities to work with
SMUD to develop place-based strategies, to make Sacramento communities
more livable, resilient, and prepared to take advantage of a low-carbon
future. We understand from experience that this can only be achieved by
recognizing Sacramento is one of the most diverse cities in the nation
and that we need to develop strategies respecting and building upon our
local, unique qualities.
SMUD's Sustainable Communities program, launched in 2018, builds on
the decades-long work we have done to support under-resourced
communities. We have identified areas in our region that are in
particular need of assistance through a Resource Priorities Map,
developed from analysis of current data indicating neighborhoods most
likely to be under-resourced or in distress due to lack of community
development, income, housing, employment opportunities, and
transportation. SMUD partners with policy makers, transit leaders,
technology companies, health care providers and other community-based
organizations to maximize our impact and collaboration with community
members to help all our communities--from rural to suburban to urban--
to be part of a zero-carbon future.
To this end, SMUD has invested more than $5 million with 130 local
organizations to execute projects aligned with the four pillars of our
Sustainable Communities program: social wellbeing, healthy environment,
prosperous economy and economic wellbeing. These partnerships have
allowed SMUD to establish relationships locally and create a pipeline
to ensure that all communities are included in our zero-carbon future.
One such partnership is with Habitat for Humanity--Greater Sacramento,
through which we have brought solar and new energy solutions to
hundreds of new and existing homes for low-income families, and which
will continue over the next few years. By adding electric vehicle (EV)
charging at many Habitat homes through our partnership, SMUD is
fostering the transition from fossil-fueled based to electric
transportation in our lower income neighborhoods.
SMUD is focusing our community outreach to improve equity in
recruitment and remove barriers many communities face in pursuing zero-
carbon careers. SMUD is helping local partners implement a workforce
development program known as Energy Careers Pathways, which trains
participants in basic installation of electrical, solar, and EV
charging equipment. By the end of 2021, the program will have 125
graduates with a large number of participants hired to perform green
energy jobs. SMUD also provides staff to assist the California
Conservation Corps in running its energy lab which employs and trains
young adults in electrical certifications and EV fast-charging
infrastructure. Similarly, SMUD's energy ``Barons'' program provides
training to individuals in utility trades to develop their community
energy management skills for next-generation facilities management.
These programs have translated into career training and zero carbon
related job placement for over 200 participants, which SMUD sees as
essential to ensure we have a workforce skilled to perform work needed
to achieve Zero Carbon by 2030.
SMUD's education outreach and workforce pipeline efforts aim to
engage students from kindergarten through college in energy-related
topics and STEM disciplines. Through partnerships with universities and
junior colleges, we support a range of STEM education programs and
activities including a leadership program for students at California
State University, Sacramento. We offer paid internships for high school
and college students, and our STEM-focused college scholarships come
with paid internships at SMUD.
Through the California Mobility Center, a public-private consortium
led by SMUD, we are seeking to establish Sacramento as a center of
electric mobility innovation. The California Mobility Center, which
began operations this year, fosters clean, e-mobility technologies and
solutions that can scale and become engines of economic growth. E-
mobility includes on- and off-highway vehicles and refueling and
charging infrastructure supporting autonomous, electric, connected, and
shared/smart mobility.
Recently, the Center was awarded approximately $1.4 million in
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act Grant funds
from the City of Sacramento and a $600,000 grant from the California
Workforce Development Board to provide workforce training to residents
seeking advanced manufacturing careers. The funds have been shared with
La Familia, the Greater Sacramento Urban League, Asian Resources, and
the Sacramento Valley Manufacturing Association and other community
training partners to develop workforce training programs supporting
jobs in advanced manufacturing and mobility industries. Since the
program's startup last year, over 350 participants received job-
readiness or technical training in manufacturing trades, more than 50
secured internships with local companies, and over 30 participants have
been placed in jobs. Many of the students trained in the Energy Career
Pathways program and the California Mobility Center are being placed in
union careers. Representatives of trade unions are brought in as part
of these trainings to evaluate student projects and to perform onsite
interviews.
Workforce training is critical to begin now because demand for
skilled employees in the e-mobility sector is only going to rise. A
recent economic assessment estimates that from 2022-2027 the California
Mobility Center and the companies it draws to the Sacramento region
could generate $2.5 billion in economic activity. The California
Mobility Center's operations during that five-year span could directly
and indirectly support approximately 8,500 new jobs and generate over
$900 million in total annual labor income.
Among these new jobs, the assessment projects that the Mobility
Center and its service provider partners would directly employ
approximately 130 individuals at an average wage of $75,000. Expanding
client companies are expected to add about 1,900 new jobs over the
five-year period. With continued support of partners, an estimated
3,150 trainees and interns will gain job skills development through
Mobility Center programs. Through the multiplier effect, an additional
3,400 indirect and induced jobs and $455.5 million in labor income
could be supported at other local businesses in Greater Sacramento. The
actual level of job and economic impact will depend on the number of
companies that the Mobility Center is able to assist and the extent to
which the new jobs created are in the Sacramento Region, but these
numbers represent the expected scenario. The additional jobs and labor
income at other local businesses stem from indirect and induced impacts
of supplier demand created by the Mobility Center and its clients and
consumer demand created by their employees.
Beyond creation of new jobs, the partnerships SMUD is developing
through the California Mobility Center is helping us realize the direct
benefits of emissions reduction and indirect benefits of lowering fleet
operating costs (contributing to lower rates for our customers). At
SMUD, we have electrified our light duty vehicle fleet 100% and
implemented advanced technologies to reduce idle time and eliminate
emissions from our heavier duty fleet. Currently, 13% of our fleet of
nearly 1,000 vehicle and construction equipment includes an electric
drive or hybrid feature, and we are aiming to accelerate this progress
significantly through 2030. This year, we have partnered with a start-
up, Zeus Electric Chassis, LLC--which established an operational
presence in Sacramento based on its collaboration with the Mobility
Center--to acquire five all-electric class 5 work trucks that will
replace diesel engines in our fleet. Our investment in all-electric
class 5 vehicles is SMUD's first in this medium duty class of vehicles
and the only direct purchase option available from the market today. We
will continue to track the market and advance fleet electrification in
medium and heavy-duty vehicles classes in the future. SMUD expects to
see and acquire all-electric bucket trucks in the next few years and
there may be options for alternative fuel cell technology before 2030
as the market develops and heavy duty lower- or zero-emissions
equipment options mature.
Looking prospectively, SMUD will be identifying new skills needed
and partner with community organizations to develop upskill or entry-
level training programs to support new zero carbon technologies. We
expect to develop customized strategies to attract and retain residents
from under-resourced communities to these stable, economically mobile
careers.
We believe our carbon reduction actions will help counteract the
effects of climate change, but it is much more than that, with even
wider-reaching direct impacts on the health and wellbeing of the
Sacramento region's 1.5 million residents today and for generations to
come.
SMUD has a long track record of working collaboratively with a wide
range of partners and industries to deliver environmental, economic and
social benefits for the Sacramento Region. In the early 2010s, SMUD
successfully installed smart meters across our entire service area as
part of the SmartSacramento smart grid effort. The heavy upfront
investment was offset by a $127.5 million Department of Energy grant,
more than 60% of the total smart-grid grant allotment in California.
SmartSacramento revolutionized the California capital region's power
grid, enabling digital enhancements in home and businesses and on
SMUD's grid to make our power supply more efficient, resilient, and
secure. Importantly, this smart grid technology facilitated integration
of increased renewable energy sources, electric vehicles, rooftop solar
and other distributed energy resources, making it possible to even
contemplate our zero-carbon goal.
As we move forward in our pursuit of zero carbon emissions, our
approach maximizes local investment in renewable energy, with a direct
impact on and improving air quality and health outcomes. It drives
inclusive economic development, creates jobs, and spawns innovation. By
taking a leadership role in addressing climate change, we hope to make
Sacramento an example to follow and a region where climate-conscious
businesses seek to establish roots. For SMUD, and me personally, what
we are doing to get to zero by 2030 is not political; it is simply the
right thing to do.
Again, thank you for your consideration of this important topic and
please do not hesitate to call on SMUD as a resource as this Select
Committee continues its work exploring and developing climate policy
solutions. I look forward to addressing any questions you may have.

Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Ms. Colon de Mejias, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LETICIA COLON DE MEJIAS

Ms. Colon de Mejias. Thank you, Honorable Chair Castor and
Ranking Member Graves and members of the Select Committee on
the Climate Crisis, for allowing me this opportunity to express
the benefits of climate action through sensible and expanded
investments in energy efficiency in homes and buildings across
America.
I am Leticia Colon de Mejias and the owner of Energy
Efficiency Solutions, which I founded in 2010. And, through my
companies, we've provided over 14,000 home energy retrofits and
upgrades in over 10 million square feet of multifamily
properties. Additionally, we provide education and community
engagement on the topics of sustainability and energy and
climate action.
I am also the Policy Co-Chair of the Building Performance
Association, and I am honored to identify policies and
opportunities to advance the energy efficiency industry as we
create work opportunities for Americans across the Nation.
Efficiency provides a benefit to our economy, human health,
grid stability, and environmental justice goals in every state
in the nation, while simultaneously making our country's
building stock more efficient, resilient, safe, and affordable
by reducing energy bills for millions of Americans through
proven home retrofits and demand reduction technologies.
Efficiency does all of this while putting Americans to work in
stable career paths, resulting in national economic growth.
While America is a diverse and innovative, amazing melting
pot of people and solutions, I know that, together, we can
create a responsible, equitable, inclusive, diverse, safe path
forward, which will sustain and grow our nation while
protecting human health and lifting our communities as we move
forward. And, to reach this goal, we must rebuild our nation's
energy grid by implementing the best possible solutions with
the least possible harm to society.
Therefore, it is critical that we invest in expanded
efficiency for homes and buildings across America, because
efficiency is the best path forward to draw down carbon
emissions while creating high return on investment and
generating numerous societal benefits.
Efficiency reaches all communities in the nation, creating
and sustaining local jobs while inclusively lifting
communities, because through energy retrofits we address the
energy crisis while prioritizing basic needs, including safe
shelter, resilient livable shelter, and an affordable energy
and a livable environment for all Americans.
The affordable clean energy future should be built on the
foundation of efficiency, because all roads lead home, and
really no one can get ahead without a safe roof or a bed.
Energy efficiency equals economic growth. Investments in
efficiency result in direct economic stimulus by creating local
jobs, and Congress could provide a robust appropriation for
Federal efficiency programs, because, dollar for dollar,
Federal investments in efficiency create more jobs.
In my written testimony I provided a list of specific
Department of Energy programs that deserve our support from
American taxpayers. These programs continue to provide
significant return on investments over and over.
Unfortunately, there are many low-income households who are
struggling with indoor contaminants, such as mold, asbestos,
and other asthma triggers, which prevent deep energy efficiency
retrofits.
And, so, I suggest that potentially we look at LIHEAP
programs, which could offer opportunities to improve human
health through expanded building retrofits and remediation of
indoor contaminants, which would allow us to draw down demand
in those buildings, not just today, but forever.
Ultimately, efficiency is the most cost-effective way to
draw down carbon emissions and pollution while simultaneously
producing all of these additional societal benefits. Americans
need jobs. In efficiency, we need workers.
Although often overlooked and not seen as very sexy,
efficiency is actually the largest energy sector in the United
States, employing over 2 million Americans, and our industry
was the fastest-growing job sector prior to the pandemic,
employing twice as many workers as the entire fossil fuel
industry.
And in my role at the Building Performance Association, I
hear daily from companies, like my own, across America, that
are looking to hire for open energy efficiency roles. These
contractors want to grow, and that growth requires hiring
qualified people for really good-paying jobs.
This is why legislation, like the Blue Collar to Green
Collar Jobs Act, introduced by Congressman Rush, is so
important, because we need to hire people for jobs, and America
has people who need jobs. Efficiency offers real jobs for real
people.
I myself have seven open roles which we are struggling to
fill at this time due to lack of qualified trained workers. My
starting pay rate is $15 an hour, and these careers offer
rapid-growth opportunities up to $26 an hour plus commission
for people with only a GED, high school diploma, and a few
certificates and training.
Residential efficiency is a critical infrastructure
investment, which is why the Blue Collar to Green Collar Jobs
Act would help bridge this gap. This grant would directly help
small businesses like my own and support on-the-job training
for new and existing employees.
Most importantly, this legislation would give priority to
businesses that recruit employees from local communities,
minorities, women, veterans, and workers transitioning directly
from the fossil fuel industry. It would also support critical
on-the-job training and reskilling for these workers.
We must ensure that funds are accessible to small
businesses and include flexibility for on-the-job training at
small businesses, because, unfortunately, at the Department of
Labor, there is no code for efficiency. So, it has been very
difficult for small businesses like mine to access Federal
grants or state funds, particularly in the residential energy
efficiency sector. And I am hoping this could be addressed
through support to frontline and disadvantaged communities.
And climate change, as we know, poses the greatest threat
to communities who are least prepared to adapt, particularly
low-income populations, working families, and historically
underrepresented groups.
These challenges and issues could all be addressed with
building science and efficiency retrofits, and we can improve
these problems through training and accessible, affordable
training programs, which are critically part of a diverse,
inclusive workforce program.
With access to workforce development and short-term
training programs, struggling Americans can become fully
equipped to fill existing jobs and new careers at small
businesses like my own.
This also helps bolster energy affordability and energy
security, because energy efficiency is one of the most
effective tools to drive cost savings and increase property
value, protecting financial security for Americans, while
reducing energy burdens and making the grid more resilient and
more efficient.
Research shows that 25 percent of all U.S. households are,
unfortunately, facing high energy burdens. For low-income
households, this number rises to 67 percent. Furthermore,
Black, Hispanic, and Native Americans and seniors, as well as
families residing in low-income and multifamily housing,
experience highly disproportionate energy burdens.
We must be inclusive----
Ms. Castor. Ms. Colon de Mejias, can you wrap up quickly?
Thanks.
Ms. Colon de Mejias [continuing]. A hundred percent. Yes,
Chair Castor.
And if we desire to engage this historically
underrepresented population in career opportunities, we must
invest in leveling the education playing field and including
education on energy, science, and STEM skills, while looking
towards protecting public health and creating a robust jobs
program to get America back to work in our building sector.
The time for action is now, and as a small business owner,
I know we can create a responsible, inclusive path forward in
the American economy.
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak here
today.
[The statement of Ms. Colon de Mejias follows:]

Testimony of Leticia Colon de Mejias

CEO of Energy Efficiency Solutions and
Policy Co-Chair of the Building Performance Association

Before the

U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

Hearing Title:

Making the Case for Climate Action:
Creating New Jobs and Catalyzing Economic Growth

April 20, 2021

Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the Select
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
opportunities and benefits of climate action through sensible and
expanded investments in energy efficiency for homes and buildings.
I am Leticia Colon de Mejias, CEO of Energy Efficiency Solutions,
and Policy Co-Chair of the Building Performance Association. I founded
the home performance company Energy Efficiency Solutions (EES) in
Windsor, CT in 2010. My direct service companies, EES, Best Insulation
of Connecticut, and Green Eco Warriors, which I also co-founded, have
completed weatherization and comprehensive energy efficiency upgrades
in over 14,000 Connecticut homes and 10 million square feet of
multifamily properties. Additionally, we have provided educational
outreach and community engagement on the topics of energy conservation,
energy efficiency, climate action, and energy equity in CT, MA, RI, NY,
and CA. We are currently engaged in energy educational efforts in
Chicago.
As Policy Co-Chair of the Building Performance Association, I am
honored to help identify policies and opportunities to advance the
residential energy efficiency industry, which in turn create career
opportunities and improved policy outcomes locally and across the
nation. Energy efficiency provides benefits to our economy, human
health, grid stability, and environmental justice goals in every state
in the nation, while simultaneously making our country's residential
building stock more efficient, resilient, safe, healthy, comfortable,
and affordable by reducing energy bills for millions of Americans
through proven home retrofits and demand reduction technologies. Energy
efficiency does this while putting Americans to work in family
sustaining, stable career paths resulting in national economic growth.
America is a diverse, innovative, and amazing melting pot of people
with unlimited ideas and solutions. I strongly believe that together we
can create a responsible, equitable, inclusive, diverse clean energy
future that will sustain and grow our nation while protecting human
health and lifting our communities. As we rebuild our nation's energy
grid to implement the best possible solutions with the least possible
harm to our society, it is critical that we invest in expanded energy
efficiency for homes and buildings.
Energy efficiency is the best path forward to draw down carbon
emissions and create high return on investments, while also generating
numerous societal benefits. The benefits of efficiency reach all
communities across our nation, creating and sustaining local jobs,
lifting communities by addressing barriers to safe and healthy housing,
improving energy affordability, and mitigating waste and pollution.
Through energy efficiency retrofits we can address the climate crisis
while we prioritize basic needs including safe, affordable, energy
efficient, resilient shelter for all Americans. An affordable, clean
energy future should be built on a foundation of energy efficiency.

ECONOMIC GROWTH

Investments in energy efficiency are a proven job creator and
result in direct economic stimulus. There is a huge opportunity to
simultaneously build a skilled clean energy workforce, support small
businesses, and dramatically improve and decarbonize America's building
stock. According to a recent report from E2 and E4TheFuture, if
Congress directed $60.7 billion to the energy efficiency sector, over a
5-year period it would add $254.7 billion to our nation's economy and
create 737,200 full-time jobs across every region and state.\1\
Investing in a robust workforce of skilled energy efficiency workers
will help power our economic recovery and our nation.\2\
Investing in the nation's energy efficiency and building retrofit
workforce will not only protect and create many jobs, but it will also
help American families save money on utility bills and make their homes
safer and more comfortable, while supporting a sustainable energy
future for the country. These investments can increase purchasing power
for working families and support economic growth and revitalization,
especially for historically disenfranchised communities.\3\
Congress should provide robust appropriations for federal energy
efficiency programs. Dollar for dollar, federal investments in energy
efficiency will create more jobs than investments in the utility sector
or fossil-fuels.\4\ Federal investments in the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) programs that support energy efficiency--like the Building
Technologies Office, Weatherization Assistance Program, and State
Energy Program--consistently result in job creation and economic
growth.
The following programs at DOE deserve the support of American
taxpayers as these programs are proven to provide a significant return
on their investment. When funded they will continue to provide energy
cost relief to households, support American-based industry and American
jobs, strengthen the aging electrical grid, and support national
security goals.

Building Technologies Office (BTO) develops critical
technologies, tools, and solutions that help U.S. consumers and
businesses achieve peak efficiency performance in new and existing
homes and buildings across all sectors of our economy, including
through its important Residential Building Integration (RBI) program.

State Energy Program (SEP) provides funding and technical
assistance to states to enhance energy security, advance state-led
energy initiatives, and maximize the benefits of reducing energy waste.
The Oak Ridge National Laboratory found that every dollar invested in
SEP by the federal government yields over $10 leveraged for energy-
related economic development and realizes $7.22 in energy cost savings
for U.S. citizens and businesses\5\--an excellent return on investment.

Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP) helps low-income
and rural families, seniors, and individuals with disabilities in every
county in the nation make lasting energy efficiency improvements to
their homes. WAP has a proven track record of creating jobs and
contributing to the economy through the program's large supply chain of
vendors, suppliers, and manufacturers. Each dollar that goes toward
weatherization assistance returns $2.78 in non-energy benefits, in
addition to the direct energy cost savings.\6\
In addition, I want to note the importance of the Low-Income
Heating Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) at the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. LIHEAP is a vital program that helps
Americans pay their utility bills. However, this critical program may
also be used to increase home energy efficiency, thus reducing those
bills permanently. To better support low-income communities, LIHEAP
allowable measures and cost per unit should be expanded to remove
barriers to weatherization which would allow long-term solutions to
energy affordability, rather than band aid solutions. Unfortunately,
many low-income households are struggling with indoor health
contaminants such as mold, asbestos, and other asthma triggers. These
programs could offer multiple opportunities to improve human health
through expanded building retrofits.\7\
Ultimately, energy efficiency is one of the most cost-effective
ways to draw down carbon emissions while simultaneously producing all
these added societal benefits.\8\ Addressing our aging infrastructure
through holistic efficiency upgrades will also support a more reliable,
resilient energy system, which is critical to our current and future
economic growth and our national security.

CREATING JOBS

Energy efficiency is the largest energy sector in the U.S.,
employing over 2 million Americans.\9\ Our industry was also the
fastest growing jobs sector in energy prior to the pandemic, employing
twice as many workers as the entire fossil fuel industry.\10\ Energy
efficiency jobs are inherently local and cannot be outsourced, since
upgrading our nation's building stock requires ``boots on the ground.''
These jobs are in every state in the country, across urban and rural
areas, and most of the companies in our industry are small businesses
like mine. Energy efficiency is an economic engine, creating and
sustaining high-quality local jobs and career pathways for the American
workforce.
Like so many industries, ours was hard hit by the pandemic,
resulting in a 10% cumulative workforce loss (338,500 clean energy jobs
were lost between February of 2020 and February 2021).\11\ My company
suffered greatly when the utility-run efficiency programs across
Connecticut shut down on March 15th of 2020. Our work came to a
screeching halt, leaving my staff and I with no way to work until late
June. This was true for all efficiency contractors in my state.
Ultimately, we were able to work with our local Department of Energy
and Environmental Protection leadership to create a safe path forward
to serve the ratepayers of Connecticut. Through a combination of
virtual assessments, new safety protocols, and PPE upgrades, we were
able to successfully get our entire team back to work. Many other
contractors in my state were also able to get back to work, and even
more of us are now looking to grow our teams, companies, and business
offerings.
The pandemic has continued to shine a light on the need to invest
in energy efficiency expansion. As we sheltered in place it became all
too clear that safe, resilient shelters are critically necessary in a
crisis. I see this realization as an opportunity to spark new career
options for displaced workers across our nation by expanding energy
efficiency workforce programs nationally. Crises like the recent grid
collapse in Texas demonstrate why expanded investments in improving
thermal boundaries and increasing home efficiency could increase our
national resilience to extreme weather or other crisis situations that
require people to shelter safely at home. These investments in EE
simultaneously work to lower peak demand, stabilize our energy grids,
and allow that same saved energy generation to be reallocated to
electrification efforts.
To prepare more American workers for quality jobs in energy
efficiency and bolster the economy, Congress should act to support
workforce development and jobs training, by passing the Blue Collar to
Green Collar Jobs Development Act (H.R. 156, 117th Congress, sponsored
by Chairman Rush). The bill includes a vital Energy Workforce Grant
Program that provides grants directly to small businesses to support
on-the-job training for new and existing employees in the energy
efficiency, renewable energy, grid modernization, and other energy
industries. This would significantly help small and medium sized
businesses invest in their employees, allowing workers to expand their
skill set, earn higher wages, and provide improved services and
technologies.
The Blue Collar to Green Collar Jobs Development Act would support
small businesses like mine that are the backbone of the efficiency
industry. Small businesses across our nation need assistance to help
train our new hires and provide ongoing education to existing
employees. We have a real need to ramp up the implementation of
workforce programs to provide support and ensure there are qualified
workers to fill these vital American jobs.
Importantly, the legislation would give priority to businesses that
recruit employees from local communities, minorities, women, veterans,
and workers transitioning from fossil fuel sector jobs--and it would
also support critical on-the-job training and reskilling for these
workers. The bill was passed by the U.S. House of Representatives in
the 116th Congress as part of H.R. 2 and H.R. 4447.
We must ensure that funds and activities to support energy
efficiency workforce development are accessible to small businesses and
include flexibility to use funds for on-the-job training. There is no
Department of Labor code for energy efficiency, so it has been very
difficult to access federal and state funds for energy efficiency
apprenticeship programs, particularly in the residential sector. The
Department of Energy has a much better understanding of this industry
and its support for residential energy efficiency businesses is
crucial. These small businesses are helping to lighten the load on our
national energy grid: we draw down pollution, carbon emissions, and
strengthen our nation's infrastructure, while lowering energy burdens,
and increasing positive health outcomes. Efficiency is simply
efficient.

SUPPORTING FRONTLINE & DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES

Climate change poses the greatest threat to those communities that
are least prepared to adapt--particularly low-income populations,
disabled, elderly, young working families, and historically
underrepresented communities. These communities already experience
disparities in health outcomes, inequities in living conditions, and
often historically lack political power. Such disparities place low-
income communities and many underrepresented communities at greater
risk while limiting capacity to adapt. Many of these same communities
are struggling with energy affordability, barriers to safe and healthy
housing, and financial insecurity. These challenges are all issues
which building science and efficiency retrofits can improve. Equity-
driven energy efficiency can help uplift these frontline communities,
through healthier homes, lower energy bills, improved safety and
increased financial security, all while offering local career
opportunities.\12\

EQUITABLE TRANSITION

Taking climate action through robust investment in energy
efficiency will create skilled jobs and stable career pathways with
opportunities for growth in every state, not just for the moment, but
for the long-term. With access to workforce development and robust
short-term training programs, struggling Americans can become fully
equipped to fill existing jobs and new careers in this emerging clean
energy economy.
At my company for example, all our company managers started out as
entry-level laborers. Over time and with training they developed into
leaders at EES. Our industry boasts employees whose highest educational
degree may be a GED or high school diploma, yet these staff are earning
upwards of $80,000 annually. Furthermore, three past EES employees now
own companies like EES. This is a wonderful demonstration of real
career paths for real Americans, ``Real Jobs for Real People.'' My past
employees are now business owners who are also hiring their own staff
from their own communities. Unfortunately, we are all struggling to
hire people with the skill sets we need. Therefore, it is critical that
Congress supports and budgets for energy efficiency training programs
for small businesses, which will offer the opportunity for Americans to
join us in this amazing work.
We are presented with an unprecedented opportunity to lift
underserved communities by supporting displaced workers, and career
changers, through recruitment and training for careers in energy
efficiency. Supporting employer-based on-the-job (OJT) training
networks can help ensure that the residential home energy retrofit
workforce continues to advance and expand to drive middle class job
growth.\13\ With expanded training we can connect displaced and
transitioning workers, underrepresented populations, and historically
disadvantaged populations to these job opportunities. My company
currently employs 20 staff members, 18 of whom are people of color who
were unemployed or underemployed prior to working at EES. Beyond our
EES staff we also provide work to a network of subcontractors who
represent a diverse group of contractors such as: window installers,
manufacturers, insulators, HVAC contractors, electricians, mold
remediators, solar installers, trainers, marketing teams, community
engagement workers, and sales staff.

Congress can take immediate action to lift energy burdens, strengthen
our energy grid, improve health outcomes, and lift communities by
supporting nationwide investments in residential energy efficiency for
Americans of all income levels by passing the following legislation:

The HOPE for HOMES Act (H.R. 7325/S. 4052, 116th Congress, pending
bipartisan introduction in the House by Representatives Welch and
McKinley) is groundbreaking legislation that will help to support
contractors and homeowner rebates for energy efficiency home upgrades,
including enhanced support for moderate-income and working families
that do not qualify for weatherization assistance.

HOPE for HOMES Training: The legislation allocates $500
million to support small businesses in training their staff to
undertake energy efficiency upgrades. This training is offered on-line
to increase access (even during a pandemic) and allow contractors
around the country to support continued improvement of their staff's
skill sets. It will also increase the general understanding of the
importance of building science and the business opportunities in
improving home performance.

HOPE for HOMES Partial Performance: The ``Partial
Performance Rebate'' is a direct rebate provided to a homeowner for 30%
of the cost of an energy efficiency improvement up to $800 for
installing air-sealing and insulation and rising to $1500 to include
high efficiency HVAC. This is doubled for moderate income families
making less than 80% of median area income.

HOPE for HOMES Full Performance: The full performance
program will be run by State Energy Offices according to building
science driven guidelines -- ensuring the energy savings paid for is
achieved in a manner that most effectively leverages the state's energy
goals and workforce. For the ``Full Performance Incentive'' the rebates
will be 50% of the cost of the project with rebates ranging from
approximately $2000-$4000 depending on the percent of energy savings
achieved. This support is also doubled for moderate income families
making less than 80% of median area income.
The HOPE for HOMES Act was passed by the U.S. House of
Representatives in the 116th Congress as part of H.R. 2 and H.R. 4447,
and is currently in the CLEAN Futures Act (H.R. 1512) and the LIFT Act
(H.R. 1848) in the 117th Congress.
The 25C Tax Incentive is complementary to HOPE for HOMES and is
another key piece of legislation providing incentives to homeowners at
their point of decision-making. Simple and current, this incentive is
the only energy efficiency tax incentive available for homeowners who
have a tax liability at filing. It allows homeowners to take a discount
off their tax bill when they purchase high efficiency products and
systems during the tax year. Congress should support a long-term,
forward-looking extension of the 25C credit by updating goals and
consider transitioning the credit into a permanent performance-based
instead of prescriptive incentive.

ENERGY SECURITY & AFFORDABILITY

Energy efficiency is one of the most effective tools to drive cost
savings, increase property value, and protect financial security for
American families while reducing energy burdens. My company provides
residential retrofits across Connecticut, which have proven to reduce
energy demand by 33% and generally have a return on investment of
between 1-3 years. Nationally, studies have shown that weatherization
measures such as insulation and air sealing can reduce energy use by
25-35%. Cutting down on energy waste lowers peak demand, resulting in
improved affordability and energy security for all Americans,
especially the most vulnerable.
New research shows that 25% of all U.S. households face a high
energy burden, and for low-income households that number rises to
67%.\14\ Furthermore, Black, Hispanic, Native American, and seniors, as
well as families residing in low-income multifamily housing,
manufactured housing, and older buildings, experience disproportionally
high energy burdens. In the face of unaffordable energy costs, nearly
one in three U.S. households have reported facing a challenge in paying
energy bills or sustaining adequate heating and cooling in their home,
which can in turn impact health.\15\ Investment in energy efficiency
generates lasting savings and is a critical solution for addressing
energy affordability and protecting the health and safety of American
families.
Congress should improve access to energy efficiency among low-
income and disadvantaged communities by supporting and expanding the
Weatherization Assistance Program (WAP), including through robust
appropriations for FY2022, as noted above.
Upfront costs are a huge barrier preventing many American
households from investing in energy efficiency upgrades that would save
money in the long run and improve their energy security.
In addition to the Weatherization Assistance Program and incentives
like HOPE for HOMES and the 25C tax credit which reduce the upfront
costs, it is important that the energy efficiency upgrades are shown to
have a return on investment. The SAVE Act (pending introduction in the
Senate by Senator Bennet and to be included in Representative
Perlmutter's GREEN Neighborhoods Act) would enable proper valuation of
energy efficiency and energy generation features in a home's appraisal.
This will help inform and engage Americans in the conversation on
energy and increase demand for energy-efficient homes and retrofits of
existing homes. It will also spur job creation in the construction,
remodeling, and manufacturing sectors while simultaneously lowering
Americans' energy bills, and decreasing carbon emissions from the
housing sector.
In Addition to the programs and legislation mentioned above,
educating Americans in the importance of energy efficiency and its
economic and societal benefits will greatly improve the adaptation and
success as we transition to a clean energy economy. Unfortunately, in
many cases youth and families located in underrepresented, at-risk
populations are still missing access to critical Science, Technology,
Engineering, Art, and Math (STEAM) applied learning skills. STEAM could
build a foundation for our future workforce needs and help us diversify
the workforce. This type of systemic change will require investments in
energy and environmental conservation education to increase the general
population's understanding of how energy is connected to all things. If
we desire to engage historically underrepresented populations in these
career opportunities, we must invest in leveling the educational
playing field and support applied science and energy education in
public schools across our nation. We must invest in enhancing access to
the information which would help connect these underrepresented
populations to our vital work to transition to a clean energy economy.
At Green Eco Warriors, we collaborate with schools, families,
communities, and leaders to achieve the following goals:

Engage youth and families in meaningful learning
activities such as environmental research and civic engagement and
sustainability leadership, through the implementation of in-person and
online education and motivation of youth and families.

Engage underrepresented communities in preparing for
growing energy workforce opportunities.

Educate energy consumers on their role in energy
consumption with special focus on at risk and minority populations,
climate science, and energy equity.

Create and provide equal access to engaging science-based
educational tools aligned with national education standards.

Reduce carbon emissions, pollution, energy waste, and
energy disparities through the reduction of residential and commercial
energy usage nationally.

Educate communities on sustainable energy plans and water
protection.

Teach youth and families how to protect natural resources
such as water, air, land, people, and the planet.
Green Eco Warriors has connected with thousands of youth and
families which, prior to working with us, had no information on climate
change, energy infrastructure, or their connection to energy, and
therefore did not see themselves as a critical part of the solution or
planning process. If we desire meaningful engagement, we must ensure
equal access to information that allows people to make informed
decisions, and to be engaged meaningfully.

PROTECTING PUBLIC HEALTH

Energy efficiency improvements in our buildings will create both
immediate and long-term benefits for public health.\16\ Home
performance contractors like myself address homes from the ridge line
to the frost line, assessing the whole home and addressing the
interconnections between the thermal envelope and the heating and
cooling systems. Using building-science-based approaches, efficiency
retrofits can dramatically improve the health and safety in homes by
identifying and fixing underlying issues which cause mold, unhealthy
indoor air, extreme temperatures, and health factors.
The health and safety benefits of energy efficiency retrofits are
well documented, including significant improvements in asthma symptoms
and other respiratory illness, reduced thermal stress, and improved
overall physical and mental health. Weatherization measures, like
insulation and air sealing, also improve the durability of homes and
minimize residents' exposure to wind, moisture and temperature
extremes, which are critical to keeping people safe in unexpected
storms or power outages. In dollar terms, these positive health
outcomes are significant. In my state of Connecticut, research shows
that a 15% reduction in energy use could reduce health impacts by $73
per capita annually. On a national scale, a recent study from the
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy (ACEEE) shows that by
targeting four common health risks--asthma, falls, and exposure to
extreme heat or cold--existing weatherization programs could save
almost $3 billion dollars in avoided health harms over a ten-year
period.\17\
Energy efficiency supports public health outside of the home as
well. In the U.S., air pollution leads to almost 250,000 annual
premature deaths per year.\18\ Building retrofits and efficiency
measures save energy and lower peak demand, thereby helping reduce
harmful pollution from coal- and gas-fired power plants.\19\ Oftentimes
these dirty ``peaker'' plants are in or near underrepresented at-risk
populations and low-income communities, threatening the health of those
populations and making it an important equity concern. In my own state,
over 10 years energy efficiency programs reduced emissions by 11.4
million tons, the equivalent of taking 2.4 million cars off the
road.\20\

CONCLUSION

Comprehensive climate action that advances energy efficiency in
buildings across the U.S. will strengthen our nation's economy and
infrastructure and help generate a cascade of societal benefits
including creating good-paying jobs for Americans, improving public
health and well-being, and supporting our most vulnerable communities.
The building sector is one of the largest contributors to our carbon
emissions, and it is also a key part of the solution. It is time to
address our aging, inefficient building stock and invest in these
proven solutions that will provide a lasting return on investment for
families, businesses, communities, and this country. The time for
action is now. As a proud American and small business owner, I know
that together we can create a responsible path forward to ensure an
inclusive transition to a clean, resilient, stable energy economy,
which will benefit all Americans regardless of economics or social
standing.

REFERENCES

\1\ https://e4thefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/E2E4-Build-
Back-Better-Faster-Stimulus-Projection-Report-July2020.pdf
\2\ https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e8j-YJdbWZY&t=247s
https://www.eesi.org/files/Leticia_Colon_de_Mejias_093020.pdf
\3\ https://rooseveltinstitute.org/publications/economic-recovery-
begins-at-home-retrofitting-housing -jobs-health-savings-climate/
\4\ http://aceee.org/files/pdf/fact-sheet/ee-economic-
opportunity.pdf
\5\ https://www.eesi.org/files/fy07_021406_oakridge.pdf
\6\ https://www.energy.gov/eere/wap/about-weatherization-
assistance-program
\7\ https://efficiencyforall.org/wordpress/2021/03/01/addressing-
health-and-affordability-challenges -for-low-income-families/
\8\ https://efficiencyforall.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2019/
02/EE-Health_2-18-2019_Flyer.pdf
\9\ https://e4thefuture.org/energy-efficiency-jobs-are-best-bet-
for-recovery-in-2021-report-reveals/
\10\ The 2020 Energy Efficiency Jobs in America Report, published
by E4TheFuture: https://e4thefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/
EE_Jobs_America_2020.pdf
\11\ https://e4thefuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Clean-
Energy-Jobs-December-COVID-19-Memo-Final-Revised.pdf
\12\ https://publichealth.yale.edu/climate/
YCCCH_CCHC2020Report_395366_5_v1.pdf
\13\ https://rooseveltinstitute.org/publications/economic-recovery-
begins-at-home-retrofitting-housing-jobs-health-savings-climate/
\14\ https://www.aceee.org/research-report/u2006
\15\ https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=37072;
https://publichealth.yale.edu/climate/policy_practice/
YCCCH%20Extreme%20heat%20issue%20brief_407652_284_48542_v2.pdf
\16\ https://rooseveltinstitute.org/publications/economic-recovery-
begins-at-home-retrofitting-housing-jobs-health-savings-climate/
\17\ https://www.aceee.org/research-report/h2001
\18\ https://oversight.house.gov/news/press-releases/oversight-
committee-and-top-experts-examine-new-data-on-the-health-and-economic
\19\ https://rooseveltinstitute.org/publications/economic-recovery-
begins-at-home-retrofitting-housing-jobs-health-savings-climate/
\20\ https://www.energizect.com/about/annual-legislative-report-
2019

Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Ms. Reams, you are recognized for 5 minutes to present your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF HEATHER REAMS

Ms. Reams. Thank you, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member
Graves, and members of the committee, for the opportunity to
testify today about how climate policy can create jobs and grow
the economy.
My name is Heather Reams, and I am the Executive Director
of Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions, known as CRES. We
are a nonprofit organization that engages policymakers and the
public about responsible, conservative solutions to address
climate change while increasing America's competitive edge.
This hearing is of significant importance to CRES, because
we believe that climate action does not come at the expense of
American job growth or economic expansion. And it is wonderful
that we all agree on the science and we need to do something
about the climate.
Where there is disagreement, however, is with the math.
Adding unnecessary cost burdens, multiplying an already too-
big-to-fail bureaucracy, subtracting perfectly viable energy
options and American jobs, and dividing up our children's
future, will not equal net zero. It is time for Congress to act
on reason and common sense rather than the demands and
rigidness of the activist fringe.
A sure bet is in the investment in American innovators. We
must empower and protect them. Give them access to resources,
such as our world-class Federal laboratories and abundant
private sector capital. Give them strong intellectual property
protections, especially from foreign threats.
Make government a partner in the work, not a barrier, so
that the private sector can build facilities and a specialized
workforce here in the United States to scale up manufacturing
and gain access to global markets.
If we follow this model, the United States will enjoy
continued economic strength, robust job creation, and lead the
world in providing energy solutions that will result in
reducing not just emissions here at home, but global emissions.
I have three key recommendations I would like to share
today.
First, reduce energy prices, not energy choices. Low energy
costs lead to more manufacturing and jobs domestically.
Today's energy choices keep energy costs affordable so that
we can continue to work towards cleaner technologies that can
be commercialized and exported globally.
And all the above does not necessarily mean a future
dominated by fossil fuels. Instead, it is a realistic outlook
about the transition to reliable, low-emissions energy sources
at an affordable price.
Second, shrink our emissions, but not our economy.
As this committee knows all too well, climate change is a
global issue. Today, 85 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions
occur outside of the U.S. borders, a share that will increase
to about 90 percent by the end of the next decade as global
energy demand is rising, primarily due to increased living
standards and energy use in the developing world.
As a group, China and the developing economies are
estimated to account for over 100 percent of the anticipated
increase in global emissions through 2050.
This means U.S. climate and energy policy must foster
innovations and commercialization pathways that will work for
America, as well as for India, Nigeria, and Indonesia.
Simply focusing on achieving net zero by 2050 here in the
United States is unlikely to produce what it takes for
developing nations to do the same.
Third, export American innovation, not American jobs.
Investment in innovation is critical to maintaining the
downward trend in emissions in the power sector, as well as to
lower emissions in hard-to-decarbonize sectors, such as
transportation and industry, which are now the second and third
sources of emissions in the United States, respectively.
We need to be clearheaded about what poor countries can and
will do. Here in the United States, there is a lot of talk
about transitioning away from fossil fuels, and that
conversation does not exist in the developing world. The
difference between having power widely available and not, well,
the choice is easy.
Energy access raises the quality of life in developing
nations. Will their energy technology be clean? Sure, it is a
concern, but it is not their priority, and who can blame them?
Let's follow the science and do the math. The United States
will be far more effective in reducing emissions--and
equitable--by driving down the cost of low-carbon technologies
to make them more competitive and viable for developing
countries to adopt.
Here is a logical role for the United States and its
scalable, affordable clean tech solutions, but we must invest
today so that we have this technology for tomorrow.
And I will underscore that these are advanced jobs, based
here in the United States and focused on research and
development, deployment, and commercialization of clean energy
technologies.
I thank you for the opportunity to share my organization's
views with you today. I sincerely believe our best hope for
curbing the impact of global emissions is to ensure that
America's climate policy supports our workers and our economy,
as well as our environment.
I will be happy to answer your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Reams follows:]

Testimony of Heather Reams, Executive Director, Citizens for
Responsible Energy Solutions (CRES)

To the U.S. House of Representatives, Select Committee on Climate
Crisis Hearing

``Making the Case for Climate Action:
Creating New Jobs and Catalyzing Economic Growth''

April 20, 2021 Noon EDT

Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today about how
climate policy can create jobs and grow the economy.
My name is Heather Reams, and I am the Executive Director of
Citizens for Responsible Energy Solutions, also known as CRES. We are a
non-profit organization that engages policymakers and the public about
responsible, conservative solutions to address climate change while
increasing America's competitive edge. This hearing is of significant
importance to CRES because we believe that climate action does not come
at the expense of American job growth or economic expansion.
We all agree that the science says climate change needs to be
addressed. Where there is disagreement, though, is the math. Adding
unnecessary cost burdens, multiplying an already ``too big to fail''
bureaucracy, subtracting perfectly viable energy options and American
jobs, and dividing up our children's future will not equal net zero. It
is time for Congress to act on reason and common sense rather than the
rigidness of the activist fringe.
A sure bet is an investment in American innovators, probably the
most powerful source for good the world has ever known. We must empower
and protect them. Give them access to resources like our world-class
federal laboratories and abundant private sector capital. Give them
strong intellectual property protection, especially from overseas
threats. Finally, make government a partner in the work, not a barrier,
so that they can build facilities and a specialized workforce here in
the U.S. to scale up manufacturing and gain access to global markets.
If we follow this model, the United States will enjoy continued
economic strength, robust job creation, and lead the world in providing
energy solutions that will result in reducing not just emissions at
home, but global emissions.
My recommendations are simple: 1. Reduce energy prices, not energy
choices. 2. Export American innovation, not American jobs; and 3.
Shrink our emissions, not our economy.
1. Reduce energy prices--not energy choices.
Low energy costs lead to more manufacturing and jobs domestically.
Today's energy choices keep energy costs affordable so that we can
continue to work toward cleaner technologies. All the above does not
necessarily mean a future dominated by fossil fuels. Instead, it is a
realistic outlook about the transition to reliable low-emissions energy
sources at an affordable price.
2. Export American innovation--not American jobs.
Investment in innovation is key to maintaining the downward trend
in emissions in the power sector, as well as to lower emissions in
hard-to-decarbonize sectors such as transportation and industry, which
are now the second and third sources of emissions in the United States.
Cutting red tape and safeguarding American intellectual property from
global competitors will foster an environment in which our nation's
innovators have the resources they need to help us get to a low-carbon
economy, while providing jobs for hard-working Americans. Scaling new
clean energy technologies will also reduce their cost and make them
more accessible for developing economies whose carbon footprint is
growing.
3. Shrink our emissions--not our economy.
It is clear at this point that clean energy is not at odds with
economic growth. Providing incentives that will allow the most
innovative technologies to flourish and be produced at scale will help
position the American clean energy industry globally. To ensure
America's global leadership in technological innovation for clean
energy, however, we must be very cognizant of the global supply chains
related to these technologies. We must take great care to reduce our
reliance on foreign competitors for the critical minerals and
components that are used in elements such as wind turbines and EV
batteries.
At a basic level, investing in innovation is an investment in
America's future. Federal support for R&D, and an unfettered private
sector to deploy and commercialize clean energy technologies will
reduce costs and increase options to address climate change.
Competition in a free and fair market will help drive the domestic
economy as America's next generation of clean energy solutions are
deployed around the world. We've seen this work in other industries and
technologies, and if done correctly will work for climate mitigation,
too.
Since this week the President is hosting the Leaders Summit on
Climate, I would like to address the 2050 net zero target that the
Biden administration has embraced and how it relates to innovation and
job growth. While more countries appear to be adopting this mid-century
goal, here in the U.S. we have not answered the all-important
questions: is it realistic? And what is needed to achieve it?
It's undoubtedly a huge challenge. We currently lack the technology
required to tackle it in a way that is commercially viable. These are
not one or two technologies to solve a problem in one or two sectors
here in America--we need a suite of breakthroughs covering multiple
sources and sectors that can be scaled to deploy around the world.
These technologies need to be affordable and reliable, and more
importantly, globally cost competitive with today's conventional
energy.
Global deployment will be needed
We have to think big--in a different way. We no longer live in the
U.S.-centric 1990s, when we produced a quarter of global emissions and
the rest of the OECD produced another 25 percent. Back then we could
pursue unilateral policy--perhaps in coordination with a few other
economies--and make a major dent in global emissions. That is no longer
the case.
Today, 85 percent of all greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions occur
outside U.S. borders--a share that will increase to about 90 percent by
the end of the next decade. Global emissions are increasing, as global
energy demand is rising, primarily due to increased living standards
and energy use in the developing world. As a group, China and
developing economies are estimated to account for over 100 percent of
the anticipated increase in global emissions through 2050. This means
that U.S. climate and energy policy must foster innovations and
commercialization pathways that work for America as well as India,
Nigeria, and Indonesia. Simply focusing on achieving net zero by 2050
here in the United States is unlikely to produce what it takes for poor
countries to do the same.
We need to be clear-headed about what poor countries can and will
do. Here in the United States, there's a lot of talk about
transitioning away from fossil fuels--that conversation does not exist
in the developing world. While there is strong support for renewables
and low-carbon technologies in those countries, they all support
traditional fossil fuel energy as well.
The green premium that wealthy countries take on is unrealistic in
poorer countries focused on poverty eradication and energy access.
Instead of exporting high regulatory costs, we would be far more
effective and equitable driving down the cost of low-carbon
technologies to make them competitive and viable for developing
economies.
We cannot solve climate change by focusing on domestic policies
that ignore basic facts like China's emissions, and what poor countries
will and will not do. And if we do not change the current global
emissions trajectory, we might as well focus on adaptation and
resiliency.
But let's assume that we're successful. That we are able to produce
affordable and reliable low-carbon technologies that poor countries
will buy without any mandates, subsidies or U.S. financial assistance.
Will we benefit commercially? Will there be replacement jobs for
workers from formerly carbon-intensive industries? Will a low-carbon
economic transformation generate substantial national wealth that all
will share in, as has been so often promised?
If we rethink our policies related to regulation, trade, and
intellectual property protection, maybe. If we continue doing what we
have been doing, absolutely not.
Never ending subsidies and mandates skew markets in a way that
stifles the American innovation necessary to address global emissions
and harms entrepreneurs. In comparing the effect of Chinese subsidies
on the solar module market, the Information Technology and Innovation
Foundation found that as American manufacturers struggled to compete
against rivals heavily funded by the Chinese government, they invested
less in the very innovation that created the market in the first place.
When the United States fails to enforce its trade rules on China, it's
no surprise that companies scale back their investment in innovation:
why invest the time, energy and money in something that will be stolen
without consequence?
Solar is a cautionary tale for how wrong this can go. It was
invented in the United States and then stolen by China, which through
predatory trade practices nearly destroyed our homegrown manufacturing.
In 2006 the United States produced 8 percent of global solar panels
compared to China's 15 percent. In just over ten years, China's share
had grown to over 70 percent while America's was negligible. But we
continue to pay for it, in 2017 the U.S. imported 88 percent of its
demand for solar cells and modules.
We must not repeat this mistake again. Well-meaning but misguided
policies that incentivize thousands of new factory jobs in China on the
U.S. taxpayer's dime is not a clean energy jobs program for America.
One very important principle that climate policy almost always gets
wrong is: Policy should cut energy prices, not energy choices.
Competitive markets are the most efficient path to the best solution at
the lowest cost.
Here in America, there is a strong push to reduce GHG emissions by
blocking fossil fuel infrastructure, including pipelines and terminals
that would ultimately result in exporting that energy overseas. In my
opinion, this is misguided and harms our efforts to reduce global
emissions. While it is important to encourage other countries to deploy
low-carbon technologies and systems, we must recognize that countries,
even those in the European Union, will continue to use fossil fuels for
the foreseeable future. At least until the global community
commercializes low-carbon technologies that can compete with
conventional energy.
It's important to understand that the GHG life-cycle emissions of
fossil fuels vary by supplier--often significantly. According to the
Department of Energy's National Energy Technology Laboratory, Russian-
produced natural gas shipped by pipeline to Europe has approximately 41
percent higher life-cycle emissions (CO2 equivalent) than U.S.
liquefied natural gas (LNG) shipped to the same destination. Russian-
produced natural gas shipped by pipeline to China has 47 percent higher
life-cycle emissions than U.S. LNG exported to China. Heavy oil
produced in Venezuela has 50 percent higher life-cycle emissions than
light oil produced in Wyoming.
When the world switches from foreign to U.S. fossil fuels, the
emissions reductions are enormous. If the European Union produced
electricity with U.S. natural gas instead of Russian, the associated
global emissions would fall approximately 72 million metric tons
annually. For comparison, the EU estimates that it needs to reduce its
emissions by 78 million metric tons each year to reach its 2030 targets
under the Paris Agreement. If China imported U.S. LNG instead of
Russian gas via a recently completed pipeline, associated global
emissions would be approximately 65 million metric tons lower. The
emissions impact will increase significantly as China is projected to
lead the world in the growth of natural gas consumption.
A similar story of misplaced demonization exists with nuclear
power. We know that nuclear generates some of the cleanest, most
reliable power in the world. Producing zero greenhouse gas emissions,
and with new, advanced safety designs coming online, nuclear should be
a growing piece of our energy portfolio if we want to reach net zero
carbon emissions. But instead of learning we've allowed ourselves to be
frightened off by accidents like Chernobyl, which was caused by bad
design and human incompetence, and Fukushima, which was caused by a
natural disaster and resulted in one death linked to radiation
exposure. Instead of opportunities to build better, safer facilities,
we've shuttered our most efficient zero-carbon power facilities or
worse, turned them into coal plants.
Do better with critical minerals
Critical minerals are materials essential to the economic and
national security of the country, but whose supply may be at risk due
to geological scarcity or geopolitical issues. A May 2020 report by the
International Energy Agency (IEA)\1\ concluded that the transition to a
low-carbon economy will require a reliable supply of critical and
strategic minerals. Cobalt, lithium, and nickel, for example, are key
for battery performance and charging capability. Copper is essential
for anything involving electrification, given its exceptional
conductivity. Many U.S. businesses are voluntarily committing to
sourcing power from renewables like wind power or transitioning
completely to electric vehicles (e.g., General Motors). Fulfilling this
demand will strain the already limited availability of these minerals.
According to the IEA report, an electric vehicle requires five times
the amount of critical minerals than a fossil fuel vehicle does, and a
wind turbine plant demands eight times as much as a gas-powered plant
with a similar capacity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ International Energy Agency, ``Clean energy progress after the
Covid-19 crisis will need reliable supplies of critical minerals,'' 6
May 2020, https://www.iea.org/articles/clean-energy-progress-after-the-
covid-19-crisis-will-need-reliable-supplies-of-critical-minerals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) produces around 70 percent
of the world's cobalt, and China is responsible for refining the same
percentage of cobalt globally. Between 2015 and 2018, the U.S. obtained
around 80 percent of rare earth imports from China.\2\ China is the
largest global consumer of cobalt, with 80 percent being used to
manufacture rechargeable batteries,\3\ and has the largest lithium-ion
battery market in the world. In 2019, the top three U.S. suppliers of
lithium-ion batteries for EVs were South Korea, Japan and China.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ United States Geological Survey, ``Rare Earths Data Sheet,''
Mineral Commodity Summaries 2020, https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/
mcs2020/mcs2020-rare-earths.pdf.
\3\ United States Geological Survey, ``Cobalt Data Sheet,'' Mineral
Commodity Summaries 2020, https://pubs.usgs.gov/periodicals/mcs2020/
mcs2020-cobalt.pdf.
\4\ Jeff Horowitz, David Coffin, and Brennan Taylor, Supply Chain
for EV Batteries: 2020 Trade and Value-added Update, Office of
Industries Working Paper ID-072, U.S. International Trade Commission
(USITC), January 2021, https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/
working_papers/supply_chain_for_ev_batteries_2020_trade_and_value-
added_010721-compliant.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The COVID-19 pandemic has evidenced the risks of relying on foreign
countries for a regular supply of goods and minerals that are key for
the daily operations of many industries. These risks are accentuated
when this dependence is concentrated in commercial and geopolitical
adversaries such as China. Additionally, accusations of hypocrisy ring
true when the world's greatest democracy relies so heavily on regimes
known for child labor and human rights abuses.
Transitioning to a clean energy economy should not come at the
expense of a clean conscious. Building a secure supply chain for our
low-carbon technologies with our allies, including the mining and
processing of the necessary critical minerals to produce them should be
a key priority for America.
Thank you for the opportunity to share my organization's views with
you today. Making sure that America's climate policy supports our
workers and our economy as well as our environment is our best hope for
curbing the impact of global emissions.

Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
And I thank all of the witnesses for your insightful and
informative testimony. And I recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Governor Bredesen, in your testimony you said climate
action shouldn't be thought of as a cost, as a cost center, but
as a revenue and profit center. I like that.
So how do we help parts of the country where there may not
be a state commitment to clean energy or a climate policy, but
yet they are looking for economic development opportunities?
And don't forget to unmute.
Mr. Bredesen. I think that there are good ways of being
able to further establish green energy, its production and the
manufacture of those things, that make it possible in other
parts of the country.
There is a big manufacturing industry behind the
development of solar power--the racking systems, the panels,
the inverters, and so on.
One can certainly imagine Federal policies which would
incent those manufacturers to place factories--new factories,
in those kinds of areas to support workers who may have been
displaced, as, for example, in Kentucky, by these technologies.
And then, second of all, of course, as I said in my
remarks, I mean, solar itself is, by its nature, very
distributed and, by its nature, tends to go into very low-cost
areas, often places that have economic challenges already. And
so focusing on it can be one of the ways, I think, in which you
bring this there.
What we have found at Clearloop is there are a lot of
companies in the country, and this effort is being driven by
the private sector so much, who would love to participate but
don't really have the vehicles today to be able to do that.
I think there are a number of very low-cost or no-cost
things the Federal Government can do that just open up the
doors in ways to use these vehicles and to bring this private
capital into the creation of jobs in the parts of the country
you are referencing.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
And so, Mr. Lau, you have just announced today that the
Sacramento Municipal Utility District will completely eliminate
carbon emissions by 2030, 5 years ahead of President Biden's
goal for the Nation, and you will do so while accelerating the
electrification of transportation and buildings.
Tell us more about this very significant announcement.
Where do you see the job creation happening here? And what do
you say to naysayers who say, well, this can't be done, or it
is going to cost too much, or it is going to make the grid
unreliable?
Mr. Lau. Thank you, Chair Castor.
So the first thing about this announcement by the board is
really our board's proclamation kind of to the world to say
clean energy is important to us because it is important to the
environment, come join us and be a global leader to fight
climate change, but do it in a way that really helps the
economic vitality of the region. You are doing this by really
kind of partnering and really leveraging innovation.
So where we see the jobs are coming, because we are going
to invest $4.5 billion in the next 9 years to really double our
energy efficiencies and electrification efforts, and we are
also going to invest heavily in local renewables, like local
solar.
So that is going to create, really, thousands of jobs,
good-paying jobs, and we are working with the underserved
communities to make sure, when we go out there, install,
really, thousands of electrical chargers that we will need to
support our electric vehicles. We are going to put batteries on
homes so that we can leverage the sun when solar is producing
during the day and dispatch those energies onto the grid when
it is most needed and most expensive.
So we really believe, by putting this goal out there, it is
something that is very significant. And it is not only about
the economy, but it is also about all the things that are
important to the Sacramento region, I think, for most
communities. It is about the air quality. It is about economic
development. It is about transportation. It is about
healthcare.
So this plan is really our board and our region's hope to
be leading by example, that you can work with your communities,
with the regulators, with the private sector, to come together
and really kind of align your resources for maximum impact so
that it is not either/or. You can still have a very, very clean
future, clean energy future, an inclusive zero-carbon economy,
but do it in a way that is also great for the environment and
really kind of great for our kids and grandkids.
Thank you, Chair Castor.
Ms. Castor. Thank you very much. Yes, you have built the
coalitions to make it happen. It is very impressive.
At this point, I will recognize Ranking Member Graves for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to thank all the witnesses for your testimony. It is
very helpful.
Mr. Lau, it was interesting listening to you talk about the
bold goals that you have set, the nearly $5 billion investments
that you are making. Yet, looking at research that has been
done by the National Academies, it indicates that there has
been--that 24--up to 24 percent of the pollutants that are
measured in California, Western States, for example, are
actually coming from Asian air transport, meaning from Asian
countries across the Pacific.
More recent analysis, after 25 years of studying emissions
and smog in California, including scientists from NOAA,
University of Colorado at Boulder, Princeton, and others, they
found that despite a 50 percent reduction in smog-forming
emissions in the United States, you have actually seen a year-
over-year increase in smog, and they attributed as much as 65
percent of that to, again, transport coming from overseas.
My point is that, how do we address this issue? You are
worried about health. You are worried about health outcomes for
our kids, which we all are. But if everything you are doing is
more than being offset by what is happening from China and
India and other countries, and you are spending $5 billion and
not improving things, how do we fix this?
Mr. Lau. That is a great question, Ranking Member Graves.
But I think one thing that we have got to remember when we
created this plan, it is more than just carbon. It is about
local air quality.
So what we are doing is that we are being very, very
aggressive in terms of energy efficiency. We are going to do
two or three times the energy efficiency that we are doing
today. And we are also electrifying the buildings and
transportation.
So when you take a look at the carbon emissions from our
plants, it is about 2 million metric tons per year. When you
look at the emissions by the electric vehicles and the
buildings, it is about 8 million metric tons, about four times
that.
So to address that issue is that we have to look at it
locally. So by taking the action that we are doing, we are
creating the jobs locally. We are inviting investment to come,
to invest in Sacramento.
Mr. Graves. Right. But let's keep in mind that our
objectives here aren't just about creating jobs. It is about
improving air quality.
And, also, I want to clarify, I am not sure if I understood
your comment correctly, but I am talking--the University of
Colorado, NOAA, Princeton, that involved smog, which is, of
course, ground-level ozone.
Mr. Lau. Yes.
Mr. Graves. And so, if we are spending all this money and
we are not improving air quality, don't we need to ensure that
there is a global component to this?
Mr. Lau. Oh, we are. So right now, currently, SMUD has
about 16,000 electric vehicles. And if our plan works out, we
are going to go to about 228,000 electric vehicles. And so that
is taking almost a million metric tons of carbon and air
pollutants out of our local community.
Mr. Graves. So, effectively, the strategy that you are
talking about, though, effectively, it is taxing Americans,
including the $4.6 billion that you referenced, to mitigate for
what is happening in China and other countries. And that raises
really strong concerns on my part in that we have got to have a
global approach.
Ms. Reams, thank you for your testimony. I appreciate you
talking about reducing emissions and addressing climate change.
And you also noted that we don't need to come in and reduce
energy choices.
Can you talk about the importance of the affordability that
I believe is related to energy choices, the affordability
issue, as we plot this path forward in terms of a clean energy
future based on America's resources?
Ms. Reams. Sure. There is a strong push to reduce
greenhouse gases by blocking fossil fuel infrastructure,
including pipelines and exporting terminals.
We also see the keep-it-in-the-ground movement. And I find
that to be misguided, and harms our efforts to reduce global
emissions.
If the world just switched from foreign to U.S. fossil
fuels, emissions would be reduced tremendously. And let's not
forget these developing nations need cheap baseload energy. So
we are likely talking about natural gas here. And that is there
for the foreseeable future.
So the technologies that we need to reduce emissions from
fossil fuels needs to be invested in. It is a reality.
Mr. Graves. Thank you very much, Ms. Reams.
Very quickly, Governor, you brought up the deployment of
renewable energy technologies. One of the issues that we have
come across is the bureaucratic red tape in actually getting
siting and other things through the regulatory process as well
as reliance upon minerals from China, like rare earths and
strategic minerals.
Do you care to comment on solutions?
Mr. Bredesen. Yeah. My point was that, rather than always
thinking in terms of how do you, as you put it, tax Americans
to spend some more money on these things and drive it, that
there are a number of ways in which simplifying the process of
siting, giving much clearer insight under the PURPA kinds of
contracts, the Qualified Facilities rules, into what future
costs are to make these projects financeable and so on, there
are things like that that don't cost a dime to the Federal
Government and really don't cost anything to the ultimate
consumers, but which unleash a lot of private activity and
capital in support of this.
That is not to say you shouldn't ever spend Federal money,
but I am saying I think the first place you ought to go is
figure out those things you can do that leverage the obvious
willingness on the part of private entities to take part in
this.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Governor.
Yield back.
Ms. Castor. Rep. Bonamici, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Chair Castor and Ranking Member
Graves.
And, really, thank you to our witnesses for your excellent
testimony.
This is a perfect time to be having this hearing at this
point in time in our country where we have about 10 million
Americans who are unemployed. And we have an opportunity to
upskill and reskill workers as we build back better. And our
transition to a clean energy economy will create good-paying,
high-quality union jobs and support people who have
historically faced barriers to employment, especially women and
people of color.
I want to give a little shout-out to Oregon Tradeswomen,
which has been doing a great job of diversifying the workforce.
As we have heard in the testimony, there is already an
unmet need for skilled workers in the energy efficiency sector.
Building back better also means restoring that economic
fairness, with better wages, stronger benefits, fair and safe
workplaces. And I say that as the granddaughter of a coal
miner.
Our Climate Action Plan includes provisions that will
address these historical failures that left workers behind,
and, instead, we are going to make sure that Federal clean
energy investments uphold labor standards. Like Davis-Bacon,
the use of community benefit agreements, project labor
agreements. These are going to be good jobs, family wage jobs.
And I want to start with Ms. Colon de Mejias.
I appreciated that you noted how energy efficiency can be
an economic opportunity for quality job creation. And, as the
founder of the STEAM Caucus, I also appreciated your note about
the importance of STEAM education to help diversify the
workforce.
So I hear from employers like you who are struggling to
find workers with the skills they need. And, last week, I
introduced my bipartisan, bicameral BUILDS Act, which I invite
all the Members to join. This is to scale up registered
apprenticeships and pre-apprenticeships in the clean energy
infrastructure and manufacturing sectors and provide workers
with the support services they need to succeed while they are
learning.
So the House also recently passed the first reauthorization
of the National Apprenticeship Act since the 1930s, which
addressed some of the challenges you have mentioned.
So how would more robust Federal investments in quality on-
the-job training programs help address the skills gap in the
energy efficiency sector?
Ms. Colon de Mejias. Thank you so much for your question.
So a couple of things are, one, I think that small
businesses are able to provide living-wage jobs that offer
benefits and protections without necessarily being part of a
union.
I myself am not part of a union, and I employ 20 people.
Eighteen are people of color who were underemployed or
unemployed. And, like I said, no one on my team starts at less
than $15 an hour, and they all have benefits as well.
So I think that it is really critical that, as we invest in
that, we consider the impacts on small businesses and that we
ensure that those resources are allocated in a way that
supports small businesses, whether they are part of a union or
not, and that we ensure that the workforce programs are placed
in the communities that are most needy so that they can access
the training and connect with the career opportunities that
exist right now, today, all across America.
I hope that answers your question, but you can clarify if
you would like more detail.
Ms. Bonamici. It does, and I appreciate that.
And I also appreciated your focus on public health and the
benefits of energy efficiency improvements.
Last summer, Oregonians were facing the compounding crisis,
not only from the pandemic, but an unprecedented wildfire
season. Air quality frequently surpassed hazardous levels,
further endangering the health and livelihoods of those already
at risk of respiratory issues from the coronavirus pandemic.
And I will tell you, it was really challenging, because you
just couldn't get away from it anywhere.
So how can Congress better support investments in energy
efficiency and demonstrate the value as a public health
investment?
Ms. Colon de Mejias. That is an excellent question.
And there is the SAVE Act, actual legislation that could be
supported, which would help us properly evaluate people's homes
and buildings to ensure that they are getting the demand
reduction.
And also, that those benefits are properly informed to
people so they can make informed decisions when they are
choosing energy choices, or when they are upgrading their
buildings or properties, or when they are purchasing something,
they would be informed.
The other thing that is important that you bring up on the
health note is that Yale recently did a study about the
increasing heat index and how that really is going to hurt our
vulnerable populations most.
And so it is extremely important that, as we plan our path
forward, that we engage in those conversations on how we can
lift those communities and protect their health through
expanding energy efficiency and building retrofits, which also
address health issues at the site that they live in, but also
at the power plant where the energy is created by doing more
with less.
That is what efficiency does, right?
Ms. Bonamici. Exactly.
Ms. Colon de Mejias. Efficiency is literally the concept of
being efficient.
Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. Exactly. And in the district I represent, I
have a multifamily, low-income housing facility that was built
to passive house standards. The first phase was 57 units. And
they have significantly cut energy costs. And it is just--it is
a great investment.
So thank you for your testimony all.
And I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Rep. Palmer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
I just want to talk a little bit about how our experience
in pushing for green jobs has worked out for us.
In 2009, the stimulus package passed by the Democrats and
the Obama-Biden administration claimed it would produce 5
million green jobs. And the Brookings Institute reported that,
of the nearly 2.7 million green jobs that the Obama-Biden
administration and the Democrats identified, most were bus
drivers, sewage workers, and other types of work that don't fit
the green jobs of the future description.
I just want to make sure that, as you push forward your
radical Green New Deal, that we have a clear definition of what
the green jobs will be.
I also want to point out that, in order to convert to a 100
percent renewable energy grid, or 50 percent, whatever it is,
the goal that you have established, that much of the materials
that we are going to need to produce the solar panels and the
turbines is going to have to come from China.
Germany has already experienced this. In 2011, they had
300,000 green jobs in Germany. By 2018, it was down to 150,000.
And part of that is because the companies that were trying to
produce the materials for the construction of their turbines
couldn't compete with China. And that is largely because in
China they are using forced labor. That includes forced labor
in the mines, forced labor in manufacturing.
And I just wonder from the panelists if people support,
being in a very disadvantaged position with China, if they
still would support this green agenda, if we are relying on
China, and China is providing these materials with forced
labor.
So any of the panelists can respond to that if they would
like.
Go ahead.
Ms. Colon de Mejias. Hello, Rep. Palmer. My name is Leticia
Colon de Mejias, just so you know who I am.
Mr. Palmer. I know who you are.
Ms. Colon de Mejias. And I agree that it is important that
we keep our eye on the world and the progress that is going
forward. But as an American I know that we have always led the
way in doing the right thing, both nationally and
internationally.
And I believe strongly that it is not a matter of red
versus blue, but this is really a matter of red, white, and
blue, because we have the opportunity to really do this right
this time, to plan it collectively together, and ensure that
the jobs are really good jobs for Americans and that they truly
do lift our community and strengthen our energy grid as we go.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. I am all for the red, white, and blue,
but the fact of the matter is we don't produce these materials,
and China is producing them using forced labor. They have got
kids working in mines and working in manufacturing.
And, again, looking at just the fact-checking on what
President Biden said during the campaign on a million new auto
jobs, Associated Press did a fact check and said that it is
actually far from certain. It is not even likely.
What I hear a lot here, and I know this will offend some of
you, but it is propaganda. Coming from having worked for two
international engineering companies, I have a pretty good
understanding of what it takes to get things done. And then to
make these claims about all these green jobs that you are going
to produce, there will be some green jobs that will be highly
inefficient in terms of energy production.
And, Madam Chairman, I don't see a clock. Oh, I see it now.
So I have got just a little time left.
We are not going to be able to give the United States a
secure energy future with renewables. There is no way to do it.
And even if we went 100 percent renewable, reputable scientists
will admit, if the United States went to absolute zero-carbon
emissions it would not stop climate change--if the entire world
went to absolute zero.
And you have got China, on the other hand, just in the last
year, 75 percent of the increase in energy consumption was in
China. They are ramping up their coal mining. They are
militarizing the South China Sea for energy extraction. They
are even moving toward the Arctic for mineral extraction.
So I just think we need to have a major reality check here
about what we are going to be able to accomplish for this and
the type of jobs we will be able to produce.
I am fine with bus drivers and sewage workers. And the
Brookings Institution--even the Bureau of Labor Statistics, not
Brookings, even identified Green New Deal lobbyists as green
jobs.
So with that, Madam Chairman, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Okay. Rep. Brownley, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Chair Castor, for bringing us
together. All the hearings we have been having in the 116th and
now the 117th, we have really gained a great deal of knowledge
and learned from so many some of the great innovative things
that are taking place across the country. So it is very, very
exciting.
And I thank the witnesses for being here.
Governor Bredesen, I wanted to ask you, in your written
testimony, at the very end of your written testimony you gave
some practical steps of things that we should do or could do.
And one I didn't quite understand, which was to allow--to
reward utilities that publicize their price for energy for
longer than 5 years.
So maybe I am not behind the eight-ball here, but I just
didn't totally understand what that meant.
Mr. Bredesen. Sure. PURPA makes available to investors in
the United States the ability to build solar and put the solar
energy thereby produced to utilities. They are called
qualified--Federal qualified utilities. And the utilities, in
turn, have to give the investor 5 years of visibility into what
their affordable cost, what the rate is going to be going
forward. Okay? All that makes sense.
That 5 years is an arbitrary number. It was developed in
some fashion. Unfortunately, what that is, is not enough time
to allow anyone to finance a facility. I mean, 15 or 20 years
of visibility allows the financing; 5 doesn't. And utilities
understand that.
So what it says, first of all, you could, with a simple
regulatory change and suggesting that utilities be forced to
make available what the avoided costs are for 15 or 20 years
into the future--they have these numbers--suddenly makes a lot
of projects financeable by investors and releases capital.
And I said, second of all, that one of the problems
utilities have with this is that some places you put it on the
grid it is a pain in the neck for. It is problematical to their
grid. There are plenty of other places where it is very helpful
on the grid, in terms of load balancing or where they need it.
So something like saying, if you put these things in some
areas where they are useful to utilities, it helps them, we
will give you this kind of visibility into it. I mean, opens up
an enormous amount of potential private investment into the
construction of the solar facilities.
It does not cost the Federal Government a dime, probably
doesn't cost any ratepayers anything either given the cost of
these facilities now. Just an alternative to the more
traditional kind of let's appropriate money or let's give tax
incentives.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you so much for that, Governor.
Mr. Lau, I wanted to ask you--I am a former legislator from
California, so spent some time in Sacramento. So thanks for
your leadership. And Chair Castor, her opening question to you
was asking about this aggressive, ambitious goal that you have
announced to get to zero by 2030.
And in your written testimony you talked about it is going
to cost you upwards of $4.6 billion. And you also go on to say
that, to put that into perspective, that your annual revenue
over a 3-year period ending in 2019 is roughly $1.5 billion.
So I guess my question is, how are you going to do this? I
mean, where are you getting the resources to make these really
important investments that I think will get you there and
without really making extensive increases in rates to the
ratepayer?
Mr. Lau. Thank you, Congresswoman Brownley. So I think that
is a great question.
So one of the things, a tenet of how we are going to get
there, is really kind of partner with our customers and partner
with the private investment companies.
And so what we want to do is, once we put the goal out
there and this is the kind of investment that we are going to
need, we are going to look to create partnerships with the
cities, the counties, the air quality districts, the air
resources board, to start actually pooling our resources
together to fund this endeavor that we are talking about.
Because right now I think, in the Brookings Institute--
Sacramento, we are one of the most diverse cities in the U.S.,
but we do a lot of things by itself, like air quality by
itself, greenhouse gas by itself, energy by itself,
transportation.
So what we are doing is that we are pooling our resources
together. And we are working with private industries, like Ms.
Mejias, about what do we need to do to create those jobs. Where
do we increase energy efficiencies? Where are we putting
chargers? What is the best way for us to pool that capital
together to do that?
Now, one of the things that we are also doing is,
certainly, we are looking to leverage technologies to drive
down our internal operation costs and be as efficient as
possible. And so we are taking advantage really about what the
customers are putting in.
The customers are putting about $180 million of what we
call DER--it is like rooftop solar, batteries, electric
vehicles in the area. So what we want to do is that we want to
co-optimize their investments for the benefit of the grid.
And so, case in point I think, you heard Governor Bredesen
talk about putting infrastructure in where it benefits both the
customer and the grid.
We have something called StorageShares. So Electrify
America was putting in DC fast chargers, and they want to put
in batteries in a location where the grid doesn't need it. We
have excess capacity there.
So we actually worked out a partnership with them to say,
hey, put this over here and we will give you the same
arbitrage, the same rate arbitrage, the same, just like the
batteries actually next door to you.
And so this is how we are co-investing and leveraging what
our customers are putting in to do this.
Ms. Castor. Thanks very much.
Mr. Lau. Thanks.
Ms. Castor. Rep. Miller----
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Lau.
Mr. Lau. Thank you so much. Sorry for the long-winded
answer.
Mr. Castor [continuing]. Representative Miller, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Brownley. I apologize. I yield.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Chair Castor, and also Ranking
Member Graves.
And thank you to all of you witnesses for being here today.
During my time on this committee, my colleagues have heard
me talk many times about the war on coal during President
Obama's term. These disastrous policies decimated my state of
West Virginia. They not only closed the mines, but they
shuttered entire communities that supported their workers.
And with that came such a hopelessness that it cast a dark
shadow in the southern part of the state, and certain parts
where the families still struggle to put food on the table. And
many of them succumbed to the opioid epidemic.
Our fossil fuel workers are the giants that we now stand
atop. We cannot and should not forget the advancements that
these workers and industries have made. We are now able to
produce our energy in a much more clean manner with a less
carbon footprint.
Completely turning our back on fossil fuels, like many of
my colleagues would like to have you think we should do, is not
only shortsighted, but it will take jobs away from hardworking
Americans.
American energy independence, achieved thanks to our coal,
natural gas, and oil industries, has made America less reliant
on malign actors. They have created thousands of jobs, and they
have helped reduce our own energy poverty within our own
country.
Furthermore, exporting our energy to our allies and the
developing nations, in my opinion, is the key to reducing
emissions around the world. American energy has the potential
to raise those in other countries out of poverty and can also
minimize dangerous governments' influences worldwide. I think
of the Ukraine when I say that.
Ms. Reams, can you talk about the potential of exporting
America's cheap baseload energy to other countries and how it
could help their economies to come online?
Ms. Reams. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
And as a mother it breaks my heart to think about the
families and the opioid addiction and the challenges that
joblessness and hopelessness can bring, and also thinking about
developing nations and those mothers, those parents who want to
offer their children a better life.
And energy is part of that. It is not about which kind of
energy, but will they have energy? Because it is going to pull
them out of poverty. It is going to mean a better quality of
life, better healthcare, better education. And that starts with
what we are doing here in the United States and the
technologies that we can create to export them abroad.
There is no doubt that fossil fuels will be around for a
while, particularly in the developing nations, and it is up to
the U.S. and countries like us to develop those technologies,
to sequester that carbon however we can, so that those
countries can get out of poverty.
This is the right thing to do, but I say that also as not
just an advocate, but as a mother.
Mrs. Miller. In your testimony you talked about developing
nations that are growing markets for American energy. Can you
discuss the benefits of exporting American energy to these
nations?
Ms. Reams. Absolutely. Developing nations are a market for
a lot of countries, not just the United States. So who is
getting there first, and who is going to provide them the
energy, the fuel they need to fund their economies and improve
their lives?
Even if the U.S. got to net zero tomorrow, we know that we
still have a lot of work to do around the world. It is not
enough that just the United States is fighting climate change.
So this is exportable. This is global and exportable.
That still means great jobs here in the United States. And
we have great examples of Federal investment and expanding
private sector dollars, sometimes 22 times the investment from
the private sector from public sector dollars.
So this is the jobs here that we can have. It is not just
the clean energy jobs here in the United States, but it is also
that technology that can be exported, I think, that is most
exciting.
Mrs. Miller. Well, how do you think American energy can
reduce energy poverty around the world?
Ms. Reams. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, we have got abundant
natural gas, for instance. It is cleaner than any other natural
gas that we have around the world. I say this statistic, I
think, in my testimony, but if we actually went straight from
U.S. fossil fuels from foreign fuels, we would be reducing
emissions.
So we are a good actor in the geopolitical world, and
getting American fuels into these countries is not just
important, it is good for a stabilizing factor, but also brings
energy online where we have got families that actually have
energy. They are not thinking about what kind of energy. When
you don't have any, you want something.
And I think it is wonderful to think that we can be
developing our technology, investing today for tomorrow's
technology so those nations--those people--can have a better
quality of life.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Rep. Casten, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you so much.
I did just want to just comment quickly on the last
exchange. It is really critical that we look out for workers
who are losing their livelihoods in coal country.
But let us make no mistake. Longwall mining killed coal
jobs. Economics killed coal plants. And it is tragic that the
folks who represent Appalachia looked out for the interests of
coal owners to reduce labor content when it was for longwall
mining, and they are now making a big deal. Let's all look out
and let's do this on a bipartisan basis.
Mr. Lau, really, really enjoyed your testimony. I am a
former utility CEO myself, a little smaller than yours, but
upstate New York. And we struggled a lot with trying to fix the
problems in rate regulation so that we could actually share in
the benefits of energy efficiency with our customers and got
New York State to come up with some fairly creative regulatory
approaches to that.
In your answer to Rep. Brownley, I found myself wondering
whether the tools you were able to use are unique to your
position as a municipal utility, or are those tools applicable
to IOUs and co-ops as well?
Are there things we could do to allow other utility-type
structures to do what you are doing, deploying a tremendous
amount of capital into cheaper and cleaner energy?
Mr. Lau. Thank you. Thank you, Congressman Casten.
So I think it absolutely can. So, I mean, I think SMUD, we
receive $127 million from the AGRI grants from the Obama
administration. And we are able to test. Like, we were one of
the first utilities in California to push into time of day
rates, or time of use rates.
So we started moving away from the tier structure, and we
are now moving forward in terms of looking at critical peak
pricing. And we are thinking about now, how do you invite
people with DERs and third parties to come in with virtual
power plants, to start actually leveraging not just energy
efficiency, but really about load flexibility?
How do you use rates to incentivize behaviors for customers
to use energy or renewable energy when it is in abundance, like
midday off-peak pricing, and then also, give pricing, like
critical peak pricing, when it is most expensive?
So absolutely I think some of the stuff that we have done
from a rate design perspective is something that could be
copied across utilities across the U.S.
Mr. Casten. So on that subject, there has been a lot of
talk lately in California about sort of the ever-deepening duck
curve. And last term I introduced and we got signed into law
the BEST Act to bring--to put about a billion dollars into
energy storage research, development, and deployment to smooth
some of that out.
Today, I introduced with Senator Heinrich the Interregional
Transmission Planning Improvement Act to try to better connect
resources around the country.
Are there other things that you would like to see our
national labs doing in working with you as far as technology
deployment to make sure that those increasingly dramatic
changes in the time of use in your load profile can be smoothed
out a little better?
Mr. Lau. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, the third thing is that
on the utility grid side--I mean, one of the challenges of
renewable energy is a lot of it is intermittent. So the more
that you can actually start actually creating, like, baseload
and renewable energy, like green hydrogen, about burning green
hydrogen in our plants, is one way to shore that up.
The other piece is really about taking advantage of the
Renewable Act could really help us to retool the grid challenge
that we have. Think about, at least in California, we can have
5 million electric vehicles by 2030.
And so each one of those--I have a Tesla, and I can easily
charge my Tesla and pump 5 kW of those for 4 hours during the
peak hours.
So how do you actually leverage the DERs for the benefit of
the grid and reliability is something I think that the Federal
Government can really, really help us in terms of driving the
cost of those DERs' adoption across the U.S., but then also
helping on the power sector.
And actually I love your thoughts about the transmission
piece, about opening up transmission so that renewables from
regions could be exported. And so now you have regional
diversity to help with the reliability issues that you were
talking about.
Mr. Casten. Well, thanks. So many of those rules are state
and local utility regulations. And if you have thoughts on how
we might nationalize some of those, I would love to work with
your office on that.
In the few minutes I have left, Ms. Reams, I really, really
appreciated your written testimony, in particular when you said
that--I think I have got this quote right--``Never ending
subsidies skew markets in a way that stifles American
innovation.''
I could not agree more, as a guy who sat there as an
innovator deploying clean technology.
If you had an industry that over the last decade had seen a
45 percent reduction in demand for its product as competition
came along, that saw a 40 to 45 percent reduction in their per-
unit price because there just wasn't the demand to prop that
price up, that saw $340 billion of negative cash flow, that saw
250 bankruptcies, do you think government should subsidize that
industry to keep it afloat?
Ms. Reams. I think that mature technologies--there is a
tough argument to be made for mature technologies receiving any
kind of subsidy.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Well, I agree. I just described the oil
and gas sector. That was 45 percent decline in coal, 40 to 45
percent reduction in the prices of coal and gas, $342 billion
of negative free cash flow in the shale gas sector, 250
bankruptcies, $20 billion of write-offs for ExxonMobil. And,
yet, according to the IMF, we still subsidize the fossil fuel
industry to the tune of $650 billion, with a ``b,'' dollars a
year.
We need a level playing field, and we need to stop deluding
ourself that the level playing field doesn't overwhelmingly
skew to the dirty energy sector.
Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Casten.
Rep. Gonzalez, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairwoman Castor and Ranking
Member Graves, for holding this hearing today, and to our
distinguished witnesses for joining us.
My fear, as always, is that there is a growing consensus on
the other side of the aisle that rapid technological changes
are becoming so disruptive and renewable energy is so cheap
that there is no economic risk in accelerating or even
mandating a path to zero-carbon emissions.
But the experiences of our European allies reveals that
such thinking can actually be quite harmful. If you look at
Germany as an example, instead of using market incentives to
establish a viable and cost-effective introduction of
renewables, they deployed massive subsidies to wind and solar
technologies that increased household energy rates by 7.5
percent and forced greater dependence on foreign suppliers,
like Russia, for natural gas, because they were shutting down
their nukes, which didn't make any sense to me.
But if our goal is to subsidize renewable energies and rely
on them alone to supply the baseload, I think we need to
realize that there will be immense trade-offs--higher energy
costs for low-income Americans, greater reliance on Russia and
China, less dependable electric power, more blackouts, lower
economic growth, and less capital investment in the
breakthrough technologies that will help us achieve an energy
transition.
I have been on the record in this hearing and in my
Science, Space, and Technology Committee and worked with Rep.
Casten on the BEST Act.
But I believe we need to invent our way through this, we
need to invent our way out of this. I do not believe the
existing suite of technologies can get us all the way there in
a way that doesn't force us to make brutal trade-offs for low-
income Americans.
Ms. Reams, in your testimony you emphasized the importance
of developing innovative, cost-effective technologies here in
the U.S. that can be exported across the world. I could not
agree more.
In your assessment, what clean energy technologies have the
greatest potential for breakthrough?
Ms. Reams. Well, that is a great question. Thank you,
Congressman.
I mean, first of all, knowing that there is investment in
technology, we have the private sector that comes in, in a big
way. So I think that that is important to know. With any kind
of investment, we are going to get good ROI on our investment.
The emerging technologies that we are seeing in advanced
nuclear, we are seeing in green hydrogen, are showing
tremendous promise. Also, in carbon capture utilization and
sequestration.
But I would be remiss if I wasn't talking about other
technologies, such as offshore wind, that are receiving
challenges simply because of permitting processes. It is an
untapped area as well.
Mr. Gonzalez. Also a challenge with the advanced nuclear,
right? I have spoken to some--to Oklo, for example, and the
fact that they have made it as far as they have is actually--
sounds like a miracle based on the amount of red tape that they
have been forced to run through as somebody who is trying to
innovate in the nuclear space, which is something I believe we
desperately need.
You also highlighted the history of U.S. solar innovation.
Specifically, you mentioned China was able to steal our
technology and corner the manufacturing market because of weak
trade and IP protections. That is an issue across the economy,
not just in clean energy, of course.
What policies do you think we should be considering to
ensure more companies feel confident enough to invest in
innovative technologies and protect themselves from the IP
theft issue?
Ms. Reams. First of all, definitely protecting the IP theft
is a national problem. As an entrepreneur, we know that this
has a chilling effect on any kind of investment when you know
it is going to be stolen. So I think those protections and
trade policies are going to be incredibly important moving
forward.
I think with this we should not make that mistake again
when we have misguided policies that incentivize jobs overseas,
in China, but we are not getting the ROI here in the United
States.
So we need to make sure, when we are creating these jobs,
that they are here domestically, that the technology can be
exported, not necessarily the regulatory, not necessarily the
people, but we are keeping them here onshore.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yeah. No, I couldn't agree more. I think this
issue creates a lot of difficult trade-offs. But it also
creates an opportunity.
If we do fund the right R&D, if we do develop the
innovative technologies that are going to allow us to emerge
from this scenario and lead the world really, it will allow us
to grow our economy, it will create jobs domestically, and it
will be good for the environment and the planet, which I think
is something that everybody wants on this committee and across
the country.
And so I am encouraged that hopefully we can find some
bipartisanship on that front. And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Gonzalez.
Next, we will go to Rep. Escobar.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And many thanks to our great panelists. I really appreciate
this conversation this afternoon.
I can tell you, I think, that the vast majority of
Americans are really looking forward to some pretty broad, bold
solutions, with an eye towards saving our planet. We just need
to provide Americans the tools and the access to opportunity
for jobs and to participate actively in helping save our
planet.
In my district, we are nicknamed, actually, the Sun City
because we have about 300 days of sun every year. Yet our local
utility has yet to fully harness that clean, natural resource.
Our local electric utility, in fact, is about to build a new
natural gas facility.
We heard yesterday from Secretary Kerry that the
advancement of facilities like this will create in the future
stranded assets, stranded assets that are paid for by
ratepayers.
So we have got to find ways of incentivizing utilities and
business owners in districts like mine that the time to
transition is now. But it is really challenging.
Mr. Lau, in your testimony you discussed in great detail
how your utility is moving to net zero, and that is incredible
and very exciting. But local utilities like mine that are
private entities, they are moving at their own timeline to
reach net zero, if they even have one at all.
Do you have any suggestions for how Congress can begin
encouraging private utilities to make the transition to net
zero now to reduce their carbon footprint and avoid building
stranded assets?
Mr. Lau. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think that is an
excellent question.
I think one of the things Congress can do, they can really
actually offer incentives for those utilities, working with the
Federal Government, working with the labs, to really kind of
take the utility-scale renewables into their portfolio in a way
that does not actually harm their stockholders.
And so one of the things I would recommend Congress do is
have those utilities work with the local communities, really
find out about really what they want.
So one of the great, I guess, tenets of our plan was that
we worked--we have been having at least 12 community meetings.
We met with 600 customers and stakeholders to have them jointly
input what they want in a clean energy plan and how it is going
to help them.
So I would implore Congress, in terms of allowing those
utilities, the private utilities, as a way to work with the
local communities so that their wants and needs, in terms of
transitioning to a zero-carbon economy, and making sure that
the underserved communities are not left behind.
I think that is one of the things that is key and central
about making sure that the jobs you are going to create in this
transition are front and center, the underserved communities
are actually being served.
That is one thing I would recommend.
Thank you, Congresswoman.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much.
Ms. Colon de Mejias, that is a great transition to a
question for you.
What can we do to make sure, to guarantee that we are
bringing emerging green energy jobs and technology to
economically disadvantaged communities like the one that I
represent?
Ms. Colon de Mejias. Thank you for the question,
Congresswoman.
I think it is really important at this time that we make
great efforts to engage those groups in conversations and
dialogue and ensure that there is access to both training and
general broad sets of information on energy and the
interconnections between health, economy, jobs, and really
level the playing field by ensuring that they have access to
that information in a way that resonates with them.
I also think it is really important that we ensure that
everyone understands that these jobs are available to anyone
who has an interest in training for them, and that they can
change careers at any time and take on a new industry.
Earlier, somebody mentioned the 2009 investment in green
jobs, and I am one of the people that came out of that era of
investment in green jobs, as are the people that work for me
now. All 20 of them have been with me that long.
So although I agree that sometimes things don't work out
exactly as planned, there certainly were a lot of benefits from
those investments that we are still really reaping today.
Ms. Escobar. Wonderful. Thank you so much.
I am just about out of time, so I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you so much.
Rep. Carter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank all of you for being here. Very important
discussion.
Ms. Reams, I want to start with you and ask you, you said
in your testimony that the U.S. is not in this alone. We are
not in a vacuum here. This is a global problem. We all
understand that, and we all understand how important it is that
we work together with other countries to make sure that we are
all doing our part in reducing global emissions.
A ton of carbon in the atmosphere causes just as much harm
no matter where it comes from. Whether it comes from U.S. or
China or wherever it comes from, it is still a problem.
But I want to ask you, Ms. Reams, specifically, can you
speak to the marginal cost of us in the U.S. further reducing
emissions versus working to reduce emissions globally?
Ms. Reams. Actually, I don't know that I can do that,
Congressman. Could you rephrase the question just a little bit
further?
Mr. Carter. Well, what I am saying is, essentially, we
don't live in a vacuum, and we all understand how important it
is that we help these other countries to decrease their
emissions as well.
Look, I believe in climate change, and I think it is real.
And a lot of my constituents do. A lot of people in my party
do. They believe it. But they don't think that we here in the
U.S. should be all suffering the consequences, economically
especially, and financially, when other countries aren't doing
their part.
You know, at some point you reach a rate of no return, and
that is what I am trying to get at here. At what point do we
reach that? At what time do we reach that point where we are
doing--I mean, it has been said that if the U.S. were to
decrease our emissions to zero, that unless the other countries
do their part, it is not going to help. It is not going to
change.
Ms. Reams. Understood, Congressman, and thank you for the
question. I do understand now.
Absolutely, this is something that we have talked about. I
think it is a great conversation to talk about the jobs that we
can create here in the United States on dealing with clean
energy and clean tech, and that is exciting.
But we also have to look abroad and seeing what those
countries need as well. And it is just access to energy.
Sometimes it is really that simple.
But there are bad actors out there, and I will point to
China in particular, that is allowed to pollute regardless of a
Paris Agreement. This was codified in the Agreement years ago.
And that is of concern.
Polling shows that voters--not just Republicans--that
voters believe in more of a level playing field when it comes
to responsibility and payment for these issues. So why do we
let China off the hook while the U.S. continues to reduce its
emissions and then pay--and also pay for the climate challenges
that we will have as a result of that pollution from China and
other nations?
So we have got to get real about where the global emissions
are coming from. They are emissions. And it is not necessarily
from any particular energy source, although some are higher
carbon emitters than others, but it is the pollution that is
the problem, not necessarily the energy source.
And, again, I point to--and we talked about this with Carol
Miller, Representative Miller--is the opportunity to have a
more civilized nation, a cleaner, healthier nation, when you
have got access to any kind of fuel. We want it to be cleaner.
That is why the technology developed here in the United States
today needs to be exported.
Mr. Carter. Right. And I appreciate that, because that is
one of the biggest complaints that we get. And it is not
necessarily America first as much as it is we just want a level
playing field. You know, we want to do our part, but we want
them to do their part as well. And who can blame anybody for
feeling that way?
I want to ask you, Governor--and, first of all, I want to
thank you, Governor, for highlighting the success that we have
had in the State of Georgia with solar energy. We are now one
of the top ten states in the nation as far as solar energy
goes. I am very proud of that. Because we have got a lot of
pine trees in Georgia. We have got a lot of sunshine, too,
especially in south Georgia.
In your testimony you said this hasn't really happened in
the name of climate change and it is not really driven by
mandates, but scale solar comes with a lot of permitting and
regulating and regulations. And I just wanted to see if you
could talk about the regulatory situation that has made it
easier to pursue projects like this in Georgia.
Mr. Bredesen. Sure.
First of all, I am, as you know, very aware of Georgia. I
think we may have built a lot of that solar that you are
describing there and so on.
Mr. Carter. Yes.
Mr. Bredesen. Georgia has been an easy place to do
business, both because it has a lot of sun and the economics
work, but also because the communities have been very
interested in and accepting of it.
Some of these rural communities, I am sure you know well,
that they are very conservative communities, and they actually
love the idea of something which helps to begin to move beyond
simply being simply sort of a farming economy.
These solar plants, when they are built, typically become,
the day they open, the largest taxpayer in the county, and they
use very few services in return for that. There are counties
that have increased teacher pay, for example, simply because a
new solar farm has come in.
So in Georgia it has not been an issue. Certainly in other
parts of the country it is. Permitting is not always easy in
that regard.
But if you had to look for a place, a pressure point, I
would say that easing the process of financing and connecting
into the grid these things, the regulatory from that standpoint
as opposed to local land use or something like that, is
probably the point that would free up the most sort of new
private capital and new investment in this area.
Those become significant issues. There are huge, huge
backlogs, for example, in getting permissions for
interconnections that are unnecessary in the way they are. And
I am hoping that in some way one of the results of this
committee can be to start focusing on some of those kinds of
issues.
Mr. Carter. Exactly. And I know I am out of time, but what
a great point. Thank you, Governor.
And, Madam Chair, that is one thing we on this committee
need to be working on, is those regulations.
So thank you. And I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Carter.
Next, we will go to Rep. Levin.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, as always, Chair Castor. I appreciate
you holding this hearing today. I think the topic is critical.
The world recognizes we need to significantly and
permanently reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. We have got a
whole series of events happening this week along those lines.
And I think the question remains whether we, as the United
States, will capture here domestically the benefits of
developing, building, and exporting the clean energy and
transportation technologies of the future, and I am committed
to ensuring that we do. But we in the Federal Government have
an important role to play in making that a reality.
And I think I speak for many of my colleagues, we are
thrilled that the Biden Administration has given us a strong
path forward through the American Jobs Plan, which includes so
many recommendations from this committee's Action Plan. And I
hope that my colleagues will join me in working to advance this
initiative as quickly as possible.
One last thing before my question.
So I want to give a shout-out to SMUD for your continued
leadership. And I do hope that in the months and years ahead we
can come as a committee, or a group of us can come and visit
you, as well as the California Independent System Operator and
California Resources Board. I think that would be great.
And I hope that some of our colleagues across the aisle
can, I guess, have some of the preconceived notions they may
have about how California does things and either prove or
disprove those notions based on lived experience and actually
seeing and understanding firsthand.
Governor Bredesen, I wanted to turn to you. I was so
pleased to see your testimony highlight the need to deploy
clean technologies that have already been developed and that
are ready to be built out. I have been a strong advocate for
clean energy tax incentives, like the investment tax credit,
and the importance also of refundability.
That is so important as the economic impacts of COVID have
made it very hard to finance projects. And by strengthening
incentives, I hope we will accelerate further development of
wind and solar and other clean energy projects.
So, Governor, do you think we need to extend, expand, and
strengthen Federal clean energy tax incentives? And how do
Federal incentives help create jobs across the country, in
particular in Tennessee and other states that you are working
in?
Mr. Bredesen. First of all, the existing tax credits, they
certainly are helpful. There is no question about that. I think
one of the most important ways, though, in which they help,
which is not always seen, is that there are places in the
country that wouldn't need those credits. The solar is cheap
enough that it can be--it is economic on its own terms.
But what that does is really open up solar as a competitive
entity in a lot of parts of the country where it still would be
very marginal. And I think it is in our interest to make sure
that Minnesota and Wisconsin and the Dakotas and so on have
access to these kinds of technologies as well as New Mexico and
Arizona and California's Central Valley and so on, so from that
standpoint they are successful.
On the issue of refundability, there is no question that
monetizing those tax credits is a pinch point at the moment in
terms of developing solar.
I personally would not want to see us go back to
refundability at the individual developer level, because when
we had that--I think it was section 1602 stuff--I mean, there
was a lot of fraud that went on there.
There was just a lot of--I used to describe it as you would
get these companies that were the Acme Donuts and Solar Company
or something that were doing stuff, and the stuff that was
built was not all that useful in terms of its connection to the
grid and its reliability.
What having to go through a third party for these tax
credits has done is really to force a third set of eyes on
that, an independent review. And the stuff which is being built
under those conditions is much higher quality and much longer,
longer term.
I think, however, that changing the rules, perhaps making
them refundable after 6 months or a year at those levels, would
open up that market a lot more than it is right now, which is
really limited to a few big banks in the country.
So I think you are on to something with that, just would
strongly suggest not going all the way back to the individual
tax credits, because I think they were problematical.
Mr. Levin. Well, I appreciate that, Governor. Thank you for
your leadership and your perspective.
And, very briefly, if I may, Chair Castor, I had a question
for Ms. Colon de Mejias.
I am working on an energy efficiency bill in the Veterans'
Affairs Committee that would provide veterans with--or Veterans
Affairs--the opportunity to factor energy savings into a
veteran's monthly income for the purpose of determining their
ability to repay a home loan when the veteran provides an
energy efficiency report for the home. And the idea there is to
increase the veteran's buying power by offsetting regular
expenses for the home calculated in the debt-to-income ratio.
So, in general, do you see value in that sort of policy? Do
you think it can help improve residential energy efficiency?
And was curious if you had any other thoughts or suggestions,
briefly.
Ms. Colon de Mejias. Thank you for that question.
I always think that valuing things appropriately and
providing the information directly to the consumer is extremely
important. Whenever we are evaluating anything, we should do it
appropriately and count all the benefits and all the costs at
the same time, right? So, yes, that is very important.
The other piece of bipartisan legislation that comes to
mind, you asked a question about taxes a minute ago, is that
there are bipartisan Hopes for Home legislation that will be
introduced by Welch and McKinley. And this actually would help
shore up American housing and afford supports to middle-class
families and working families [inaudible] drawing down energy
bills.
The other complementary piece to that is the 25C tax
incentive, which would also go directly to support middle-class
and working families and drawing down their energy burdens,
including veterans. And I employ some veterans. I love and
respect them very much. They are really beneficial to our work.
So thank you for your question.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much.
I yield back, Chair. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Now I recognize Rep. Huffman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Madam Chair.
As we have heard from our witnesses here today, there is an
enormous economic upside to climate action. As we decarbonize
this economy to avoid climate disaster, we can simultaneously
seize these huge opportunities.
And, Mr. Lau, you and SMUD are really showing how that can
work. So let me congratulate you on your big announcement
today, a plan to completely eliminate carbon emissions from
your power supply by 2030, exceeding President Biden's goal of
a carbon-free electricity sector by 2035. That is fantastic.
And you have gotten a little bit of a taste today of how
some of our colleagues in Congress are pushing back against
climate action.
Today's hearing about the economic upside of clean energy,
something that shouldn't even be controversial, is apparently
so threatening to the fossil fuel industry and its champions in
Congress that they keep talking about China as some kind of
excuse for fossil fuel business as usual, as if China somehow
wants the U.S. to seize all these opportunities and become the
global leader in innovation and investment and dominate the
global clean energy economy. It is really preposterous.
You have also heard the suggestion that we should not seize
all of these clean energy opportunities unless and until China
stops polluting. And just to be clear, no one is proposing to
give China a pass, especially now that the United States is
back in the Paris Accords, now that we have allies again, now
that we are pursuing a climate-focused foreign policy.
But as we work on emission reductions from all countries in
the world, including the Republican's favorite new country of
China, we are not standing still here at home. We are not
waiting for fossil fuel champions in Congress to tell us when
China has finally done enough for us to take action.
So let me come back to the subject of this hearing and to
another issue that our Republican colleagues like to bring up
when we talk about climate action: cost.
The world's leading scientists and economists have
explained over and over the cost of inaction is astronomical,
but invariably, when we talk about confronting this crisis, we
are told climate action just costs too much.
Now, the Sacramento region is economically diverse. You
have got struggling working families trying to pay their energy
bills. And you noted your commitment to keeping energy bills
affordable to those customers.
Would you please explain how that can be done?
And as you do that, please, if you can, touch on how, when
it comes to the price of energy, it is not just the unit cost
or the price per kilowatt-hour that matters, it is the overall
bill. If energy efficiency and conservation results in lower
bills, even with higher nominal rates, that is still a good
deal for consumers.
So, please, as an expert in this sector, if you could
explain how that works to the members of this committee,
because they often seem to be confused about California's
electricity bills.
Mr. Lau. Thank you, Congressman.
I think you are absolutely right. People don't pay rates.
In fact, most customers don't even know how much they pay for
kilowatt-hours. People pay bills.
So one of the things that we have been doing is that we
have been working very aggressively with our community to let
them know the benefit of energy efficiency, as Ms. Mejias said.
We have been doubling our energy efficiency.
Since 2007, we passed an aggressive goal to reduce our load
by 1.5 percent per year through energy efficiency, and that
translates to saving roughly about 15 to 20 million dollars a
year ever since. And some years we do 2 percent. And then, with
the new goal that we have, we are going to do three times that.
So that is one of the things that we have been looking at,
is that it is not really about the rates that you are paying;
it is really about the bills.
So we have been very, very aggressive with our Sustainable
Communities to work with those underserved communities to find
out what do we need to do to bring them into the, I want to
say, the zero-carbon economy.
So we have been working with them to very aggressively do
energy efficiency at their homes. We have been working with
GRID America in terms of GRID Alternatives, to put solar on the
roof. Now we are talking about looking at maybe we have NEM for
multifamilies for low-income.
And then, most importantly, we have been very, very
intentional about directing our resources for job training. So,
case in point, just the fact that we worked with the California
Mobility Center and we were able to get $1.9 million to train
folks to do light manufacturing for the region.
I think you heard Ms. Mejias talk about there is a problem
getting skilled workers. And so what better way to do it than
to work with your community, to work with all those local, I
want to say, nonprofit organizations, who those communities
trust, and really develop the pipeline to do that, and in a way
that creates those jobs that you need to talk about, good-
paying jobs for our communities.
That is how we are doing it. So it is not about rates. It
is all about what your customer wants.
So our latest plan, we have a 93 percent--no, 97 percent
approval from our customers saying this is what they want to
do. And we are bringing our underserved communities right along
with it.
And that is why we are working with the air quality
districts and local financiers to put zero-emission vehicles,
so low-income customers can borrow those cars for a few hours
and go do the stuff they need to do.
Mr. Huffman. I appreciate that. I know I don't have time to
compare California's energy bills with fossil fuel States like
Louisiana, which would compare quite favorably. But you have
helped, I think, sharpen the conversation in a helpful way.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Huffman.
Next, let's go to Rep. McEachin for 5 minutes.
Mr. McEachin. Thank you, Madam Chair. And, again, thank you
for convening this very, very important hearing.
I would like to start off with Ms. Mejias, if I can.
You were kind enough to discuss LIHEAP in your testimony.
And of course LIHEAP is a vital program. In fact, the American
Rescue Plan provides 4.5 billion in emergency funding for
LIHEAP. And I have a bill to expand LIHEAP so that more of the
funding can be used for solar energy.
Please tell us more about the program. Why is it an
important program? And how can we use it to protect public jobs
and protect public health?
Ms. Colon de Mejias. Thank you so much, Representative, for
your question.
LIHEAP is a phenomenal program that helps customers that
are struggling with unaffordable energy bills pay those bills.
And I see the opportunity here really to broaden that
definition and ensure that we provide equal access to those
customers that are struggling the most, the most disadvantaged
and most at risk, to access things like renewable resources, as
you have just suggested.
But also to remove the barriers that exist in their housing
currently so that they can access deeper retrofits, like air
sealing and insulation upgrades. Some of the problems that we
see in low-income housing that are often recipients of LIHEAP
dollars are mold, asbestos, vermiculite, and knob-and-tube
wiring, which makes it difficult to upgrade to, let's say, a
ductless mini split, or even to install something like
insulation that could cut their costs by 32 percent.
So it is really important. And Mr. Lau has done a great job
of giving some statistics. But I want you to know that, when I
work in low-income housing, which is 50 percent of my clients,
we reduce consumption by up to 32 percent. That is both in
single-family and multifamily housing.
And there are many studies that I could follow up with
after this that explain how we can drive those bills down
consistently and long-term so that we could reallocate some of
those LIHEAP dollars to things that you have an interest in,
like access to renewable resources for people who live in
multifamily housing or low-income housing.
I hope that answers your question.
Mr. McEachin. It does indeed, and I thank you for your
answer.
Mr. Lau, we have seen research showing that gas appliances
can worsen air quality--indoor air quality--and exacerbate
health problems. We have also seen research showing that
exposure to air pollution can increase the likelihood of severe
impacts from COVID-19, even including death.
How is your utility helping customers switch to electric
alternatives, to gas water heaters and space heaters?
Mr. Lau. Thank you, Congressman.
So we have been very, very active in terms of advancing our
building electrification efforts. So we offer right now
rebates. We offer heat pump water heater rebates. We offer heat
pump in terms of space heating rebates.
So we have been working very, very closely with our
communities in terms of showing them the benefits that, when
you switch over from gas to electric, you save money, on
average, I think a couple hundred dollars a year on family
households. When you look at the things you pay for gasoline,
and then when you combine the bill together, it is actually
quite a bit of savings.
And you remove the pollutants when you bring gas inside a
home. It is actually safer. And you never have to worry about
you forgot to turn off the stove because it is electric.
And so we have been working very, very closely with our
community to educate them about the benefit of electrification.
And so that is really one of the most important things, as
more and more people put in energy efficiency, as more and more
DERs get put on the grid. Utilities need to have healthy growth
through building and transportation electrification, because
those are beneficial growth.
And when they use clean energy, it helps to drive the costs
lower for everyone, and it really does help to improve the air
quality indoor and outdoor for everyone.
Mr. McEachin. Well, thank you, sir.
Madam Chair, I don't see a clock. So in an abundance of
caution, and so I don't pluck your nerves or the committee's
nerves, I will yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. McEachin.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses for your very
informative testimony on this Earth Week or U.S. Climate Action
Week as we look forward to crafting bipartisan climate
solutions that create jobs and protect the health and put money
back into the pockets of consumers.
We have a number of unanimous consent. Without--a number of
documents to enter into the record, if you all would like to
stick around for that.
In response to Representative Palmer's interesting comments
about forced labor in the solar supply chain, a Thursday,
February 4, 2021, statement from the Solar Energy Industries
Association, where 175 solar companies, including some of the
top solar manufacturers in the world, announced that they have
signed a pledge opposing forced labor in the solar supply
chain, stating their commitment to help prevent these abhorrent
practices and ensure that the products they are using do not
have links to forced labor in the region of China or anywhere
else in the world. And then hopefully we can bring some of
those supply chains back to the U.S. and help create jobs.
Also, without objection, we will submit, in response to
Representative Palmer's statement that the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act wasn't a very good job creator when it
came to clean energy, a report from 2016, the Council of
Economic Advisors, that states that from 2009 to 2015 the
energy-related investments from ARRA supported roughly 150,000
jobs, and it leveraged $150 billion in non-Federal and private
capital for clean energy investments.
Also entering into the record an April 13 letter from the
Outdoor Business Climate Partnership in support of our April 15
hearing, ``Making the Case for Climate Action: The Growing
Risks and Costs of Inaction''; an April 13 letter from We Mean
Business Coalition, representing hundreds of companies and
investors, calling for ambitious U.S. nationally determined
contributions at at least 50 percent emissions reductions by
2030; a March 23 letter from environmental justice
organizations and national environmental groups outlining
spending priorities for economic recovery legislation that
reduces pollution, tackles climate change, and addresses
environmental injustice while creating jobs in the hardest-hit
communities; an April 19 letter from the Solar Energy Industry
Association aligning policy recommendations to scale up solar
energy development to meet clean energy goals; an April 20
report from the Rhodium Group entitled ``Pathways to Build Back
Better: Jobs From Investing in Clean Electricity,'' which
highlights the goal of the Biden American Jobs Plan to create
millions of new jobs through Federal investments in clean
infrastructure and finds that decarbonization of electricity
can create more than 600,000 jobs a year on average between
2022 and 2031; and--Mr. Lau, you will like this--a statement
from Congresswoman Doris Matsui regarding the Sacramento
Municipal Utility District.
[The information follows:]

Submissions for the Record

Representative Kathy Castor

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

April 20, 2021

ATTACHMENT: SEIA. (2021, February 4). Solar Companies Unite to Prevent
Forced Labor in the Solar Supply Chain.

The press release is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://www.seia.org/news/solar-companies-unite-prevent-forced-
labor-
solar-supply-chain

ATTACHMENT: White House Council on Economic Advisors. (2016, February
25).
FACT SHEET: The Recovery Act Made The Largest Single Investment
In Clean Energy In History, Driving The Deployment Of Clean
Energy, Promoting Energy Efficiency, And Supporting
Manufacturing.

The fact sheet is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2016/02/
25/fact-sheet-recovery-act-made-largest-single-investment-
clean-energy

++

April 13, 2021

House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis
H2-359 Ford Building
Washington, DC 20515

Dear House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,

As the three trade associations representing the U.S. outdoor
industry, we are sending a letter in support of your hearing this week,
``Making the Case for Climate Action: The Growing Risks and Costs of
Inaction.''
Our members, outdoor gear manufacturers, retailers and ski resorts,
make up the majority of the outdoor industry that generates over $778
billion in U.S. consumer spending annually and supports 7.6 million
jobs. As an industry that is inextricably linked to the natural
environment, we are sharply tuned into the impacts of climate change.
Climate change is threatening our communities, infrastructure and
economy. The Fourth National Climate Assessment identified outdoor
recreation and tourism as key sectors that will be negatively impacted
by climate change. Longer and hotter summers, prolonged droughts,
increasingly devastating forest fires, rising sea levels, warming
waters, reduced river flows and unreliable snowpack are all impacting
the outdoor recreation economy. The unpredictability that comes with
climate change presents challenges for outdoor recreation businesses
with respect to planning, staffing, inventory, capital investments, and
other key decision-making. Changes in snowpack and earlier snowmelt
affect not just ski resorts, but fly fishing and rafting as well. The
record 2020 wildfires, intensified by drought conditions across the
West, profoundly impacted rural communities and could cost up to $150
billion in economic losses.
There is no time to wait to address climate change, and we support
your efforts to increase the urgency to address it in Washington. Many
of our member-businesses are already taking-action, setting ambitious
science-based emissions targets and working to reduce their carbon
footprints through our respective organization's climate programs. But
the private sector cannot do this alone--we need systemic change that
only a strong national climate policy can deliver.
To achieve this, our organizations support:

Prioritizing BIPOC communities in any climate and
infrastructure investments, as well as those communities
impacted in the transition to a clean energy economy.

Curbing carbon emissions across the largest-emitting
sectors.

Placing a price on carbon pollution to incentivize
emissions reductions.

Fostering investments to accelerate the transition to
a zero-emissions economy including research, jobs and green
infrastructure.

Providing incentives for renewable energy and
storage, cleaner transportation, clean technology innovation
and natural climate solutions.
Our trade associations--representing more than 1,500 businesses
with operations across all 50 states--have united against this common
threat because together, we can be a stronger voice for the climate
policies urgently needed to protect the places that we live, and the
future of our industry. We know that addressing climate change is an
opportunity to position our country for a successful, net-zero future
and support a healthy outdoor recreation experience for all.

Sincerely,

National Ski Areas Association, Lakewood, CO;
Outdoor Industry Association, Boulder, CO;
Snowsports Industries America, Park City, UT

++

ATTACHMENT: Businesses and Investors Support U.S. Federal Climate
Target in
Open Letter to President Biden. We Mean Business coalition.
(2021, April 13).

The letter is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://www.wemeanbusinesscoalition.org/ambitious-u-s-2030-ndc/

++

March 23, 2021

The Honorable Nancy Pelosi
Speaker of the House
U.S. House of Representatives
H-232, U.S. Capitol
Washington, D.C. 20515

The Honorable Kevin McCarthy         The Honorable Charles Schumer
Minority Leader                      Majority Leader
U.S. House of Representatives        U.S. Senate
H-204, U.S. Capitol                  S-221, U.S. Capitol
Washington, D.C. 20515               Washington, D.C. 20510

The Honorable Mitch McConnell
Minority Leader
U.S. Senate
S-230, U.S. Capitol
Washington, D.C. 20510

Dear Speaker Pelosi, Majority Leader Schumer, Minority Leader McCarthy,
and Minority Leader McConnell:
Our country is currently facing the devastating impact of
intersecting health, economic, racial justice, environmental justice
and climate crises. Too many communities of color, low-income
communities, Tribal communities and environmental justice communities
have long faced a toxic legacy of pollution as a result of
environmental racism and are now suffering disproportionate economic
and health impacts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. And they are
on the front lines of climate change, bearing the brunt of climate
impacts and most at risk of being deprived of the benefits of a clean
energy transformation. For these communities, the current challenges
are deeply interconnected, and require immediate action. Congress now
has an opportunity to meet these crises head on through bold
leadership, a commitment to justice, and significant, sustained and
equitable investments in recovery with a focus on these aforementioned
communities.
During his first week in office, President Biden committed to
achieve bold and concrete climate and environmental justice goals and
launched an all-of-government approach to tackling climate change and
addressing decades of environmental racism. With his Justice40
commitment, the President directed his Administration to take immediate
steps toward delivering 40% of the overall benefits from federal
investment in clean energy and climate-resilient infrastructure and
affordable housing to disadvantaged communities. This commitment is
central to the success of any significant investment package and must
be met or exceeded by Congress through a long-term investment program
that centers equity and justice.
We therefore urge Congress to advance transformative economic
recovery legislation that confronts these ongoing crises by reducing
pollution, tackling climate change and addressing environmental
injustice while creating jobs in the hardest-hit communities. As
described in our recommendations below, we urge Congress to support an
investment package that improves public health and addresses health
disparities, increases access to healthcare, and ensures uninterrupted
access to potable water and reliable electricity for all households and
communities. This investment package must also reduce pollution, create
meaningful local job opportunities, support pollution-free energy and
transportation options, and invest in affordable and climate-ready
housing and other equitable and just community development programs.
In addition, stimulus legislation must include safeguards to ensure
that funds are spent in ways that comply with environmental regulations
to avoid increasing public health and safety risks. Congress must
ensure that projects supported by recovery legislation reduce locally
harmful air pollution in communities coping with the cumulative impacts
of multiple pollution sources, including low-income communities, Tribal
communities, communities of color, and environmental justice
communities. Congress must also direct companies receiving stimulus
support with facilities located in or near low-income neighborhoods,
Tribal communities and communities of color to significantly reduce
locally harmful pollution, such as airborne particulate matter, in
these communities. Finally, Congress must remove federal program cost-
share requirements for environmental justice and other disadvantaged
communities and, where needed, adjust existing funding allocation
formulas to ensure that at least 40 percent of federal program
investments go directly to environmental justice and disadvantaged
communities.
We write today as a group of environmental justice organizations
and national environmental groups working together to advance a bold
and equitable national climate agenda.\1\ On behalf of our members and
supporters, we urge you to address environmental injustice, tackle
climate change and build an equitable and just economic recovery.
Specifically, we urge you to include the spending priorities
recommended below in any economic stimulus legislation and to advance
this critical legislation promptly.
WATER
Access to affordable clean water is critical, especially as
households nationwide respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. Winter storms
in Texas in February underscored the fragility of our nation's water
systems when millions of people lost water access during the crisis.
The below actions are long overdue. We recommend the following specific
actions and funding:
Keep national moratorium on water shutoffs for all households in
place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Equitable and Justice National Climate Platform available at:
www.ajustclimate.org
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Include $100 million for immediate potable water distribution,
filter installation and sanitation systems for homes without access to
these necessities. Spending should prioritize urban, rural, and Tribal
communities who currently lack access to safe drinking water and
adequate water and sanitation systems.
Include $45 billion in grants and technical assistance dollars for
the replacement of both household plumbing and lead services lines.
Spending should prioritize households' whose plumbing systems have been
corroded by municipal drinking water systems, such as in Flint,
Michigan. This should also allow for home water filters for
contaminants including but not limited to lead and PFAS. Trust in
municipal water systems must be rebuilt.
$1 billion over 5 years for School Drinking Fountain Replacement to
help schools and daycare centers replace lead-bearing water fountains
and faucets with water hydration stations with certified filters that
meet the Q
Grid modernization and transmission: Grid
modernization efforts should include establishment of a robust
and transparent benefit cost framework to inform utility
planning and ensure full and fair valuation of distributed
energy resources. To reduce transmission barriers to the
further expansion of utility-scale solar, we need a
disciplined, well-coordinated, cross-jurisdictional regional-
level transmission planning effort.

US manufacturing: To help ensure U.S. manufacturers
can succeed in this environment, the United States must
leverage its unique technology and innovation ecosystem,
including national labs, regional and local incubators, and the
venture capital investment community.

Resiliency & cybersecurity: Ensuring resiliency
requires a focus on developing technological solutions for
reliability, including developing industry guidance for
equipment corrosion protection in design and installation,
establishing grid management and source-based maintenance
programs that ensure integration as main or back-up systems and
developing industry-wide procedures for operations and
maintenance.

Workforce development: To reach 20% of generation by
2030, our estimates show that nearly 400,000 jobs will be added
over the next decade, with many of them coming in emerging
states and regions that will require significant training and
workforce development.
SEIA is proud of the amount the solar industry has contributed
to decarbonizing the electricity system, but we know we still
have a long way to go. With your support in addition to our
industry taking on aggressive collaboration to work with other
technologies and partners, we are confident that the Solar+
Decade will be fruitful for the American economy, American
workers, and homeowners and small businesses. Thank you for
your consideration of these policies and continued dialogue
with the solar industry.

Sincerely,
Abigail Ross Hopper, Esq.
President & CEO

++

ATTACHMENT: Larsen, J., Mohan, S., & Houser, T. (2021, April 20).
``Pathways
to Build Back Better: Jobs from Investing in Clean
Electricity.'' Rhodium Group.

The report is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://rhg.com/research/build-back-better-jobs-electric-power/

++

Statement from Congresswoman Doris Matsui

House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

Full Committee Hearing:

``Making the Case for Climate Action:
Creating New Jobs and Catalyzing Economic Growth''

Tuesday, April 20th at 12PM via Zoom

Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the
Committee:
In October of last year, Mr. Paul Lau was appointed as the Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) of my local utility company, the Sacramento
Municipal Utility District (SMUD). But his leadership to fulfill SMUD's
mission to provide clean, safe, and affordable electricity to
Sacramentans began long before. Paul is a son of Sacramento. Originally
from Hong Kong, he immigrated with his family to the city at the age of
12. He attended high school and college in Sacramento and has built his
professional career for the last 38 years at SMUD. It all started in
1982 when he was a young electrical engineering student at California
State University, Sacramento interning at the company. I am honored to
have him as my constituent and as a fellow leader serving the
California Capital Region.
Paul's work ethic and commitment to SMUD and the Sacramento
community have positioned him to be a part of the utility's executive
team for more than 12 years, most recently serving as chief grid
strategy and operations officer, and now as CEO. His expertise in
emerging energy technologies has also led him to serve as Vice Chair of
the Large Public Power Council Emerging Trends Task Force, on the
Boards of the Smart Electric Power Alliance and the Electric
Transportation Community Development Corporation, on the Sacramento
Asian-Pacific Chamber of Commerce, and as an Alternate Commissioner of
the Balancing Authority of Northern California. In his new leadership
role as CEO, Paul will use his nearly four decades of experience to
spearhead the most ambitious carbon-reduction goal of any utility in
the United States, SMUD's `Zero Carbon' Plan.
As you know, SMUD is one of the nation's largest community-owned
utilities, operating on a not-for-profit basis and supplying
electricity to 1.5 million residents in the California Capital Region
for over 75 years. As a strong partner in the fight against the climate
crisis, the company has set ambitious goals to meet and exceed
California's rigorous environmental requirements: it was the first
large utility in the state to reach a 20 percent renewable portfolio
standard and in 2018 the utility's board adopted a plan to put SMUD on
a path to net-zero emissions by 2040. Now, SMUD seeks to build on its
robust legacy by becoming the first utility company in the nation to
completely eliminate carbon emissions from its power supply by 2030.
Paul and SMUD are not just leading the way on deep decarbonization,
they are incorporating energy equity and local workforce development as
they chart a path towards a clean energy future. SMUD is also focused
on expanding clean energy access to underserved communities, creating
green jobs, and building a pipeline to recruit, train, and hire diverse
communities in the region for this transition. They seek to build
community wealth by investing in partnerships with local organizations,
colleges, and universities. Additionally, through its work with the
California Mobility Center--a public-private consortium--SMUD aims to
establish Sacramento as a center of electric mobility innovation. Its
investments in local workforce development for electrical, solar, and
EV charging equipment combined with charging infrastructure efforts
through the public-private consortium are estimated to generate $2.5
billion in economic activity in the region in the coming years.
Clean energy deployment and green jobs are a part of the future
that our communities deserve, and SMUD is an exceptional example that
we can achieve our goals to build back better sustainably. I am honored
to work alongside a progressive, community-owned, and community-minded
utility company and thankful to have Mr. Lau's expertise and leadership
guiding clean energy efforts in Sacramento and beyond.
Thank you for your time and I yield back.

Ms. Castor. As you know, she is your biggest fan.
And so, without objection, all members will have 10
business days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses, and I ask our witnesses to please
respond promptly.
And just as a reminder, to tune in to President Biden's
Leaders Submit. What a refreshing time it is that the United
States of America is leading again on the world stage to urge
China and all other countries to go farther and faster on their
NDCs under the Paris Climate Accord.
Secretary Blinken said yesterday that here in the U.S. we
have around 4 percent of the world's population, but we
contribute nearly 15 percent of global emissions. If we do our
part at home, we can make a significant contribution to
addressing this crisis. And I know that we will then inspire
others to go farther and faster as well.
So thank you all for being here today. And we are
adjourned. Thanks so much.
[Whereupon, at 1:57 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
