- TURNING THE TIDE FOR OCEAN CLIMATE ACTION: UNLEASHING THE CLIMATE BENEFITS OF OUR BLUE PLANET

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TURNING THE TIDE FOR OCEAN
CLIMATE ACTION: UNLEASHING THE
CLIMATE BENEFITS OF OUR BLUE PLANET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
JUNE 9, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-18

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-321             WASHINGTON : 2022

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CLIMATE CRISIS
One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

KATHY CASTOR, Florida, Chair
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana,
JULIA BROWNLEY, California             Ranking Member
JARED HUFFMAN, California            GARY PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         BUDDY CARTER, Georgia
MIKE LEVIN, California               CAROL MILLER, West Virginia
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
------
Ana Unruh Cohen, Majority Staff Director
Sarah Jorgenson, Minority Staff Director
climatecrisis.house.gov

C O N T E N T S

----------

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Page
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and Chair, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................     3
Hon. Garret Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Select Committee on the
Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     4

WITNESSES

The Honorable Dr. Richard W. Spinrad, Under Secretary of Commerce
for Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Prepared Statement...........................................     8
The Honorable Monica Medina, Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau
of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs, U.S. Department of State
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Prepared Statement...........................................    17

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Report from the National Energy Technology Laboratory, ``Life
Cycle Greenhouse Gas Perspective on Exporting Liquefied Natural
Gas from the United States: 2019 Update,'' submitted for the
record by Mr. Graves...........................................    39
Table from the U.S. Energy Information Association's
International Energy Outlook 2021, ``Table A6. World natural
gas consumption by region, Reference case,'' submitted for the
record by Mr. Graves...........................................    40
Table from the U.S. Energy Information Association's
International Energy Outlook 2021, ``Table A6. World natural
gas consumption by region, High Economic Growth case,''
submitted for the record by Mr. Graves.........................    40
A letter to President Biden from 118 organizations and businesses
supporting the development of an U.S. Ocean-Climate Action
Plan, dated October 15, 2021, submitted for the record by Ms.
Castor.........................................................    46

APPENDIX

Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Hon. Dr.
Richard Spinrad................................................    47
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Hon. Monica
Medina.........................................................    48

TURNING THE TIDE FOR OCEAN

CLIMATE ACTION: UNLEASHING THE

CLIMATE BENEFITS OF OUR BLUE PLANET

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 9, 2022

House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:04 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Kathy Castor
[chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Castor, Bonamici, Brownley,
Huffman, Levin, Casten, Graves, Palmer, Carter, Miller,
Crenshaw, and Gonzalez.
Ms. Castor. And the committee will come to order.
Good morning, everyone.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
As a reminder, members participating in a hearing remotely
should be visible on camera throughout the hearing. For members
participating in person, masks are optional, as per the Office
of the Attending Physician.
As with in-person meetings, members are responsible for
controlling their own microphones. Members can be muted by
staff only to avoid inadvertent background noise.
As a reminder, statements, documents,
or motions must be submit- ted to the electronic repository, to

[email protected]
.
Finally, members or witnesses experiencing technical
problems should inform committee staff immediately.
Okay. Now that that is out of the way, good morning.
Welcome to the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis hearing,
Turning the Tide for Ocean Climate Action: Unleashing the
Climate Benefits of Our Blue Planet.
And before we get going, I want to acknowledge that there
are students in the room, the SCUBAnauts--the SCUBAnauts
International. As we'll hear about during the hearing, marine
science and observations are the cornerstone of ensuring a
safe, healthy, and sustainable planet and the ocean. These
SCUBAnauts are ready--are already getting a start in becoming
the next generation of scientists and policymakers and maybe
even a future NOAA Administrator. So welcome to our SCUBAnauts
today.
And I will recognize myself for a 5-minute opening
statement.
Happy Ocean Month and Capitol Hill Ocean Week. As we
celebrate the progress that we have made to sustainably manage
our ocean, our coasts, our marine ecosystems. We must also look
at additional policies and investments needed to conserve and
restore them. And I am worried. We know climate change is
impacting our ocean, leading to increases in water temperature,
rising sea levels, acidification, deoxygenation, and changes in
circulation. And the climate crisis is an ocean crisis, which
means the oceans must be part of our national climate strategy,
and we must invest in the ocean-based climate solutions.
The ocean plays a critical role in our global climate. It
helps regulate temperatures, it absorbs excess heat, it
supports countless ecosystems. It also supports millions of
jobs. We know this in Florida, in the Tampa Bay area, including
over 500,000 jobs in Florida alone. But the ocean is stressed
out. It has absorbed between 20 and 30 percent of all human-
caused carbon pollution since the 1980s. And it has absorbed
more than 90 percent of excess heat since 1970.
That is why it is crucial that we conserve seagrasses,
mangroves, and other coastal habitats, which sequester more
carbon per area than any terrestrial habitat. It is crucial
that we protect our coral reefs, which can mitigate the impacts
of intense hurricanes, rising sea levels, and storm surge in
places like Florida. And it is crucial that we conserve open
ocean and deep-sea ecosystems, which may also be able to
sequester carbon according to emerging research.
But we cannot stop there. Ocean climate action is also
about harnessing offshore wind energy and emerging
technologies, like wave and tidal power. These clean energy
sources can help secure America's energy independence, while
reducing our dependence on costly fossil fuels, and it can help
us meet our climate targets.
According to research by the High Level Panel for a
Sustainable Ocean Economy, ocean-based climate solutions can
help reduce heat-trapping pollution by nearly 4 billion tons
per year by 2030, and 11 billion tons per year by 2050. That is
more than the equivalent of shutting down every coal-fire power
plant around the world.
So as we unleash this potential, we must also be proactive
about restoring and conserving our ocean areas. That means
investing in low-cost, big-impact solutions, like safeguarding
marine and coastal habitats through well-implemented marine
protected areas.
According to a recent study in Science, climate-fueled
ocean warming could kill off one-third of all marine animals
over the next 300 years. And according to a separate study,
climate change could lead to 10 percent of fish species
becoming extinct this century. These serious losses would harm
coastal economies, and we are already seeing some of these
impacts in Florida. Just last year, a record number of manatees
died, many from starvation, as man-made pollution killed off
much of the seagrass that manatees feed on. And in Tampa Bay,
red tide killed more than 600 tons of marine life and fish last
summer, leaving a rotten smell that took over parts of our
coast.
But the good news is that we can mitigate these harms. And
when it comes to ocean climate action, the Biden-Harris
administration has hit the ground running. President Biden made
the ocean a central part of his early Executive Order on
Climate, increasing American coordination with international
partners, and pledging to protect at least 30 percent of our
waters by 2030. He also tasked the Ocean Policy Committee with
drafting a National Ocean Climate Action Plan. And he is
committed to produce 30 gigawatts of offshore wind energy by
2030.
We have also done our part in Congress. Through President
Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we invested over $490
million to restore ecosystems and prevent flood damage in
coastal communities; another $150 million to better gather data
along our coast, the Great Lakes, and the ocean; and $490
million to improve NOAA's flood mapping, forecasting, and water
modeling. Through our government funding legislation that we do
every year, we also invested $33 million for NOAA's Coral Reef
Program, and $16 million for its Ocean Acidification Program,
as well as $21.5 million to address harmful algal blooms.
Finally, the House did pass $6 billion in reconciliation
investments for coastal and marine habitat restoration, and we
urge our Senate colleagues to include those investments as they
finalize the reconciliation legislation.
So it is time to turn the tide for ocean climate action,
and I look forward to today's discussion.
I know my partner here, the Ranking Member, Representative
Graves, agrees about the importance of our ocean resources, and
I am happy to recognize him for 5 minutes.
[The statement of Ms. Castor follows:]

Opening Statement of Chair Kathy Castor

Hearing on ``Turning the Tide for Ocean Climate Action:
Unleashing the Climate Benefits of Our Blue Planet''

June 9, 2022

As prepared for delivery

Happy National Ocean Month and Capitol Hill Ocean Week. As we
celebrate the progress we've made to sustainably manage our ocean, our
coasts, and our marine ecosystems, we must also look at additional
policies and investments needed to conserve and restore them. I'm
worried. We know climate change is impacting our ocean, leading to
increases in water temperature, rising sea levels, acidification,
deoxygenation, and changes in circulation. The climate crisis is an
ocean crisis. Which means the ocean must be part of our national
climate strategy--and we must invest in ocean-based climate solutions.
The ocean plays a crucial role in our global climate. It helps
regulate temperatures, absorbs excess heat, and supports countless
ecosystems. It also supports millions of jobs, including over 500,000
jobs in Florida alone. But the ocean is stressed out. It has absorbed
between 20 and 30% of all human-caused carbon pollution since the
1980s. And it has absorbed more than 90% of excess heat since 1970.
That's why it's crucial that we conserve sea grasses, mangroves, and
other coastal habitats, which sequester more carbon per area than any
terrestrial habitat. It's crucial that we protect our coral reefs,
which can mitigate the impacts of intense hurricanes, rising sea
levels, and storm surge in places like Florida. And it's crucial we
conserve open ocean and deep-sea ecosystems, which may also be able to
sequester carbon, according to emerging research.
We cannot stop there. Ocean climate action is also about harnessing
offshore wind energy and emerging technologies, like wave and tidal
power. These clean energy sources can help secure America's energy
independence, while reducing our dependence on costly fossil fuels. And
they can help us meet our climate targets. According to research by the
High Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, ocean-based climate
solutions can help reduce heat-trapping pollution by nearly 4 billion
tonnes per year by 2030--and 11 billion tonnes per year by 2050. That's
more than the equivalent of shutting down every coal-fired power plant
around the world.
As we unleash this potential, we must be proactive about restoring
and conserving our ocean areas. That means investing in low-cost, big-
impact solutions, like safeguarding marine and coastal habitats through
well-implemented Marine Protected Areas. According to a recent study in
Science, climate-fueled ocean warming could kill off one-third of all
marine animals over the next 300 years. And according to a separate
study, climate change could lead to 10% of fish species becoming
extinct this century. These serious losses would harm coastal
economies. And we're already seeing some of these impacts in Florida.
Just last year, a record number of manatees died--many from
starvation--as man-made pollution killed off much of the seagrass that
manatees feed on. And in Tampa Bay, red tide killed more than 600 tons
of marine life and fish last summer, leaving a rotten smell that took
over parts of our coast.
The good news is we can mitigate these harms. And when it comes to
ocean climate action, the Biden-Harris Administration has hit the
ground running. President Biden made the ocean a central part of his
early executive order on climate, increasing American coordination with
international partners and pledging to protect at least 30% of our
waters by 2030. He also tasked the Ocean Policy Committee with drafting
a national Ocean Climate Action Plan, and he's committed to produce 30
Gigawatts of offshore wind energy by 2030.
We've also done our part in Congress. Through President Biden's
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we invested over $490 million to restore
ecosystems and prevent flood damage in coastal communities; $150
million to better gather data along our coasts, Great Lakes, and ocean;
and $490 million to improve NOAA's flood mapping, forecasting, and
water modeling. Through our government funding legislation, we also
invested $33 million for NOAA's Coral Reef Program and $16 million for
its Ocean Acidification Program, as well as $21.5 million to address
harmful algal blooms. Finally, the House passed $6 billion in
reconciliation investments for coastal and marine habitat restoration,
and we urge our Senate colleagues to include those investments as they
finalize their reconciliation legislation.
It's time to turn the tide for ocean climate action. I look forward
to today's discussion.

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks for being here
today and hosting the hearing.
And I want to thank y'all for being here. And let me
explain why. This issue on climate has been this issue that has
just been really political and really volatile now for a number
of years. And the thing is, is that if we don't get it right,
you are going to be the ones that inherit the problems, right?
You are. You are going to be the ones that deal with our
irresponsible actions, our politicizing something that should
just be fact and science-based. And so we have got to get it
right.
And what is especially concerning is the area that I
represent, South Louisiana. We have one of the--some of the
fastest subsidence rates in the world--or sinking rates in the
world. We have some of the most gradual slopes. And so every
inch of relative sea rise causes a pretty extraordinary impact.
And just to put things in perspective--and I know Secretary
Medina knows this well--we have lost about 2,000 square miles
of our coast. That is like taking the State of Rhode Island and
just wiping it off the map entirely.
But what has happened with this issue is it has just become
this big political thing. We have people out there saying all
these things that are completely untrue, that are causing
people to create false narratives and then act on them. And so
let me give you a few examples.
So, number one, you have people out there that are touting
things like Paris Climate Accords and saying that these things
are going to end up being the saving grace. Well, I will give
you a little factoid. Under Paris Climate Accords, emissions
for the globe are actually going to go up, not down. They are
going to go up.
And, specifically, I want to call out one country, and I
know Secretary Medina is going to talk about this, but China.
The country of China right now, if I remember this right, they
are emitting more than the United States, European Union, South
Korea, and Japan, I think, combined. And under their commitment
to the Paris Accords, they get to increase another 50 percent
between now and 2030. Fifty percent.
So think for just a minute, in the United States, we can be
leading the world. We can be leading the world in reducing
emissions, in reducing emissions, but the reality is the
environment is agnostic as to which country--which country
reduces emissions the most. It happens--what matters is whether
we have a net downward trajectory. And the reality is that for
every 1 ton of emissions the U.S. has reduced, China has
actually gone up by 4. For every 1 ton we have reduced, China
has increased by 4.
If we are going to extract any lessons learned from what
has happened with Russia's aggression in the Ukraine, it needs
to be the fact that you have leaders like Vladimir Putin, and
Xi in China, and Kim in North Korea, and Iran, and leaders
around the world, they don't care about international norms.
They don't care about standards or rules. They don't care. They
are going to do whatever they want. And they are never going to
do things that undermine their economic best interest. They are
not.
And so for us to go out and pursue it--as the Chair
mentioned--costly fossil fuels. Well, you know, I remind you,
gasoline prices have gone up over a hundred percent over the
past year and a half. Natural gas prices have gone up over 300
percent over the last year and a half. The Biden administration
has made it very clear that we are going to have an increased
demand for fossil fuels. We are going to have an increased
demand for natural gas. We are going to have an increased
demand for gasoline, for oil.
The Chair is exactly right, we are going to need absolutely
every energy source, the ones that she has mentioned. We are
going to need solar and wind, we are going to need wave and
geothermal, we are going to hydro, we are going to need
nuclear. We are going to need all of it. Because according to
the Biden administration, there is going to be a 50 percent
increase in global energy demand. Fifty percent. And so we are
going to need every energy source we can.
The Biden administration has also said that developing
countries are going to need up to an 80 percent increase in
natural gas. So if we are going--the globe is, the globe,
developing countries. So if we need an 80 percent increase in
natural gas, why in the world would we not get it from the
place that has it the cleanest, the cleanest in the world? You
know what that is? That is the United States. In fact, it is in
our offshore.
So we can continue going down these pathways that make no
sense, that aren't based in science, that aren't based in data,
that continue the trajectory of this administration, that is
actually seeing emissions go up, not down. I will tell you a
secret. Under the previous administration, emissions went down
2.5 percent a year. Under this administration, they have gone
up 6.3 percent in 1 year. Okay? So we can deal with facts or we
can create false narratives and then pursue solutions based on
things that are completely untrue. And if we continue doing
that, guess whose problem it becomes? Yours.
So I am looking forward to this panel today. My daughter
and I went fishing in the Gulf of Mexico this weekend. She
nailed an 18-pound red snapper, a 30--well, almost 30-pound gag
grouper, a good lane snapper. I mean, she was nailing them. We
love fishing. We love the Gulf of Mexico and those resources.
We must protect them, but we have got to make sure that we are
using rational science.
And I want to thank this committee's first government
witnesses ever for coming since our existence. We appreciate
you being here.
Ms. Castor. Okay. Now, I want to welcome our witnesses.
Today we will hear from two Biden administration officials on
the importance of ocean-based solutions in addressing the
climate crisis. And they are not the first government witnesses
to appear here, just to make sure the record is clear on that.
Dr. Richard Spinrad is the Under Secretary of Commerce for
Oceans and Atmosphere and NOAA Administrator. Dr. Spinrad is
responsible for the strategic direction and oversight of NOAA,
including its mission to understand and predict changes in
climate, weather, ocean, and coast, as well as helping conserve
and manage coastal and marine ecosystems and resources. He
previously served as NOAA's Chief Scientist under President
Obama, and led NOAA's Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric
Research and the National Ocean Service. Welcome.
And Ms. Monica Medina is the Assistant Secretary of State
for Oceans and International Environment and Scientific
Affairs. Assistant Secretary Medina and her team provide
leadership to conserve and protect the global environment and
the ocean. Prior to this role, Assistant Secretary Medina was
an Adjunct Professor at Georgetown University's School of
Foreign Service, a former Principal Deputy Under Secretary of
Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and General Counsel of NOAA,
and a Special Assistant to the Secretary of Defense. Welcome.
We are so excited to have you both here. And, without
objection, the witnesses' opening statements will be made part
of the record.
With that, Dr. Spinrad, you are recognized for 5 minutes to
provide your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF THE HONORABLE DR. RICHARD W. SPINRAD, UNDER
SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE AND NOAA
ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION;
AND THE HONORABLE MONICA MEDINA, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE,
BUREAU OF OCEANS AND INTERNATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SCIENTIFIC
AFFAIRS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DR. RICHARD W. SPINRAD

Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Chair Castor, Ranking Member
Graves, members of the Select Committee. I really appreciate
the opportunity to testify on NOAA's work to turn the tide for
ocean climate action. And I am pleased to join you during
National Ocean Month and Capitol Hill Ocean Week, a time when
we all join together to focus on the importance of our oceans
and Great Lakes, and the communities that rely on them,
something that we at NOAA do every day.
I am also excited to be teaming up again with my former
NOAA colleague, Assistant Secretary of State, Monica Medina, on
these critical issues. Now more than ever, it is crucial that
we are united in confronting these challenges on both the
domestic and the global fronts.
The oceans play a fundamental role in supporting life on
our planet, effecting everything from the air we breathe and
the food we eat, to weather and climate patterns. Our well-
being is intrinsically linked to the health of the oceans.
NOAA's mission to support healthy oceans requires observations,
research, modeling, prediction, and science-based stewardship
of ocean resources.
As the Federal authoritative source on climate information,
NOAA is working to build a climate-ready nation by 2030. This
means a nation that loses fewer lives and incurs less damage
when extreme weather strikes. Using NOAA's data, products, and
services, our nation will improve its collective understanding
of climate change, both to mitigate its impacts and help ensure
we are resilient in the face of the climate threats we cannot
avoid. With our stakeholders, other Federal agencies, the
private sector, philanthropy, academia, and the international
community, we are focusing on actions on addressing the climate
risks of extreme heat, drought, fire, flooding, sea level rise,
and other extreme events, all serious realities that you and
your constituents experience every day.
NOAA is here to help. Through the Department of Commerce's
Climate Action Plan, the departmental order on addressing the
climate crisis, and NOAA's own Climate Council, we are working
diligently to address these concerns and integrate them into
planning and policies to instill meaningful change.
But we are not just providing data to scientists and
industry. To truly prepare our nation to be climate ready, we
know that it is critical to engage early, often, and
meaningfully with the rural, Tribal, marginalized, and
historically underserved and vulnerable communities that need
the most help to build resilience against climate change.
To expand our reach, NOAA is forging partnerships with
entities like the American Medical Association, the American
Bar Association, the National Association of Realtors. We are
engaging through our Climate and Equity Roundtables, as well as
our private sector climate listening sessions, to make sure we
are meeting the needs and the codeveloping smart, sustainable
principals for the public-private partnerships necessary to
deliver climate services.
We are working in all of the United States, including with
Native communities, to provide them with the products and
services that they need. We want to ensure all decision makers
are empowered to take action and make science-based decisions
in the face of climate change. NOAA is actively working to
remove barriers and expand equitable access to our tools,
resources, and services to those on the front lines. We are
funding climate and equity pilot projects, codeveloped with
communities based on feedback received during these
roundtables.
The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law--thank you--provides NOAA
with nearly $3 billion, two-thirds of which is focused on
coastal resilience and habitat restoration. And NOAA's Fiscal
Year 2023 President's budget request includes nearly $200
million in new climate research, tools, and services.
There is a significant increase in demand for climate
services across all regions and sectors, and these investments
will not only help expand and improve NOAA's service delivery
to build a climate-ready nation, but also prove and provide new
and long-lasting economic opportunities to all communities.
As NOAA works to address the impacts of climate change, we
are also leading the administration priorities to map 30
percent of our coasts and oceans, protect 30 percent of our
land and water, and deploy 30 gigawatts of offshore wind by
2030.
NOAA has a memorandum of understanding with the Bureau of
Ocean Energy Management, which will prepare us to reach our
offshore wind goals and minimize the impacts on ecosystems. We
are also expanding our network of marine and estuarine
protected areas, enhancing our resilience, sequestering carbon,
and protecting biodiversity.
In May, NOAA's Mauna Loa Atmospheric Baseline Observatory
recorded carbon dioxide levels not seen on this planet for over
4 million years. The last time CO
2
levels were this
high, sea levels were high enough to drown most of the world's
modern, major cities.
The time to act on climate change is now, and NOAA will
continue to lead the way in understanding and taking action to
address the climate crisis and build a climate-ready nation. We
look forward to continuing to work alongside our Federal
partners, including the Department of State, to do so.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I do
look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The statement of Dr. Spinrad follows:]

Written Testimony of Dr. Richard Spinrad

Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Administrator

Hearing on ``Turning the Tide for Ocean Climate Action:
Unleashing the Climate Benefits of Our Blue Planet''

Before the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

June 9, 2022

INTRODUCTION

Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and Members of the Select
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today regarding the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) work on our
ocean and climate. I am pleased to join you during National Ocean Month
and Capitol Hill Ocean Week; a time when Congress focuses on the
importance of our ocean and Great Lakes
and discusses how we can protect them and the communities that rely on
them--something we at NOAA do every day.
The Department of Commerce's Climate Action Plan \1\ and Department
Administrative Order 216-22 \2\ aim to incorporate climate
considerations into Department policies and planning and to foster and
enhance the resilience of vulnerable communities against the key
climate risks of extreme heat, drought, wildfires, flooding, coastal
inundation and impacts to fisheries. At NOAA, we seek to build a
climate ready nation, with the goal of a thriving nation whose
prosperity, health, safety, and continued growth benefit from and
depend upon a shared understanding of, and collective action to reduce,
the impacts of climate change. NOAA received almost $3 billion in
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act funding that will support the
ocean, climate, and communities. This funding will restore coastal
habitats and ecological features that protect coastal communities from
flooding and coastal storms and work towards infrastructure that is
climate smart, climate ready, and climate resilient.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.sustainability.gov/pdfs/doc-2021-cap.pdf
\2\ https://www.commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2022/04/secretary-
raimondo-establishes-commerce-climate-council-directs

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OCEAN AND CLIMATE

The ocean plays a critical role in supporting life on our planet,
affecting everything from the air we breathe and the food we eat, to
weather and climate patterns. Our well-being is tied to the health of
the ocean, and supporting a healthy ocean is a key part of NOAA's
mission that requires observations, data processing, research, advanced
modeling, analysis, prediction, assessments, and science-based
stewardship of ocean resources. Ocean health is essential for the
safety and economic well-being of our Nation. NOAA works closely with
other federal agencies in exploring, mapping, and understanding our
ocean and its relationship to the atmosphere and climate as well as
managing its living marine resources that help sustain the many people,
businesses, and communities that depend on them.
The Earth is an ocean planet, and every sector of society is
affected by the ocean, either directly or indirectly. Coastal and
global ocean observations and associated research are foundational to
characterizing ocean and environmental changes over time. These efforts
are key to improvements in weather, climate, marine, and ocean
forecasts, especially for high impact events such as hurricanes,
floods, terrestrial and marine heat waves, drought, and El Nino, as
well as sea level rise, ocean acidification, and ocean oxygen loss.
Climate change is impacting our ocean in myriad ways. The complex
interactions between greenhouse gas emissions and changes in ocean
storage of heat and carbon dictate climate impacts, such as melting of
sea ice, ocean deoxygenation, ocean acidification, sea level rise,
coastal flooding, and changes in the distribution and abundance of
marine organisms. We are already seeing these impacts: fifteen of the
lowest minimum extents of sea ice in the Arctic have occurred in the
last 15 years \3\ and we are losing approximately 350,000 km\2\ of sea
ice per decade.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and
Abroad https://
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/
executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-abroad/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/snow-and-ice/extent/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These climate impacts threaten the numerous valuable ecosystem
services provided by the ocean, such as absorbing carbon and heat from
the atmosphere and mitigating some of the damaging effects of climate
change. In total, more than 90% \5\ of the excess heat in the Earth's
system caused by human-induced accumulation of greenhouse gasses in our
atmosphere is stored in the ocean. If that heat was converted into
energy, it would be equivalent to a Category 5 hurricane occurring
every second for 30 years. Even one of the least understood
environments on the planet, the layer of cold ocean water where
sunlight doesn't reach, known as the twilight zone, provides critical
ecosystem services, by supporting ocean food webs and commercial
fisheries. The deep ocean zone also plays an important role in storing
carbon in its sediments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-climate/
climate-change-ocean-heat-content
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ocean Observations Inform Decision Making
The ocean and coasts compose 80 percent of the Earth's surface, and
NOAA's geostationary and polar-orbiting satellites are constantly
observing and taking measurements in this vast area, providing daily
global measurements of ocean color and sea surface temperature. In
addition, NOAA uses data from NASA, USGS, and international partners to
support many of our ocean and coastal applications. These data are
available in near real-time to users through the National Centers on
Environmental Information (NCEI), NOAA CoastWatch, and the U.S.
Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS).
NOAA's ocean observation enterprise collects data on past and
present conditions of ocean ecosystems, from ocean temperature and
other physical parameters to biological conditions like the
distribution and abundance of living marine resources. This information
provides the foundation for understanding and predicting future
changes. The United States, guided by NOAA, leads the world in
observing our ocean, accounting for over half of the observations of
the global ocean that exists today.
These ocean observations contribute to a number of the goals laid
out in the Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and
Abroad.\6\ Our global and coastal weather and climate prediction,
combined with measurements of the marine environment from NOAA's fleet
of ships and aircraft, ground observations, and satellites, enables
informed decision making across a wide range of stakeholders, including
resource managers and policy makers. As our ocean observations improve
and expand, so do the opportunities to ensure safety, enhance commerce,
sustain fisheries, generate renewable energy such as efficiently
harnessing offshore wind, wave and tide and current energy, and
understand our changing climate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/34474
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA is working to collect and provide partners with finer-scale
data on ocean and coastal regions that is critical to predicting the
frequency, severity, and location of environmental changes, such as
marine heat waves and sea level rise. We are also improving simulations
of ocean interactions with the atmosphere, land, and ice to advance
short term forecasts and subseasonal, seasonal, and decadal predictions
and assessments. By advancing both short and longer term projections of
ocean conditions, we will be able to provide living marine resource
managers and stakeholders with early warnings and the best management
strategies for resilience and adaptation to changing ocean conditions.
Additionally, as we obtain improved representation of ocean topography
and the ocean's interactions with the earth system, we can improve
simulation of ocean circulation and thus anticipate future rates of
heat and carbon uptake. Finally, we are advancing our ecological
forecasts in order to provide earlier warnings of events such as coral
bleaching and harmful algal blooms, which can wreak havoc on coastal
systems, human health, and regional economies.
Changing Ocean
Ocean warming is causing ocean deoxygenation and leading to changes
in the distributions of marine organisms. In addition to altering
organisms' distribution, low oxygen events can disrupt habitat support
functions, impair living shoreline protections such as oyster reefs,
and undermine nutrient cycling, carbon sequestration, recreational
fishing activities and more.\7\ NOAA's National Centers for Coastal
Ocean Science (NCCOS) has funded the research and development of
hypoxia (low oxygen area) forecasts in the Gulf of Mexico since 1990
and in the Chesapeake Bay since 2005. This information provides
important information to interagency management bodies like the
Chesapeake Bay Program and the Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico
Watershed Nutrient Task Force.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2595
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere increase, so too does
the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed by the ocean. The ocean absorbs
about 25% of global carbon dioxide emissions. This absorption leads to
significant changes in seawater chemistry, leading to ocean
acidification. This is a threat to food security, economies, and
culture because of its effects on a broad range of marine life
including protected species of corals, harvestable species like crabs
and sea scallop, and mussels, and oysters that are cultivated in
aquaculture systems. The NOAA-supported Regional Coastal Acidification
Networks provide an open forum for the review of the latest science on
ocean acidification and its biological, economic, and cultural effects
with a focus on identifying knowledge gaps. These networks are building
stronger connections between scientists, decision makers, fishermen,
Tribes, and other stakeholders to identify regional priorities and
information needs for ocean acidification.
Ocean acidification may also promote growth of toxic phytoplankton
species that form harmful algal blooms (HABs) and increase the amount
of toxins in surface waters. HABs can produce toxins or cause other
harmful effects that damage ecosystems, disrupt our seafood supply,
impact economies, and threaten human health. Marine and fresh waters of
the United States are increasingly impacted by HABs with blooms
reported in every state, leading to annual economic losses of millions
of dollars.\8\ NOAA is researching HABs and the impact of ocean
acidification along our coasts, including in the Great Lakes and
Alaska, and is now providing short (once or twice weekly) and longer-
term, seasonal forecasts for these events so health officials,
environmental managers, water treatment facility operators, and seafood
and tourism industries can proactively prepare.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Sanseverino, Isabella, et al. ``Algal bloom and its economic
impact.'' European Commission, Joint Research Centre Institute for
Environment and Sustainability (2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Three of NOAA's programs--Sea Grant, NCCOS, and the National
Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) through
the NOAA Coast Watch Program--have partnered to create a HAB Liaison
position to work with federal partners and communities to better serve
decision-makers through the development of new data-driven
communication tools. The NCCOS and IOOS also support the HAB Observing
Network. Finally, we are one of three co-chairs of the Interagency
Working Group on Harmful Algal Bloom and Hypoxia Research Control Act,
in which we work across 17 Federal agencies and with stakeholders to
develop action plans and assess HAB events. Investments in HABs
research represents a coordinated effort across NOAA and the federal
government to advance our nation's ability to observe, monitor,
forecast, and manage blooms that are being exacerbated by climate
change.
Ocean and the Economy
Changing ocean conditions are affecting Americans whose livelihoods
depend on the sea, such as fishermen. Marine fisheries and seafood
industries supported more than $255 billion in economic activity and
1.8 million jobs in 2019.\9\ Environmental changes are creating
significant challenges for fishing industries and coastal businesses by
influencing the location of fish stocks, the productivity of fish
stocks, and the fishing industry's interactions with bycatch, protected
species, and other ocean users. To reduce impacts, increase resilience,
and take advantage of new opportunities, NOAA Fisheries is improving
science, and implementing adaptable management approaches. For example,
scientists from across NOAA are working together to improve ocean
forecasts and projections relevant to marine fisheries management.
NOAA's Climate Ecosystems and Fisheries Initiative (CEFI) is a cross-
NOAA effort to build the end-to-end operational modeling and decision
support system needed to help living marine resource managers,
stakeholders, and resource-dependent communities identify best
strategies for resilience and adaptation to changing marine ecosystems.
NOAA's FY 23 budget request includes $20 million to begin building the
CEFI system. In partnership with the Regional Fishery Management
Councils, Fishery Commissions, states, Tribes, academia and others, we
are taking steps to help fisheries prepare for and respond to changing
climate and ocean conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Marine Fisheries Service. 2022. Fisheries Economics of
the United States, 2019. U.S. Dept. of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-
F/SPO-229, 236 p.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/resource/document/fisheries-economics-
united-states-report-2019
Ocean-related segments of the U.S. economy--the blue economy--were
worth nearly $373 billion GDP in 2018.\10\ Our ocean is now
experiencing a rise in economic importance, which has strategic
implications. A strong blue economy depends on healthy ocean, coastal,
and Great Lakes resources. The science and management to conserve and
sustainably use these resources is at the heart of NOAA's mission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/annualreport/2020/ocm.html#gdp,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
https://coast.noaa.gov/data/digitalcoast/pdf/econ-report.pdf
As Administrator, supporting sustainable economic development by
advancing the New Blue Economy is one of my main priorities. The New
Blue Economy leverages data, information, and knowledge about our ocean
to address societal needs and create economic innovation and
opportunities. The New Blue Economy is an economy founded on emerging
capabilities for acquiring data and developing information and
knowledge that supports economic growth. NOAA is helping our Nation
respond to changing conditions with a New Blue Economy fueled by ocean
information and American ingenuity, while protecting ocean and human
health and ensuring social equity. This economy has the potential to
create new jobs, foster innovation, and help to fight the climate
crisis by spurring sustainable economic growth that is informed by the
best-available climate and ocean data.
To help build out the New Blue Economy, we aim to increase funding
for coastal mapping and improve our understanding of the impacts a
changing climate has on our ocean, coastal, and Great Lakes resources.
Today, there is a need and desire to observe and understand our ocean
for near-term benefit, but we must also take actions that will preserve
this resource for future generations.
OCEAN AND CLIMATE SOLUTIONS
Though we have been researching the ocean for hundreds of years, we
have only recently come to understand its role in maintaining planetary
stability. As the climate changes, the ocean is also changing and
warming. According to a recent study by NOAA researchers, the
likelihood of a hurricane developing into a Category 3 hurricane or
stronger, with sustained winds greater than 110 miles an hour, is
increasing by about 8 percent per decade.\11\ At NOAA, we are working
to provide the information needed to prepare for, respond to, and
recover from extreme events and generate lasting solutions to society's
needs, while sustaining and promoting the services the ocean provides.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1920849117
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ocean connects us, feeds us, sustains us, and offers solutions
to climate change. These solutions include renewable ocean energy,
carbon-neutral shipping, and blue carbon ecosystems like mangroves,
salt marshes, and seagrass beds. There is a growing interest in
understanding how ocean solutions can help facilitate the removal and
sequestration of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and there's
increasing demand for NOAA and its federal partners to verify the
approaches being proposed by private industry.\12\ Tackling the climate
crisis is one of my three main priorities as Administrator, and we must
take action now to accomplish it. NOAA, with its observations,
products, services, Tribal consultation, stakeholder engagement, and
stewardship responsibilities, is working to help decision makers at
every level build resilience to climate change.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ https://nap.nationalacademies.org/read/26278/chapter/1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Offshore Wind
NOAA is working closely with other Federal agencies including the
Department of Energy to mitigate climate change and achieve the
Administration's goal to deploy 30 gigawatts of offshore wind energy by
2030, while protecting biodiversity and promoting co-ocean use. NOAA
advances the Administration's wind energy priorities through science,
modeling, and products that inform decisions for offshore wind energy
planning and development. NOAA Fisheries also works with the Bureau of
Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) and offshore wind developers to minimize
the negative impacts of offshore wind projects on endangered or
threatened species, marine mammals, fisheries, marine habitats, fishing
communities, and NOAA's scientific enterprise.
As the demand for offshore wind grows, so does NOAA Fisheries'
associated regulatory workload, demand for data and marine planning,
and the need for scientific surveys and monitoring to understand
impacts to trust resources and U.S. fisheries. We are looking to
increase capacity and continue to build expertise to keep pace with the
growth of offshore wind development off our coasts. The NOAA 2023
Budget includes an increase of $45 million to support our increasing
work in this area.
Enhancing Ocean Science for Solutions
At NOAA, we are collecting data 24/7 from a robust network of
weather radars, satellites, fixed and drifting buoys, aircraft, ships,
and uncrewed systems. Our National Centers for Environmental
Information hosts the authoritative archives of climate and historical
weather data and information. NOAA also makes ocean and coastal
specific space-based data available through the NOAA CoastWatch and the
nation-wide IOOS system. We conduct research, create products, tools,
and educational resources, and we disseminate forecasts, warnings,
climate predictions and projections, and maps. We know that all of this
must be continuously informed, updated, and improved upon to understand
and predict our ocean and climate, forecast the weather, and inform the
public.
We are investing in our observations and modeling capabilities, in
the translation of data and knowledge into actionable information for
decision-makers, and in the New Blue Economy. Our FY 2023 budget
request includes investments to improve climate-related ocean and
coastal observations and to deliver user-informed data, tools, and
services to local communities--including Tribes and underserved
communities in line with the Administration's Justice 40 initiative--to
help them better prepare for and respond to the impacts of climate
change. Additionally, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act
(IIJA), signed by President Biden on November 15, 2021, provides a
$2.96 billion dollar investment for NOAA over the next 5 years. NOAA
will use these new resources to work towards infrastructure that is
climate smart, climate ready, and climate resilient to prepare
communities for the on the ground impacts of increasingly intense
precipitation, hurricanes, flooding, drought, extreme heat, and fire
weather events. IIJA funds will be used to recapitalize and modernize
the global ocean and Great Lakes observing system assets and improve
quality products, services, and capabilities at NOAA, Department of
Defense, and forecast centers around the world.
We are advancing our regional ocean and Earth System models to
deliver robust forecasts and projections of acute and chronic ocean
conditions over varied spatial and temporal scales to ensure climate-
ready management of living resources, and enhance both climate and
weather predictions. NOAA's FY 2023 budget request includes $20 million
for the CEFI program, which will build the end-to-end operational
modeling and decision support system needed to help decision-makers
identify best strategies for resilience and adaptation to changing
marine ecosystems. A great example of our work in this sphere can be
seen in the NOAA co-led production of an interagency Sea Level Rise
Technical Report with projections through 2150 for all U.S. coastal
waters. The findings were unequivocal: sea level along the U.S.
coastline is projected to rise, on average, 10-12 inches in the next 30
years (2020-2050). Sea level rise will create a profound shift in
coastal flooding over the next 30 years by causing tide and storm surge
heights to increase and reach further inland. There will be more
damaging coastal flooding that will reach further inland. Whether or
not we curb emissions now and into the future will have a major impact
on the rate of sea level rise that occurs.
Over 127 million people in the United States live in coastal
counties,\13\ which face a number of threats spanning from increasing
storm intensity to coastal inundation and sea level rise. These growing
coastal risks threaten aging infrastructure, disrupt food and water
supplies, and make it difficult to plan for natural disaster response
and recovery. There is an increasing need for accessible and
geographically comprehensive ocean data and information for decision-
making in these rapidly changing communities. We are investing in
environmental literacy programs and working with communities on
resilience. We have supported the creation of tools such as the Office
of Coastal Management's Sea Level Rise Viewer, the Homeowner's
Handbooks and the Resilience Indices promulgated by several Sea Grant
programs, and the National Integrated Drought Information System's
Drought Early Warning System products.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Economics and Demographics https://coast.noaa.gov/states/fast-
facts/economics-and-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
demographics.html#: :text=Coastal%20counties%20of%20the%20U.S.,land%20ma
ss%20
(excluding%20Alaska).
Not all communities are experiencing these hazards in the same way.
Communities of color, already under strain due to legacy and current
environmental injustices as well as impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic,
are disproportionately impacted by climate change.\14\ As
Administrator, one of my main priorities is improving equity and
environmental justice in our service delivery, and to that end, we are
improving and creating new tools that address the need to mitigate the
compounded threats presented by climate change and injustice. During
the first year of this Administration, we held a series of Climate and
Equity Roundtables across the country with the goal of understanding
what communities need from NOAA to build resilience to climate hazards
they face. For example, NOAA's Climate Program Office and the National
Integrated Heat Health Information System (NIHHIS) are working together
with CAPA Strategies LLC to provide science support for citizen
science, community based campaigns to map the hottest parts of
communities through the NIHHIS-CAPA Urban Heat Island Mapping Campaign
program. The 2022 campaign will map heat inequities of 14 communities
across the country this summer, and two international cities. We are
now funding Climate and Equity pilot projects, co-developed with these
communities, in response to the feedback received during the
Roundtables. This is one example of NOAA's work on the Justice 40
initiative, increasing equity in our services and working directly with
the most underserved communities to understand and co-create responses
to needs that they identify.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ United Nations COVID-19 Response https://www.un.org/en/un-
coronavirus-communications-team/un-working-ensure-vulnerable-groups-
not-left-behind-covid-19
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In January 2022, NOAA also participated in interagency Tribal
consultations on subsistence fishing in Alaska. Subsistence fishing is
an important way of life in Alaska and we look forward to continuing
our conversation with Alaska Native leaders and finding new ways to
partner with and address climate change impacts on the Alaska Yukon-
Kuskokwim region.
Blue Carbon and Nature-Based Solutions
To counter the threat of climate change, we are also investing in
understanding, protecting, and restoring coastal blue carbon ecosystems
such as seagrasses, mangroves, and salt marshes. These ecosystems offer
multiple co-benefits for adaptation, mitigation, and ecosystem services
such as providing fish habitat and supporting recreational and
commercial fisheries. Coastal blue carbon habitats have been shown to
sequester up to ten times as much carbon per equivalent area as
tropical forests,\15\ making them some of the most efficient natural
carbon sinks in the world. However, they cover a relatively small
portion (
2
.'' Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment, vol. 9, no. 10, 2011, pp. 552-560., https://doi.org/
10.1890/110004.
\16\ U.S. EPA's Inventory of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks:
1990-2019 (Chapter 6 Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Biden-Harris Administration's Conserving and Restoring America
the Beautiful report outlines specific goals and principles to address
climate change, the disappearance of nature (both natural areas and
biodiversity), and inequitable access to the outdoors. One specific
recommendation in the report is to expand the National Marine Sanctuary
System and the National Estuarine Research Reserve System as a valuable
existing tool to meet those goals. These protected areas provide a
long-term legal and management framework for conservation and
restoration of blue carbon habitats, as well as serve as focal points
for research, education, and community engagement. In addition to
expanding the systems and their funding, we are working with our
partners to pioneer methods for quantifying coastal blue carbon within
the network of coastal sites. Our actions aim to ensure that carbon
will continue to be sequestered and stored carbon will not be released
by trawling, mining, or oil and gas extraction.
We also support the integration of coastal wetlands data in our
national Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, produced
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and provide technical
support for individual states that are actively working to include blue
carbon ecosystems within their own greenhouse gas inventories. This
experience has positioned NOAA to share this foundational information
nationally and internationally through capacity building activities,
including a recently established partnership between NOAA and the U.S.
Department of State. Through this new Blue Carbon Inventory (BCI)
Project, NOAA is working with partners to provide technical guidance to
countries as they strive to include coastal wetlands in their own
greenhouse gas inventories and reflect the value of these ecosystems in
their coastal planning and management. Through these partnerships, NOAA
is helping to enhance the sustainable management of coastal habits, and
the realization of their multiple benefits for adaptation, mitigation,
and ecosystem services. We are also investigating the efficacy and
tradeoffs of carbon dioxide removal technologies and how NOAA's
mission, products, and services can help catalyze the work of our
federal, nonprofit, and private partners already underway.
We are funding nature-based and climate adaptive infrastructure
projects, such as our floating pier in Alaska, that provide resilience
for communities, as well as numerous ancillary co-benefits. In 2022,
IIJA provides $200 million for NOAA coastal grant programs, including
to restore coastal habitats and ecological features that protect
coastal communities from flooding and coastal storms as well as assess
and remove marine debris.
NOAA is playing a critical role in the development of a report to
the National Climate Task Force identifying key opportunities for
greater deployment of nature-based solutions across the federal
government, including through potential policy, guidance, and program
changes as outlined in President Biden's Executive Order on
Strengthening the Nation's Forests, Communities, and Local Economies.
We know that there are proven ways that nature can help. Protecting
coastal communities from storms, waves, flooding, and erosion can also
protect biodiversity and provide ecosystem services that support
livelihoods, culture, food security, water quality, recreation, and
tourism. Through this report, NOAA will identify ways that more support
can be given to these effective solutions.
The many observations, products, and services that NOAA continues
to expand and improve upon are complemented by our invaluable work on
place-based engagement, service delivery, and the co-creation of
knowledge. Not only does NOAA continue to expand its ocean and climate
information, we also strive to empower communities to make informed
decisions using the best available science, including Traditional
Ecological Knowledge and Indigenous Knowledge (TEK/IK), and support
tools. Ensuring that NOAA's products and services continue to address
the needs of our nation, and are iteratively refined in collaboration
with our diverse stakeholders and our government-to-government
relationship with Tribes, is key to sustaining our mission and building
our New Blue Economy from the ground up.
International Engagement
In addition to NOAA's domestic climate science, service and
stewardship mandate, our mission and climate engagement extends beyond
the political boundaries of the United States to many of the countries
and communities that depend on the ocean. For decades, NOAA has
provided a broad range of tools and information to our international
partners to reduce disaster risk; build resilience to/in a changing
climate; support decision-making to better prepare for and adapt to
weather, water and climate extreme events; and understand the ecosystem
impacts of climate change such as coral bleaching, ocean acidification,
and shifting resource populations such as fish stocks.
NOAA's interest in international climate information systems
extends from providing accessible and timely climate data to its
application for management, decision-making and adaptation purposes.
NOAA collects and makes available an extensive array of space-based and
in situ Earth observation data and information that are essential for
climate scientists and decision makers around the world. Additionally,
NOAA participates in, and often leads, international data sharing
arrangements that ensure these streams of information are global in
scope and availability. NOAA provides expertise and leadership to
climate assessments such as the annual State of the Climate report and
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change as well leadership at
multilateral organizations related to weather, water and climate, such
as the World Meteorological Organization.
NOAA's applied climate information systems efforts includes work
with the Local 2030 Islands Network, a global network of islands
focused on climate resilience and sustainability. NOAA provides climate
data and additional support to islands for building Communities of
Practice and Data Dashboards related to resilience. NOAA also supports
the Weather Ready Nations Program, which enhances the linkages between
the National Meteorological and Hydrological Services (NMHS) and
disaster managers and planners. This work highlights NOAA's vested
interest in providing accurate and useful climate data and products
while also supporting the development of in-country climate information
systems capabilities. These and other efforts underpin NOAA's
engagement as one of the five core implementing agencies for the
President's Emergency Plan for Adaptation and Resilience, or PREPARE.
Through this plan, NOAA will enhance its support for developing
countries and communities in vulnerable situations around the world as
they adapt to and manage the impacts of climate change.
CONCLUSION
NOAA's work to assess, understand, and predict the ocean and its
role in climate and share this knowledge, as well as its efforts to
build resilience and mitigate climate change, is critical to the people
in the United States and around the world. NOAA, as an authoritative
source of climate information, is working with other federal agencies,
state and local government leaders, Indigenous communities, private
businesses, international partners, and the public, so that together we
can bolster adaptation and boost resilience to the impacts of climate
change and build a climate ready nation.

Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
Next, Assistant Secretary Medina, welcome. You are
recognized for 5 minutes to provide your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MONICA MEDINA

Ms. Medina. Thank you, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member
Graves, and members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on this important issue of protecting
the ocean and on its significance in the climate crisis.
Thank you especially for the timing of this hearing.
Yesterday was World Ocean Day, a day that is celebrated around
the world. And here in the U.S., it is Capitol Hill Ocean Week.
It is a perfect time to have this conversation.
My name is Monica Medina, and I am the Assistant Secretary
for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
Affairs at the State Department. Our Bureau leads U.S. efforts
to conserve and protect the global environment, including the
ocean, for the prosperity, peace, health, and security of this
and future generations, like the ones who are sitting over
there.
I too am worried about the ocean and the climate impacts on
it. The statistics you shared are daunting and deserve our
attention in government, even as we deal with all the other
crises in front of us. The ocean bares the brunt of climate
change with tremendous implications for the U.S.' economic
interests and global security. Communities are already being
strained by the effects of climate change on our ocean,
including food shortages, severe storms, coastal inundation,
growing dead zones, and escalating conflicts around shifting or
dwindling ocean resources. Climate change is happening today
and exacerbating every other challenge we face.
Leaders I have talked to around the world want to work with
the U.S. to address climate challenges. These are existential
threats. And though they seem localized, the ripple effects are
felt worldwide, from food shortages to mass migrations. And
these countries are being aggressively wooed by our
competitors. But our competitors do not offer these countries
the sustainable solutions they need.
By contrast, the United States is deploying our expertise
from across the government to build the capacity of our
international partners to deal with the climate challenges they
face. And I want to thank Congress for the funding that you
have provided for the work that we are doing. We must work with
our allies to build a more secure, climate-resilient world. We
are the partner of choice for the impacted nations, and the
more we help them, the stronger we will be as a nation.
In my testimony today, I would like to highlight three ways
in which the United States is working globally to combat the
ocean climate crisis and the implications of that work for our
security.
First, we can help other countries see what is coming. The
United States is a global leader in climate forecasting and
observing, as Dr. Spinrad has so well explained. We support
capacity-building efforts around the world to help other
countries improve their ocean observing systems and to support
scientists in the collection of globally shared data that is
critical for our weather forecasts and models.
This data--this vast data collection effort, undertaken
largely through the work of my colleague at NOAA, has informed
the development of climate and ocean models that are helping to
better predict and prepare for how we deal with the changing
climate and how that impacts communities both here, at home,
and around the globe.
Second, we can help those countries prepare based on that
information. The United States has enormous technical capacity
and expertise to apply those forecasts to assist other
countries. Sharing this expertise can strengthen our alliances
and help build a better world.
Supporting international partners as they adapt and build
resilience will be critical for promoting security and
stability at home and abroad. The President's Emergency Plan
for Adaptation and Resilience, or PREPARE, seeks to help more
than 500 million people in developing countries adapt to and
manage the impacts of severe storms, droughts, and sea level
rise.
We are also working to protect the health and productivity
of marine ecosystems by taking action to promote maritime
security and stop illegal fishing. And we plan to increase our
collaboration with our Atlantic and Pacific neighbors to solve
common challenges and seize opportunities to develop
sustainable blue economies.
The third we can do is help with the solutions that prevent
the climate crisis' worst impacts from happening. The United
States is taking an active role in galvanizing these ocean-
based climate solutions. These include protecting and restoring
coastal ecosystems, expanding offshore and renewable energy,
and decarbonizing the shipping sector, to name a few.
In sum, the steps we take today to address and adapt to
climate change are critical to American security and global
stability for generations to come. This is the year to turn the
tide on oceans, to tackle these challenges, and make
investments needed to ensure that our oceans are central to
solving the climate crisis.
From the Our Ocean Conference that we co-hosted with Palau
in April, the upcoming U.N. Ocean Conference, to the Convention
on Biological Diversity Meeting, to COP27 in Egypt, this year,
the United States has many opportunities to position ourselves
as a global leader on ocean climate issues to support our
partners as they seek sustainable solutions to ocean
challenges, and to pursue the bold steps we need to stop the
decline of our oceans.
This is our chance to work together with our partners
around the world to build a future for our children and
grandchildren that is in harmony with the ocean and free from
conflict. And if we act now, we can achieve a healthy ocean
that will continue to meet their needs for the foreseeable
future, which is surely the future we would like to see.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Medina follows:]

Written Testimony of Monica Medina

Assistant Secretary for

The Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and

Scientific Affairs, U.S. Department of State

Before the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

June 9, 2022

Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today, during
National Ocean Month and the day after World Ocean Day, on the
importance of protecting our ocean and its significance in the climate
crisis. My name is Monica Medina, and I am the Assistant Secretary of
State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs
at the Department of State. Our Bureau leads U.S. efforts to conserve
and protect the global environment, including the ocean, for the
prosperity, peace, health, and security of this and future generations.
This mandate has never been more vital, and our work has never been
more urgent, as the effects of climate change cause significant harm to
communities around the world.
The ocean, in particular, bears the brunt of climate change, with
tremendous implications for U.S. economic interests and global
security. It absorbs approximately 25% of global carbon dioxide
emissions and more than 90% of the excess heat trapped in the Earth
system. This influences the most basic natural functions, like our
weather and the changing seasons. Sea level rise, ocean warming, and
ocean acidification already are destabilizing economies, ecosystems,
communities, and cultures.
We need only to look at the world today to see that communities are
already being strained by the effects of climate change on our ocean--
including food shortages, drought, severe storms, coastal inundation,
growing ocean dead zones, and escalating conflicts around shifting or
dwindling ocean resources. At the State Department, we often hear from
colleagues in the developing world about the impact that climate change
is having on their economies and communities. I want to make clear that
they do not see climate change as some future horror story. Climate
change is happening today and exacerbating every other challenge we
face--from overcoming COVID-19 to food and energy shortages.
Leaders I have talked to around the world want to work with the
U.S. to address their current climate challenges. They worry about
fresh water sources disappearing or becoming undrinkable, damages they
cannot afford caused by more powerful storms, and where their food is
going to come from. Some even worry whether the land on which they have
lived for generations will remain above water as sea level rises. These
are existential threats, and though they seem localized, the ripple
effects are felt worldwide, from food shortages to mass migrations.
These are not theoretical future problems--this is now. And we will see
even more terrible disruptions from climate change in the future.
I also want to stress that these countries--many of which are
struggling to recover from both climate and COVID shocks--are being
aggressively wooed by our competitors. The People's Republic of China
(PRC) is seeking to enlist developing countries in its Belt and Road
Initiative, offering to build power plants, aquaculture facilities,
transit systems, and ports. They are offering to help these countries
build climate resilience. But our competitors do not offer these
countries the sustainable solutions they need to thrive in a warming
world. It is not offering them the technical know-how to achieve a
climate resilient, sustainable ocean-based economy, or ``blue
economy,'' or the capacity to understand the impacts that a changing
ocean may have on their food systems, water, and health. By contrast,
the United States is deploying our expertise to build the capacity of
our international partners and allies to do all these things. And we
can--and must--do more to help our friends and allies prosper amid a
changing ocean and to build a more secure, climate-resilient world. We
are the partner of choice for these nations--and the more we can work
with them, the stronger we will be as a nation both at home and abroad.
The ocean also offers sustainable solutions to the climate crisis,
many of which the United States is pioneering and wants to share. For
example, we are advancing renewable offshore wind energy and
decarbonization of the shipping sector. We are rallying countries,
ports, and other actors in the shipping value chain behind our vision
to create green shipping corridors: maritime routes that showcase low-
and zero-emission lifecycle fuels and technologies with the ambition to
achieve zero greenhouse gas emissions across all aspects of the
corridor.
And through the Infrastructure and Jobs Investment Act, passed by
Congress and signed by President Biden last fall, we are allocating
billions of dollars to support coastal restoration and resilience in
the face of climate change. In places like the Gulf Coast, where
communities are already seeing the devastating effects of climate
change, these funds are implementing proven nature-based solutions,
restoring eroded wetlands that are critical protectors in the face of
storms as well as key carbon sinks. In tackling these ocean issues, our
national strengths in environmental science, maritime domain awareness,
and technology are a tremendous strategic advantage. They give our
nation an edge in an increasingly competitive world.
In my testimony today, I would like to highlight three ways in
which the United States has the capacity to combat the ocean-climate
crisis and the implications of how we deploy that capacity for our
security. First, the United States is a global leader in climate
forecasting and observing. Second, we possess unparalleled technical
expertise in climate resilience strategies. And third, we are--and can
continue to be--a global leader in understanding and implementing
ocean-based climate solutions.
The United States enjoys unmatched climate forecasting and ocean
observing capabilities. The data provided by our wide network of ocean
sensors, including buoys, satellites, and ship-based observing systems
help us understand and prepare for the impacts of climate change on our
ocean and coasts. These capabilities will be critical to achieving the
goals of the UN Decade of Ocean Science, which seeks to deliver the
science we need for the ocean we want and is an opportunity to
demonstrate our commitment to fulfilling the UN Sustainable Development
Goals. The Ocean Decade is a critical framework for identifying and
aligning resources toward ocean science that can address the pressing
challenges of our time.
And those challenges are indeed pressing. We know that increasing
volatility in the Earth's climate system, coupled with ocean warming,
is leading to more frequent and more extreme storms. In 2021, weather
and climate disasters cost the United States $148 billion, according to
NOAA's National Centers for Environmental Information. Globally, losses
were over $300 billion, according to the 2021 Weather, Climate and
Catastrophe Insight report by Aon, a professional services firm. And
2021 was the seventh consecutive year in which ten or more billion-
dollar disaster events occurred in the United States.
These storms have far-reaching consequences for safety and
security. In addition to being an acute threat to the safety of coastal
communities, hurricanes result in the decimation of coastal
infrastructure, military installations, and key institutions like
hospitals, schools, and roadways. The response to hurricanes also
requires a massive effort across agencies, shifting focus from other
security concerns.
Sea level rise, due to melting ice sheets and glaciers and the
expansion of seawater as it warms, is another key stressor that
ultimately increases international instability. Rising seas are an
existential threat for low-lying island countries and coastal
communities. About forty percent of the global population lives in
coastal areas threatened by rising sea level and storm surges. Around
the world, sea level rise is likely to result in population
displacement, shrinking maritime zones, and threats to human health, as
it increases the incidence of waterborne diseases and threatens access
to water for drinking, sanitation, and hygiene.
One way we are helping to combat these threats is by expanding
international ocean observing systems that collect key ocean-climate
data. The United States partners with other countries in using Earth
observing technology to understand and respond to climate change
impacts on the ocean. For example, Sentinel-6-Michael Freilich is a
U.S.-Europe joint satellite mission launched in November 2020 to
measure sea levels at a global scale with millimeter-level accuracy.
This U.S.- European partnership of developing satellite radar
altimeters to measure global sea levels goes back to 1992.
We also support capacity building efforts around the world to help
other countries improve their ocean observing systems, and support
scientists in the collection of globally shared data. Each year, the
Department of State facilitates international marine scientific
research, processing 20 to 30 applications for foreign scientists
conducting marine scientific research in waters under U.S. jurisdiction
and supporting U.S. scientists in conducting 300 to 400 cruises in
waters under foreign jurisdiction. The data collected during these
cruises include measures of key ocean metrics like temperature,
salinity, oxygen, and pH, as well as studies of biodiversity, marine
geology, fisheries, corals, and so much more. Supporting the collection
and sharing of such data across academic and government institutions is
crucial to building a global understanding of our changing ocean. These
exchanges also help ensure that data are transparent and accessible, in
line with our democratic values.
This vast data collection effort--undertaken largely through the
work of our colleagues at NOAA--has informed the development of climate
and ocean models that are helping the United States and our allies
better predict and prepare for how a changing climate will impact
coastal communities.
We are also using ocean observing data--from satellites, buoys, and
more--to anticipate health threats like cholera outbreaks, harmful
algal blooms, and mosquito-borne diseases, which are increasing in
incidence as the ocean warms. Our Bureau is working to link these
datasets with those from health and demographic sources to protect
public health, including through our cooperative agreement with the
Pacific Islands Health Officers Association to develop a climate-based
dengue fever early warning system. And we are taking similar steps to
address climate-sensitive health risks in coastal communities with
partners from the Arctic, Africa, and Southeast Asia.
Next, I'd like to highlight that the United States has enormous
technical expertise in climate and ocean resilience. Sharing our
expertise with our partners and allies can strengthen our alliances and
help build a better world.
As the impacts from the climate crisis worsen, supporting
international partners as they adapt and build resilience will be
critical for promoting security and stability at home and abroad.
According to the UN Environment Program, adaptation costs for
developing countries are projected to be between $140-300 billion
annually by 2030. The need is great, and how the United States responds
will have lasting implications on our diplomatic posture and the
world's geopolitical landscape in general.
The President's Emergency Plan for Adaptation and Resilience,
PREPARE, is a whole-of-government effort that seeks to help more than
500 million people in developing countries adapt to and manage the
impacts of severe storms, droughts and sea level rise. PREPARE, jointly
coordinated by the State Department and USAID, will help get early
warning and climate information into the hands of those who need it;
integrate and support adaptation in key sectors such as water,
infrastructure, health and food security; and improve access to and
mobilize finance, including from the private sector, for adaptation.
PREPARE will also support locally-led adaptation that enables
Indigenous peoples, vulnerable communities, and marginalized
populations to meaningfully participate in and lead adaptation-related
efforts.
President Biden announced his intention to work with Congress to
provide $3 billion in U.S.-supported funding included in the FY 2023
Request. We hope you will approve this funding. This committee and your
congressional colleagues have a key role to play in ensuring that we
fund PREPARE in the coming budget cycles so that our U.S. resources can
be used effectively and efficiently to strengthen U.S. leadership
abroad.
What happens an ocean away has economic and security implications
for our country. While it may seem abstract or distant from this
hearing room today, ocean challenges across the globe will affect our
economy, threaten our security, and impact our future. We must address
these challenges, and I'd like to share with you now a few ways in
which the State Department is already doing so.
First, I am proud to report that, working with Congress and subject
to completion of domestic procedures, the United States intends to
provide $1 million to support the Ocean Risk and Resilience Action
Alliance, and looks forward to participating in its work. The
Alliance's mission is to drive at least $500 million of investment in
ocean nature-based solutions.
We are also working to protect the health and productivity of
marine ecosystems. Seafood, among the most traded of all commodities,
offers a lifeline out of poverty and a source of healthy protein for
billions in developing economies. But many fish stocks around the world
are under threat from climate change and other stressors on the marine
environment. Warming ocean temperatures and related changes to
ecosystems are affecting the distribution and abundance of living
marine resources, with the potential to undermine the food security of
vulnerable communities and exacerbate social and political conflict.
As the ocean changes and fish stocks with it, sustainable fisheries
management--including the data and tools to anticipate and adapt to the
impacts of climate change on fish stocks--will be key to ensuring
future resilience and food security. The threat is especially acute in
the developing world and in the tropics, where people consume two to
four times more fish than in other regions.
Overfishing, illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing,
and other harmful fishing practices are compounding stressors on
dwindling fish stocks that are already under pressure due to climate
change. IUU fishing creates market distortions that put law-abiding
fishers at a disadvantage. And, it is often connected to a web of other
security challenges and criminal activity, from forced labor to trade
in illicit goods.
But critically, this is a challenge we have the tools and expertise
to combat right now. By halting bad actors and destructive practices
today, we are reducing the stress on fisheries in the future.
At the Our Ocean Conference in April 2022, the U.S. announced plans
totaling nearly $250 million to combat IUU fishing via policy
initiatives, strengthened governance, on-the-water assets, technical
assistance, and innovative forms of monitoring and traceability. We are
helping partners and allies implement the Port State Measures
Agreement, the first binding international agreement to specifically
target IUU fishing. And with the Food and Agriculture Organization, we
launched the Global Record of Fishing Vessels, Refrigerated Transport
Vessels, and Supply Vessels, which, as the first (and only) global,
publicly accessible database of fishing vessels, is an essential tool
for increasing transparency and enabling States to verify the identity
and history of fishing vessels seeking access to their waters and their
ports. And we are seeking enforceable counter-IUU fishing provisions in
our Free Trade Agreements.
Of course, securing the productivity of marine resources is about
more than IUU fishing. It is also about creating transparent ocean
governance and encouraging sustainable economic development
opportunities for communities. During the World Leaders Summit at COP26
in Glasgow, the United States announced that we would join the High-
Level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy, known as the ``Ocean
Panel.'' This group of sixteen countries accounts for about 45% of the
world's coastlines, 35% of the world's exclusive economic zones, 25% of
the world's fisheries, and 20% of the world's shipping fleet. Ocean
Panel members have committed to develop and be guided by Sustainable
Ocean Plans within five years, with the aim of sustainably managing 100
percent of our ocean area under national jurisdiction. This group
provides the United States with a new forum to promote marine
conservation in areas of the world that are strategically important to
the United States, in collaboration with likeminded allies and
partners.
And, there is still more we can do.
The United States is both an Atlantic and a Pacific nation. We plan
to increase our collaborations with our Atlantic and Pacific neighbors
to help solve common challenges and seize opportunities to develop
sustainable blue economies.
Atlantic nations face shared ocean challenges, including IUU
fishing, lawlessness at sea, and climate change threats to coastal
communities. Lives and livelihoods are at risk and overall economic
development will lag if we fail to address these challenges. We will be
better able to solve problems that affect us all by working together,
based on shared principles, to preserve the Atlantic as a stable,
sustainable resource for Atlantic nations.
We also see opportunity with our Atlantic neighbors. The blue
economy is estimated to double from $1.5 trillion in 2010 to $3
trillion in 2030. Stronger partnerships across Atlantic countries can
be a mechanism to share knowledge, spread best practices, and identify
activities that will provide sustainable economic returns from the
ocean now and preserve it as a resource for future generations.
We are also a Pacific nation, with strong cultural and historical
ties to our neighbors throughout the Pacific region. We have a strong
interest in a prosperous, secure, and free and open Pacific community.
The Pacific Islands countries are amongst those most at risk from
climate change, and some of the strongest global voices on the need to
work collectively to combat the climate crisis. They are looking to the
United States to lead the world on this issue.
Our neighbors in the Pacific depend heavily on healthy ocean
ecosystems to support fisheries and tourism industries that drive their
economies, which face continuing economic impacts from the pandemic.
The United States seeks to partner with the Pacific Islands to help
them strengthen their economies, increase their resilience to climate
change and environmental threats, improve their security, and overcome
barriers to accessing adequate financing for these solutions.
Similarly, countries in Central and South America are seeking our
help in protecting their waters. Costa Rica, Colombia, Ecuador, and
Panama are working together to strengthen the Eastern Tropical Marine
Corridor (CMAR). This corridor supports critical fisheries for tuna and
other valuable species and is an important swimway for blue whales,
hammerhead sharks, leatherback sea turtles, and giant manta rays.
Countering IUU fishing in the region could also help the U.S. combat
narcotrafficking, with which it has become deeply intertwined.
We are also working globally to protect and enhance the resilience
of valued marine ecosystems. Coral reefs annually provide over $3.4
billion of economic benefits, including by supporting tourism and
supporting fisheries, and close to $94 million in avoided flood damage.
NOAA Fisheries estimates that the coral reefs of the United States
alone have a commercial value of over $100 million. However, these
critical elements of many healthy coastal ecosystems are existentially
threatened by ocean acidification and increasing sea surface
temperature. It is estimated that over the last 40 years, half of the
world's coral reefs have disappeared, and the majority of those
remaining could be gone by 2050. This year alone, warming waters
resulted in coral bleaching in 91% of reefs surveyed along the Great
Barrier Reef, marking the fourth large-scale coral bleaching event in
the last seven years.
The United States remains at the forefront of coral reef
conservation and is committed to advancing efforts to protect and
restore coral reefs. To that end, the United States is a strong
supporter of the International Coral Reef Initiative (ICRI). We
currently serve as chair of ICRI and were among its founding partners.
Established in 1995, ICRI is a unique public-private partnership of
governments, international organizations, scientific entities, and non-
governmental organizations committed to reversing the global
degradation of coral reefs. The United States and ICRI have
demonstrated a clear commitment to prioritizing coral reef conservation
and restoration and to reversing the twin crises of climate change and
biodiversity loss, with all the tools and assets we can assemble.
Finally, the United States is taking an active role in galvanizing
ocean-based climate solutions globally.
Ocean-based climate solutions have the potential to provide up to
20% of the emissions reductions needed to keep the 1.5-degree goal
within reach. These solutions include protecting and restoring coastal
ecosystems, expanding offshore renewable energy, and decarbonizing the
shipping sector. Scaling up these efforts at home takes effective steps
to combat the climate crisis, and supporting other countries in doing
the same helps them build critical technical capacity.
As the co-hosts of the Our Ocean Conference in Palau in April 2022,
the United States showcased our leadership in advancing ocean-based
climate solutions. For example, the United States collaborated with
Denmark and the Marshall Islands to more than double the number of
countries participating in the Declaration on Zero Emission Shipping by
2050, which we worked together to launch at COP26. These new
participants include shipping powerhouse Cyprus as well as several
small island states: Palau, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. This initiative and
others represent key steps towards decarbonizing the global shipping
sector, which currently has an emissions trajectory that is
incompatible with the goals of the Paris Agreement.
We are also growing capacity at home and abroad for offshore
renewable energy. At the Our Ocean Conference, we highlighted our goal
to deploy 30 gigawatts of offshore wind by 2030 and announced technical
assistance, subject to domestic procedures, and other required
resources to advance climate goals and create good jobs. We also
spurred countries including the UK, Norway, Belgium, and Sri Lanka to
make their own offshore renewable energy announcements at the
conference, which will add approximately 30 gigawatts of capacity.
Lastly, the United States is committed to conserving at least 30%
of our land and waters by 2030, because we know that conservation of
natural spaces is key to both adapting to and mitigating climate change
and its effect on the ocean. Just this year, we have established a new
national marine sanctuary in Lake Michigan, Wisconsin and a new
national estuarine research reserve in Connecticut.
And we are supporting other countries as they take steps to
conserve their own ocean resources. At the Our Ocean Conference, we
announced a new global Ocean Conservation Pledge, encouraging countries
to commit to conserve, protect, or restore at least 30 percent of
waters under their national jurisdictions by 2030. We are also working
with partners globally to finalize an ambitious and effective agreement
for the conservation and sustainable use of high seas biodiversity that
would create, for the first time, a coordinated and cross-sectoral
approach to establishing high seas marine protected areas and help us
achieve our goal of conserving 30 percent of the global ocean by 2030.
Taking these steps to advance ocean-based climate solutions in the
United States and support other nations with the resources to do the
same is key to security worldwide. These mitigation and adaptation
initiatives reduce the risk of future global instability as a result of
the climate crisis and help us protect marine resources for generations
to come.
In sum, the threats we face at the ocean-climate nexus are
daunting, and the scale of our response must be equal to the size of
our challenges. The ocean is a global system, essential to the well-
being of all life on our planet. The steps we take today to address and
adapt to climate change and its impacts such as sea level rise, extreme
weather, and food insecurity are critical to American security and
stability for generations to come. This is the year to turn the tide on
oceans--to tackle the challenges and make the investments needed to
ensure that oceans are central to solving the climate crisis.
From the Our Ocean Conference, which generated over $16 billion in
ocean commitments, to the upcoming UN Ocean Conference, G7 Ministerial,
Convention on Biological Diversity meeting, and COP27, the United
States has many opportunities this year to position ourselves as a
global leader on ocean-climate issues, support our partners abroad as
they seek sustainable solutions to ocean challenges, and pursue bold
steps needed to reverse the decline of our ocean. We must continue this
pace of urgent action and maintain this momentum. This is our chance to
work together with our partners around the world to build a future for
our children and grandchildren that is in harmony with the ocean and
free from climate conflict. If we act now, we can achieve a healthy
ocean that will continue to meet their needs--surely a future we all
wish to see.

Ms. Castor. Thank you very much.
I will recognize myself first for 5 minutes to start the
questioning.
You know, we are very fortunate to have an administration
like the Biden-Harris Administration that is bringing every
tool to the table to help protect our oceans. So let's talk
about some of the tools that you have.
You talked a little bit about the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law that will provide significant resources to help keep our
oceans resilient. There are different resources all across
America. So would you go into a little more depth on the tools,
your priorities out of those new Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
investments, and then, just yesterday, you announced an Ocean
Climate Action Plan. How do those interact together, to the
Administrator, to help protect our oceans and allow us to
become more resilient?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Chair Castor. There is a lot going
on. I appreciate your comment about the role of the Biden-
Harris Administration. On a little bit of a sidebar, I came out
of retirement to take this job because I was so compelled by
some of what I was hearing about what this administration
wanted do in moving forward. And I was also very much
encouraged when I saw action up here on the Hill, especially as
it manifested in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, focused on
these specific issues.
So what kinds of tools? Well, obviously, in the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, we see, in NOAA's case, close to $1.4
billion dedicated to coastal resilience, which is a direct
application of resources to adaptation, to what we know is
already happening. So while we can mitigate and we can start
addressing decarbonizing and renewables, we know sea level
rise, ocean acidification are happening right now. What do we
do about that?
So we will be issuing funding opportunity announcements for
competitive bids around the country for local communities,
jurisdictions, Tribes, to invest those resources, to harden
their coasts, to make their coasts more resilient through any
number of actions. It is something we have done before, but we
have never had these kinds of resources to build that sort of
resilient coastal activity.
That is not enough. We also need to make sure that those
scientific capabilities and the products of our science that
come out of our labs and our work with academic researchers are
made available to decision makers and local emergency managers,
local community planners, Tribes. And so we were building
mechanisms for dissemination of the data, whether it be through
web portals or using our boots on the ground through Sea Grant,
for example, to make sure information about what climate
impacts will be can be shared with those communities.
And the last part is, part of the investment that we are
seeing is going to go to the nuts and bolts, if you will, of
being able to build better forecasts and better models. So
high-performance computing, which allows us to actually zero in
and provide improved seasonal outlooks. And that is not,
obviously, limited to coastal applications. I had a discussion
with a Member of Congress who is a fifth-generation farmer who
wanted a better seasonal outlook of precipitation. So our
ability to build better models with more high-performance
computing is another aspect of that.
And with respect to the Action Plan that you alluded to,
the Climate Action Plan, now, this is a team sport. NOAA has a
leading role, as I indicated, but we work very closely with our
colleagues in Department of Interior, Energy, NASA, National
Science Foundation, State Department, obviously. And so through
the auspices of climate policy, our office, as well as the
Office of Science and Technology and Policy, we are making sure
we all understand the coordination of our efforts and the plan,
and also the leveraging and the complementary nature of what we
do.
Ms. Castor. That is terrific. The resilience and
adaptation, we have to do it. We have waited too long to
decarbonize. But I am so worried about the oceans. And our--you
know, my local economy in the Tampa Bay area in the State of
Florida is directly tied to clean water. But with the highest
concentrations of carbon pollution in the atmosphere, the
stresses on marine life, the impact to corals, we have got to
move to clean energy. I mean, it is more plain than ever. We
cannot throw up our hands and say, oh, it is too hard, or other
countries aren't doing their job. We are the world leader.
So can you talk about, maybe Assistant Secretary, what we
are doing to help rally the global community to reduce carbon
pollution so we don't have to focus totally on pouring billions
and billions and billions of dollars into resilience and
adaptation, that we are really moving to the clean energy
economy over time?
Ms. Medina. Of course, Chairwoman. The administration's
policy on this is set by special envoy--Special Presidential
Envoy Kerry, the global policy. And I work very closely with
his office. We share a lot of staff members who actually work
for both of us. They are working very hard on clean energy and
on dealing with the major emitting countries and helping them
to see the need to make this kind of transition that Ranking
Member Graves talked about, the need for those countries to
turn their energy systems around and to be more innovative, to
rely more and more and more on renewable energy.
But in my work, I focus tremendously on nature-based
solutions, and that is where the ocean comes in and where I
think we can work much more closely with scientists and other
nations to find those ocean solutions, whether it is wind
energy--and we know the value of wind energy is only going up
here in the U.S. We have seen how those wind energy leases are
really taking off, and we know that there is tremendous
potential. We could basically, you know----
Ms. Castor. I think we are going to talk more about it. I
am over time with my question. So thank you. To be continued.
Ranking Member Graves, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Oh, Mr. Gonzalez, good morning. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez. Good morning. Thank you, Chairwoman Castor
and Ranking Member Graves, for holding this hearing today, and
to our witnesses for joining us and sharing your testimonies.
Secretary Medina, I am going to start with you. While
marine litter and climate change have commonly been treated as
two separate issues, there is a growing recognition of their
interconnectedness. As I am sure you know, when plastics end up
in the ocean and start breaking down, they release greenhouse
gases, as well as affect the ability of organisms to grow,
reproduce, and capture carbon.
Latest set of data from the World Bank indicates that 8
million tons of plastic are leaked into the ocean each year,
which is the equivalent of dumping the contents of a garbage
truck in the ocean, roughly, every minute. It seems obvious to
all of us here that we need to take steps to incorporate more
circular economy principles and take action to reduce waste we
have currently built up in the ocean.
That being said, what efforts can lawmakers take to
accelerate innovation in the recycling space and reduce plastic
leaks into the ocean?
Ms. Medina. Thank you so much for this question. It is one
I spend an awful lot of my time on. Plastic pollution is one of
my priorities, not only because it ends up in the ocean, which
is a terrible problem. In my data, I have a different fact, and
it is even more alarming, 14 million tons ends up in the ocean.
We could quibble. It is way too much.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yeah. More than a million.
Ms. Medina. Yes. Way too much. We are drowning in plastic.
We know we need to do something differently, which is why I am
so pleased to say that the United States is playing a leading
role in creating the new global agreement we need. And industry
is actually right with us, along with the environmental
community, to try to change the way the world deals with
plastic pollution. This agreement that we have just decided to
launch the negotiation of, hopefully, will be concluded in the
next 2 years.
And we will, under this agreement, allow nations to create
ambitious action plans of their own. No one-size-fits-all
solutions. An island nation might need something different than
a big country, big land-based country like ourselves. But if we
work hard together to spur innovation from industry to drive
that change, I am convinced that we can find the solutions that
we need to actually stem this terrible scourge of plastic
pollution, and we have to do it now.
We could always use more resources to do that, to try and
help spur that innovation, to help smaller countries that don't
have the capacity to do that work, but I think industry will
have to play a huge role. And we are counting on them to do it,
and I think they are ready to step up and help us.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you. Switching gears a bit. In recent
years, there has been a resurgence in interest in offshore
wind, but despite the low carbon and economic benefits that
offshore wind can bring, there are real concerns on long-term
turbine performance, specifically the high operating costs and
reduced economic lifetimes.
As Europe's experience with offshore wind has demonstrated,
large turbine technologies suffer from reliability and
maintenance issues, causing the amount of electricity generated
to decline by almost half over 10 years. Unsurprisingly, the
revenues and profitability of these facilities diminishes
rapidly, leaving developers to abandon the projects before the
term of their power purchase agreement.
Moreover, offshore wind means more demand for rare earth
elements, which historically come from China. With increased
demand likely triggering higher production costs, it is
difficult to imagine a world in which ratepayers are left
unharmed.
With the administration setting a goal of 30 gigawatts of
offshore wind by 2030, can you provide some insight into how
these concerns will be addressed and ratepayers will be
protected?
Ms. Medina. This one is to me?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes.
Ms. Medina. So, Congressman, I am not the domestic energy
expert. I am at the State Department, and energy isn't squarely
in my remit. But I take the point that we need to continue to
improve technologies, and wind is a big part of the solution.
And we need offshore wind. We also need solar. We need all the
renewable energies we can muster, and that is what will help
ratepayers.
Mr. Gonzalez. Well, let me ask you from an international
perspective then. So put your international hat on. How do we
protect ratepayers globally if we are going to move into an
offshore wind world with these cost concerns?
Ms. Medina. I think we continue to improve the technology
so that we can have renewable energy for ourselves, and we
don't have to worry about price spikes and perturbations caused
by other countries.
Mr. Gonzalez. Is it your belief that we can do this and,
from a cost standpoint to consumers, there will be no harm?
Ms. Medina. I believe, just like President Biden, that when
we the American people put our minds to something, we can get
it done. If we can put a man--or a rover on Mars, I believe we
can solve these challenges as well.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, and I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next up, Representative Huffman, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Chair Castor.
And just a few words about my friend from Louisiana's
opening remarks. I actually got my hopes up when I heard him
describe these terrible impacts of the climate crisis that are
coming. We know they are coming. We know what they are going to
do to places like South Louisiana. And he then described the
duty to future generations, which I found very heartening and
encouraging, saying that we need to overcome politics and
confront this crisis for the sake of preserving a livable
planet for these guys.
Unfortunately, it went downhill pretty quickly from there.
We started hearing the same old excuses, that China is a bigger
emitter than us and, therefore, we can't focus on emissions
until we get China in line. And that somehow our fossil fuels
are cleaner than the Russians and the Saudis and, therefore, we
ought to just crank it up and go out there and meet all of this
global energy demand with our fossil fuels which are cleaner,
which are really less bad than the really bad.
And, unfortunately, that is like saying never mind. To all
of that good stuff about the climate crisis, to all of these
nice words about your generation, folks, it is like saying
never mind. We have got money to make. We have got oil to sell.
And that is politics.
So if we are serious about overcoming politics and doing
the right thing to preserve the planet for the younger
generation, leading a global fossil fuel race to the bottom
cannot be the answer.
Now, on this subject of our oceans--and, Chair Castor, I am
so glad that we are focusing on this--I would like to start my
questions on fisheries, which is something I have been working
a lot on.
So, Dr. Spinrad, I will begin with you. I did a national
listening tour because I have been working on legislation to
reauthorize the Magnuson Act. Everywhere I went, every region
of the country, I heard how climate change is already impacting
fisheries, whether shifting stocks, or habitat changes, or
acute disruptions like fisheries disasters. It is here and now,
and yet our institutions were developed at a time when we
weren't really thinking about any of that.
And some of the more commercially important fish species,
in fact, are moving north to find cooler water. This creates
all kinds of conflicts between regional councils, maybe between
us and Canada, and Mexico in some cases. So it is a whole new
world of fishery management that this climate crisis is
presenting us with.
And I wondered if you could just speak broadly to what NOAA
is doing so far to address these changes in fisheries
management, and what resources do you need to meet the moment?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congressman Huffman. This is a very
serious issue and one where we are applying a lot of resources
and a lot attention to from a number of different perspectives.
As a scientific agency, as an environmental intelligence
agency, what we are trying to do is not dissimilar to the way
our national security community looks at, is how will things
change in the future and can we position ourselves to deal with
that.
So we have an investment in what we call the Climate
Ecosystems and Fisheries Initiative, which really asks, how
are, for example, Alaskan pollock becoming Russian pollock?
What is happening to the lobstering industry, and where are
those lobsters going to go? What will change do to our best--in
the context of our best knowledge. So just as we try to develop
predictions in forecasts of atmospheric and weather phenomena,
we are trying to do the same thing with all species in this
initiative.
The other part of this, of course, is a redoubled effort to
take advantage of the extraordinary traditional knowledge that
we have around the country. Generations of fishers, generations
of local communities have knowledge about the patterns that
they have seen over the last few years. We are trying to, if
you will, quantify that through a QA, QC, and those kind of
data, to incorporate those in our predictive capabilities and
codevelop the policies----
Mr. Huffman. Great.
Dr. Spinrad [continuing]. Associated with what will our
fisheries community look like. And we need industry involved in
this discussion as well. So we have been doing similar
roundtables to yours.
I would add there is another angle on this as well, and
that is, you know, we have established aquaculture opportunity
areas.
Mr. Huffman. Yeah.
Dr. Spinrad. And we are looking at how might that--what is
the art of the possible associated with really doing this in a
sustainable, economically viable manner so we are developing
the initial environmental impact statements associated with
those, and, hopefully, that that is part of the solution as
well.
Mr. Huffman. I don't have much time left, but Assistant
Secretary Medina, I would love to hear from you how you are
working with other countries to manage essential fisheries in
the face of the climate crisis.
Ms. Medina. Thank you, Congressman. There is a huge problem
here. Twenty-three percent of fish stocks are predicted to
shift from their historical migration roots and habitats by
2030. That is an awful lot of people whose food source is going
to move somewhere else immediately, and that is a recipe for
crisis and for conflict. So we are working with the Food and
Agricultural Organization to increase technical assistance, to
build climate-ready fisheries management. And, hopefully, with
better forecasting of these kinds of shifts and migrations from
agencies like NOAA, and with our partners at USAID, we can take
those forecasts and aim our assistance right where we need it.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Thanks. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next up, Rep. Palmer, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Good morning, Representative Miller, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Graves. And thank you both for being here today.
I represent West Virginia, which is a landlocked state. We
all know that the world's oceans impact all of us, from natural
challenges, changes in weather patterns, man-made
circumstances, even our supply chain, and the difficulties we
are having internationally because we are all affected by the
oceans. That is why America, acting alone with few close
allies, cannot tackle this challenge single-handedly.
Carbon emissions do not recognize borders or stay within
their country of origin. The developing world has questioned
why countries like the United States and Europe and China have
been allowed to develop because of our vast use of natural
resources and traditional energy, and why they have to remain
in poverty to serve our interests. The quickest way to bring
developing countries into modern economy is to allow them to
utilize their own energy assets and to help scale the
technologies to tackle the real problem, which is carbon
emissions.
Vilifying natural resources or sources of energy like this
administration has done constantly--excuse me, madam. Madam
Chair? Excuse me?
Vilifying our natural sources of energy like this
administration has done constantly will only breed resentment
around the world on their stage, raising prices for consumers
here at home, and leave American security at the whims of
authoritarian foreign governments. We don't want to repeat the
mistakes of our European allies who traded cheap energy from
Putin in exchange for their security.
If our goal is to tackle the rise in sea levels, the way to
do that is by lowering carbon emissions. And we should be
researching and funding transformative technologies that curb
emissions, while still using the sources of energy that
provides the vast majority of our power. By scaling down these
technologies here at home, we can further export it across the
world, creating goodwill and a prosperous global economy in the
shortest amount of time possible. Our government should be
investing to ensure the continued clean use of all types of
energy, and, yes, that does include coal, oil, and natural gas.
Madam Chair, I have been reading this book by Professor
Koonin, who has served as Under Secretary for Science under the
Obama administration. In it, he provides a robust discussion on
the climate alarmism that has gripped our politics, our media,
and our culture. And in the chapter on sea level rise, Mr.
Koonin says, in summary, we don't know how much of the rise in
global sea levels is due to human-caused warming and how much
is a product of long-term natural cycles. So it is time to stop
the alarmism and name-calling and bickering and come together
to find a real solution.
Ms. Medina, as your testimony notes, the challenge of sea
level rise and the challenges of adaptation in the developing
world are something that we are all concerned about. Given that
the U.S. is among the most environmentally efficient producers
in the world, how important is it that we look to efficient
producers to power the globe which will then lead to greater
energy security, lower global emissions, and greater
environmental outcomes?
Ms. Medina. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question. I
think there is a lot in what you have said that we agree with.
America cannot tackle this problem alone. We must lower carbon
emissions, and we have to rapidly scale innovative technology.
And what I think developing countries, particularly small
island developing countries need, is the energy supply that
will work for them. And so we go and we listen to countries,
and we ask them what they want and what they need. And
importing expensive oil and gas may not be the right solution
for them. And so we look at programs that will meet their
needs, that will address their demands for energy, but also
their desire to be part of the climate solution.
What I hear over and over again from those countries is,
let us help be part of the climate solution. Invest in ocean
conservation in our big ocean areas, and let us help the rest
of the world make up for the damage that it is causing.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. In your testimony, you also
mentioned the role of our country is to serve as a partner to
other nations. Could you expand on that and what you believe
the administration sees as its role on partnering with other
countries to ensure stable and consistent energy supply through
all of the above strategy, especially given the energy crisis
the whole world is facing today.
Ms. Medina. Congresswoman, thank you for that question.
What I said in an earlier answer is that I am not the energy
expert. There is another bureau within the State Department
that governs energy policy. But what I can tell you about what
we are doing to work cooperatively is rebuilding partnerships
and allies with--alliances with countries all over the world.
And I will just give one quick example.
Yesterday, at the Summit of the Americas, we signed an MOU
with the governments of Costa Rica, Panama, Ecuador, and
Colombia to save--help them conserve some of the most precious
ocean spaces on the planet, the Galapagos Islands.
What could be more important? Our work is to help them
become more able to conserve the resources that they have. And
we are going to work together across the Federal Government
with our Federal interagency partners to bring that kind of
American expertise to help other countries work together to
solve their ocean issues.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Representative Casten, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to our speakers
for coming here. And thanks to all the young folks who are
here. I really appreciate you coming out here. And I hope you
will continue to be active in this space.
You know, a number of years ago--well, 2 years ago, when
the United States pulled out of the Paris Climate Accord, there
were about a dozen of us who went over to Madrid to basically
let the world know that, even though the United States
Government, which was the only country that pulled out, that we
were going to go and tell the world we are still in.
And I remember one of our European colleagues pulled us
aside and said, we just want you to know that really bad things
happen when the United States doesn't lead. That carried a lot
of weight, obviously, with the history of Europe, but I hope
you will keep that in mind as you think about your own futures.
Because notwithstanding our Ranking Member's advice that we
shouldn't act until China acts, it is important that the United
States leads.
Dr. Spinrad, I want to chat with you a little bit about
ocean modeling and methane. I am on the Science Committee. We
just saw this report about the--how the oil and gas industry is
not reporting all of the methane emissions that they are
producing. And, of course, as we all are, I think, petrified
about, you know, this 84
multiplier on global warming
relative to CO
2
, the global methane pledge that came
out of the Glasgow meetings was a key part to making sure that
we actually do keep 1.5 alive, as they say.
And we are focused a lot on the private sources of methane.
But, you know, as I look at the geological history of the
world, there is--as you know well, there is this Paleocene-
Eocene border where there is some suggestion that maybe the
warming of the upper surface of the ocean led to these huge
burps of methane hydrates underneath. We have seen some
releases. I believe Alaska, the University of Alaska,
Fairbanks, saw some significant releases in the East Siberian
Sea, if I have that right.
I am wondering if you can share to what degree you believe
we have got a good model of the oceans to understand, as we are
injecting this heat into the upper surface of the ocean, should
we have concerns about intermixing, releasing some of those
clathrates out? Do we need more research there? Help me
understand how big a deal that is. Should we be concerned about
it, and what we can do to mitigate some of the effects, if any.
Dr. Spinrad. Yeah. Thank you, Congressman. I think that is
a critical issue. And I was delighted, quite honestly, in
Glasgow that this was elevated to an issue of global certain.
At NOAA, we look at it from a few perspectives. You have
alluded to the modeling piece of it, but there is an equally
important observational component. So talking about the Alaska
release is just one piece we have recently conducted through
our ocean exploration program. A number of studies off the East
Coast of the United States where we have seen more events, more
venting of methane than we had expected to see before.
It is not, right now, an inherently modelable phenomenon.
We first need to understand, what are the sources? What are the
sources, the natural sources of methane emitting in these
undersea events? So our ocean exploration program is a critical
component of that.
Once we have an understanding of the sorts of
concentrations and the distribution of the vent sources, the
methane sources, then we can build that component as one of the
greenhouse gas elements into the forecasts for changes in
temperature, the results of having that methane in the
atmosphere. You are absolutely right, greater than 80 percent
greenhouse gas impact. If you will, the silver lining, if there
is one, is that it is a much, much more short-lived component
in the greenhouse gas constituency.
So we do have the models. We can take the information. Once
we have got the data from the observational capabilities, we
can get a much better handle on what the downstream
implications are for global warming.
Mr. Casten. Correct me if I am wrong, but if we release all
those clathrates, I think we are also short-lived.
The last time you and I spoke, I think you had just
released this report saying that the sea level rise on the Gulf
Coast was going to be 2 feet by 2050, with high degree of
certainty. Appropriate scientific qualifiers on that. And I sit
in the Financial Services Committee, and a few weeks later we
had Chairman Powell before us. And I shared your testimony with
him. And I said, okay, so if I buy a home on the Gulf Coast of
Louisiana today, that house is going to be underwater before
the mortgage is paid off. And are we changing the way that
Fannie and Freddie allocate risks accordingly? And his comment
was, no, but we probably should.
I wonder if you could share to what degree you are working
on an interagency basis to make sure that across all of our
other agencies that are directly affected by what you are
doing, and how can we help elevate that or make sure that we
don't have to have any more of those conversations saying, yes,
but we should.
Dr. Spinrad. Yeah. Thank you, Congressman. That is a
subject that is near and dear to my heart and one which I have
undertaken some very specific actions on. At NOAA, I
established NOAA Climate Council initially to coordinate our
internal activities between the Fishery Service and the Weather
Service and the Ocean Service. But we quickly realized there
was an external facing role we could play. So I have begun
serious dialogues with the Department of Treasury, Department
of Transportation, Department of Energy, FAA, any number of
those components of the Federal Government that have policy and
operational responsibilities for economic security, for
example.
We are also working with industry. The reinsurance and
insurance industry is closely coupled. I will be talking to the
reinsurance industry next week about these issues. So we are
trying to work both the interagency piece by talking to
Treasury and the other related departments, as well as the
industry component. And, of course, we work with local
communities.
Mr. Casten. Okay. I see I am out of time, and you have been
gracious. Thank you. I would love to work with you more.
I yield back.
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Representative Palmer, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I thank the
witnesses.
I have a question, and I really want the young people here
to answer this mentally anyway. But has the Sahara always been
a desert? Dr. Spinrad.
Dr. Spinrad. Gosh, I was going to ask the younger people. I
think depending on how you define ``always.'' Obviously, if we
go back in geological----
Mr. Palmer. No, no. I am asking you, has it always been a
desert? It either has or it hasn't.
Dr. Spinrad. I am sure in geological time there was a
period when it was not.
Mr. Palmer. How long ago was that?
Dr. Spinrad. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Palmer. How about you?
Ms. Medina. I am not a scientist. I wouldn't hazard to
guess.
Mr. Palmer. You are not a scientist?
Ms. Medina. No.
Mr. Palmer. Most of the people asking questions here aren't
either.
The answer is the Sahara was a lush area, populated by the
Nubian and Egyptian cultures. There was farming. There were
lakes and rivers and streams, and it was only about 5,000 years
ago. I mean, a literal blink in geologic time. It started
becoming a desert somewhere between 10,000 and 12,000 years
ago. Again, a literal blink in geologic time.
This is important for you to understand this, because there
are decisions being made based on climate science. It is based
on models that the vast majority of models are totally
inaccurate. They have to manipulate the models to get to some
of the conclusions that they draw. And as a result, your
parents and you are paying $6, $7, $8 a gallon for gas. You are
going to be paying that for a gallon of milk, for a loaf of
bread. We are experiencing the highest inflation we have seen
in 40 years.
There are consequences for the decisions that are being
made by my colleagues in Congress and by the Biden
administration. And I understand that the climate is changing.
And the reason I bring up the Sahara desert, because that is an
example of climate change. And I know you won't know the answer
if I asked you what caused that, but most scientists believe it
is because the Earth changed its tilt on its axis. And as a
result, the wind patterns changed, and over time, the Sahara
became a desert.
Now, like I said, they are excavating Nubian and Egyptian
settlements there. You have got the archaeological data to look
at. And what I like to point out to people is, if the Nubians
and the Egyptians had had the same desalinization technology
and irrigation technology that Israel uses today, there would
still be people living in the Sahara, farming and, you know,
playing sports, driving cars. I know that drives my friends
crazy, but--we need to be talking about adaptation and
mitigation.
And, Chairman Castor, I am going to admit something. It is
hard for me to do. But human activity actually has had an
impact on tropical storms in the Atlantic. And it is a study
from NOAA that indicates that the reduction of particulate air
pollution in Europe and North America has contributed to an
increase in the number of tropical cyclones in the North
Atlantic. Isn't that interesting that we have cleaned up the
air and it has resulted in more storms? So human activity does
impact the climate.
But I know you brought these young people in here for a
reason. I want you to understand that there is more to the
story than you are getting. I highly recommend a book by Dr.
Kirsten Peters, a Ph.D. from Harvard, a geologist; it is called
``The Whole Story of Climate.'' And you need to understand
this. And my colleague from--mentioned sea level rise and the
potential of him buying a home in Louisiana. Now, my colleague,
Mr. Graves, would really encourage that.
But during the Eemian Period, you have got--we are right at
the end of the Holocene Period or what is known as the
Subatlantic Period. But during the Eemian Period, it was
considerably warmer. And you look at the geologic evidence and
you can see there are higher concentrations of CO
2
,
higher concentrations of methane, as you have pointed out. But
during that period, the shoreline in Georgia and North Carolina
was about 50 miles further inland and about 120 feet higher.
Two-thirds of Alabama was underwater. All of Florida was
underwater. Most of Louisiana was underwater. A huge portion of
Texas, all the way up into Oklahoma and into the Midwest was
underwater because the climate changed. It changed again. The
sea levels receded.
There is a whole lot more to this than what you are being
told. I highly encourage you to take the time to study this for
yourself. Get the whole story.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next up, Representative Brownley is here
virtually. You are recognized for 5 minutes for your questions.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thanks to the
witnesses for being here today.
Administrator Spinrad, I have been working with
Representative Carbajal and Senators Feinstein and Padilla to
support the designation of the Chumash Heritage as a National
Marine Sanctuary. The proposed sanctuary, which was initiated
by the Chumash, is the home of really the most biologically
diverse and ecologically productive regions in the world.
And so my question to you, if you could speak a little bit
more to the work that you are doing around this, but even more
importantly, how quickly are you addressing these expansions,
and what are your goals around that?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congresswoman. And I really
appreciate your drawing attention to the issue of development
of marine-protected areas. We were delighted, I was pleased, as
one of my earliest acts as NOAA Administrator, to initiate the
designation of the Chumash Sanctuary.
We have an inventory of these sanctuaries--or proposed
sanctuaries. We added one yesterday to the inventory from
Alaska. We also announced the initiation, a designation of
another sanctuary in the Hudson Canyon yesterday.
So we are aggressively moving out the definition consistent
with the America the Beautiful Initiative of the Biden-Harris
administration to conserve 30 percent of our lands and waters
by 2030.
The process is one which involves extensive engagement, as
you well know, in the case of Chumash, with the local Tribes,
local communities, local industries, to define what the terms
are. Not all sanctuaries, not all marine-protected areas have
the same terms of reference, if you will, or definitions of
what activities can be conducted in those areas. So we have a
portfolio, we have an inventory of these.
Part of the restriction, if you will, or controlling
factor, or RIA stat, so to speak, is the resources that we
have, the resources we get from Congress, so we thank Congress
for your additional investments in sanctuary development, and
also the people that we have that can process these.
But another important component is the dynamic of working
with our agency partners, especially, for example, within the
Department of Interior, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management.
So when you look at all of those factors, over the course
of several years, we will undergo a thorough analysis, public
comment, and hopefully end up with the formal designation of
the sanctuary in just a few years.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much for that.
And, Secretary Medina, could you speak a little bit about
what the international efforts are to support indigenous and
local people who are working to protect their local
environments?
Ms. Medina. Yes. Thank you for that question. It is one I
very much appreciate because it is a big part of what we are
doing at the State Department. We have been working hard with
Tribal governments and indigenous peoples around the world to
help lift up their efforts to adapt to climate change and to
understand better the nature of the threat that they are up
against.
We recognize that these people have often been ignored or
have been marginalized in the conversation globally, and I am
very pleased actually to have with me here the lead negotiator
for the agreement, the Global Climate Agreement on Indigenous
Peoples. And so we are working very hard to further their
interests, both in our bilateral foreign policy efforts with
USAID and also within the confines of the agreement itself.
Ms. Brownley. Terrific. Thank you very much.
And, Dr. Spinrad, in terms of partnering with other
agencies, as you mentioned earlier, I know a few weeks ago, the
Department of Interior announced next steps and public comment
on offshore wind lease sales in two regions offshore of
California. Is NOAA involved in that process at all?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you for that. We work closely with
our colleagues at the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, which
has the responsibility for those lease sales and those lease
activities. In fact, I have signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with BOEM Director Amanda Lefton, which includes
any number of very specific activities regarding coordination
of permitting, regarding coordination of release of
information. And another interesting component is an agreement
that we both have to exchange personnel so we can accelerate
and optimize and make even better the processes that those who
are bidding on the leases have to engage in.
So I am really excited about the progress we are making and
what this will mean in terms of interest, certainly from the
wind energy development, the energy development community in
general.
Ms. Brownley. Very good. I represent a port in my district,
the Port of Hueneme, that is associated with Naval Base Ventura
County, and I know they are very much interested in possibly
participating as a hub for servicing wind turbines as this
moves on.
So thank you for that, Madam Chair, and I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Perfect. Next up I will go to Representative
Carter, who represents a beautiful coastal district in Georgia.
Rep. Carter, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Madam Chair. And thank both of you
for being here.
As Chairperson Castor just mentioned, I have the honor and
privilege of representing the entire coast of Georgia, over a
hundred miles of pristine coastline. I am very proud of it. And
I want to thank you, I want to thank NOAA, because you have
done some great work in providing data about our coast, and
that is extremely important.
You know, I have always said, in order to deal with climate
change, you got to do three things. You got to have adaptation,
mitigation, and innovation, and they are very important.
Particularly on the coast, adaptation and mitigation are
extremely important.
Since 1980, the United States has spent $1.75 trillion in
recovery from 258 billion-dollar events that we have
experienced. From 2014 to 2018, the United States saw an
average of 13 billion-dollar disasters every year. Those are
staggering numbers.
You know, there are a number, as I mentioned, a number of
programs that NOAA has been involved with, including the
Integrated Ocean Observing System, the Digital Coast Sea Level
Rise Viewer, and reports from Coastal Resilience Grant Programs
that allow communities to recover and repair from storms. And
this has allowed Georgia to recover, and it has truly allowed
us to adapt to the climate. Adaptation, one of the things that
we need to do.
According to FEMA, no other coastal state besides Georgia
has completed disaster recovery and redevelopment plans for
every coastal county as we have.
So I would like to ask you, Mr. Spinrad, I would like to
ask you this: As you can see, these have been truly beneficial
programs and these efforts. How is NOAA ensuring that local
communities, especially smaller ones, get this information, and
what does NOAA do to help them act on this valuable
information?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congressman. I truly appreciate
your recognition of the hard work that NOAA and our partners
have undertaken, especially in the state that is home to one of
our sanctuaries as well, and our attention to the issue of
coastal resilience.
So your question really gets down to, no matter how good
you do in terms of developing products and services, how are
they being implemented, how are they getting out to the
communities. We have recognized that that service delivery
piece, if you will, of our responsibility is one of the most
important aspects. So we have boots on the ground and
capabilities like Sea Grant. We also are going to make
extensive use of our service delivery mechanisms, like the
weather forecast offices, more than we have in the past.
Mr. Carter. Okay. All right. Well, thank you for your fine
work.
Now, I want to get serious. How many hours in 2 days? You
know the answer to that. Forty-eight?
Dr. Spinrad. In 2 days? Forty-eight hours.
Mr. Carter. Forty-eight hours. You know how many days of
fishing for red snapper we get on the Atlantic Coast?
Dr. Spinrad. Yeah. Two.
Mr. Carter. How many?
Dr. Spinrad. Less than that, yeah.
Mr. Carter. Two days. We are going to get 2 days this year
of fishing for red snapper.
Now, on the Gulf, I was just told that they went from
Memorial Day to Labor Day last year, and then they reopened the
season because they still had plenty of red snapper.
We get 2 days.
Let me ask you, do you know who holds the club record at
The Savannah Yacht Club for the biggest red snapper caught?
Dr. Spinrad. I do not, sir.
Mr. Carter. Do you know that I have got plans for these 2
days elsewhere? Now I am not going to be able to defend my
record. Two days. How can you justify 2 days for recreational
fishing for red snapper?
Right now, the most recent South Atlantic red snapper stock
assessment indicated that the stock has shown progress toward
rebuilding. There is an independent, 30-month study that will
help better understand the true stock of red snapper in the
South Atlantic. This one is inspired by the Gulf of Mexico, as
I just mentioned, by their great red snapper count, which
discovered that there are three times as many red snappers as
previously estimated in the Gulf.
What I want to ask you is, can you commit to NOAA using the
results of this independent study to possibly inform management
of the South Atlantic red snapper fishery?
Dr. Spinrad. So, thank you, sir. And I can commit to using
all the best scientific data that we have got, including the
results of that assessment, the red snapper count, as we look
to ensure the highest quality of the assessment of what the
stocks are of red snapper.
Mr. Carter. How did you come up with 2 days? I mean, if the
wind is blowing, if it is raining, then we don't get anything.
And you tell us the 2 days that we are going to get to fish.
Two days. Forty-eight hours.
I hope that we can use this study, I hope that we can make
an accurate assessment of what exists out there.
I went fishing in the Gulf of Mexico, and it happened--this
was off in New Orleans, Port Fourchon, a couple of years ago. I
had to throw back 44 red snapper. Now, granted, I am a pretty
good fisherman, but at the same time--but at the same time, I
had to throw back 44 red snapper. I just--I don't know what you
all are doing and where you are coming up with this, but I hope
that you will consider the recreational fisherman.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Castor. Next up, we will go to one of the leading
advocates for ocean policy in the Congress, Representative
Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member
Graves. Thank you to our witnesses.
Dr. Spinrad, it is great to see you, another Oregonian, in
your position at NOAA, and thank you for being here today, as
well as Secretary Medina.
Thank you to the students for being here today as well. I
hope you are finding this an informative and thought-provoking
experience to be here.
So I co-chair the House Oceans Caucus--oh, thank you. Wrong
button--I co-chair the House Oceans Caucus and the House
Estuaries Caucus. So I am deeply concerned about the climate
crisis and how it is affecting our ocean, coastlines, and
estuaries. Sea level rise, ocean acidification, hypoxic zones,
harmful algal blooms are on the rise.
I am glad my colleague, Representative Miller, recognized
that this affects not only people who represent coastlines like
I do with the beautiful north coast of Oregon.
Last year, I reintroduced my bipartisan Blue Carbon for Our
Planet Act to enhance the research, protection, and restoration
of blue carbon ecosystems, which has the potential to sequester
carbon but also to provide coastal resilience benefits.
So, Dr. Spinrad, in your testimony, you discussed how some
countries are using blue carbon as a way of meeting their
nationally determined contributions under the Paris climate
accord.
What can NOAA do to help put the U.S. on the same path, and
how can blue carbon mapping help?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congresswoman. Good to see you as
well.
Blue carbon is a fascinating subject, and I think to start
the discussion, we need to point out that it is only recently
that we have recognized the role that blue carbon can play, the
role that algae and seaweed and a higher level--higher trophic
levels can play in this.
So the first thing we are trying to do is the inventory, if
you will, the assessment of exactly what does constitute blue
carbon. And one of the things I am excited about is the
initiative the White House announced just a couple of months
ago about the Natural Capital Inventory to understand where is
the carbon, how much of it is there.
NOAA will play a critical role. We are the environmental
intelligence agency, so our efforts to assess and account for
and also to predict the potential for the growth of blue carbon
is going to be a major contribution that we make to that
assessment.
Ms. Bonamici. Excellent. Well, the idea for the bill came
from a visit to the Hatfield Marine Science Center, where I
know you have spent----
Dr. Spinrad. Very good.
Ms. Bonamici [continuing]. A significant amount of time.
Dr. Spinrad, what efforts has NOAA undertaken to incorporate
equity into decisionmaking? We know the data from NOAA and the
Census Bureau indicates that vulnerable populations make up
approximately 40 percent of coastal populations, and more than
one-third of coastal communities are individuals from
historically marginalized communities.
So how are you incorporating that data, making sure that
marginalized communities share in economic benefit for the blue
economy?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congresswoman. We are doing a
number of things. I would say in one word what we are doing is
listening, primarily, engaging with communities that may not
have had a voice in the dialogue in the past. So we conducted a
series of eight climate and equity roundtables around the
country, focused on geography, but also focused on themes--
flooding, drought, extreme heat--and heard what the concerns
were.
And I would point out that these were not, if you will,
your usual roundtables. We involved faith-based communities, we
involved underrepresented, underserved, vulnerable communities.
And we are now taking the results of those roundtables and
building pilots and engaging in delivering products and
services, and also co-developing what the priorities will be
for those particular projects.
Internally at NOAA I have brought on senior advisors in
those roles, including an Advisor for Tribal Engagement.
Happens to be another Oregonian, I would point out, a member of
the Nez Perce Tribe with a Ph.D. in fisheries biology, to help
us engage with Tribal communities.
We similarly have elevated a position for equity in
everything we do. We are building a number of internal
frameworks for equity and climate that we are using as the
guide rails on how we prioritize our investments.
Ms. Bonamici. Don't forget, environmental justice is a
pillar throughout our Climate Action Plan.
Assistant Secretary Medina, you mentioned the work at the
Summit of the Americas. Can you talk about how the U.S. can
learn from efforts that other nations have taken to research,
map, and conserve natural solutions like blue carbon?
Ms. Medina. Absolutely. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think
it is crucial that we listen and learn from other nations. What
I hear everywhere I go is gratitude that the U.S. is back, but
what I convey back to countries when I talk to them is how much
we have to learn from them.
And indigenous knowledge is an important way that we can
learn from other communities, other parts of the conversation
that haven't always been heard. And we have something called
the Islands 2030 Network, where we aim to do just that, bring
together island communities so that they can not only share
knowledge among themselves but with us.
I think it is very important that we never go into these
discussions believing we have all the answers. We have to be
listening.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And because it is Ocean Week,
Capitol Hill Ocean Week, I want to thank you also for your work
on marine debris and particularly plastics, which we know are
devastating to marine life and a problem that we absolutely
need to tackle and can. So thank you for your work on that
through NOAA.
And I am over time and yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Next, Representative Graves, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
All right. So I started out by saying that sometimes people
have trouble with being accurate, so watch this.
People up here aren't required to tell the truth. That is--
ooh, I am going down.
People up here aren't required to tell the truth, but they
can do whatever. They can say whatever. You all are, under the
law, you all are.
Did I say at any point that the United States should not do
anything until China does? Did I say that in my opening
statement?
No, I didn't. I didn't. You know that. Yet it was
interpreted that that is what I said.
Let's see. What was the other one? Did I--are you familiar
with emissions related to U.S. energy production, specifically
National Energy Technology Lab's assessment that was done in
2019, I think it was October, that found or compared U.S.
emissions from natural gas delivered to Europe and Asia? Are
you familiar with that? Ring any bells?
Dr. Spinrad. I am familiar, but I couldn't cite the data.
Mr. Graves. Are you aware of just some rough comparison of
emissions associated with U.S. energy delivered to Europe or
other countries compared to, for example, Russian energy
delivered, which one would have a lower emissions profile?
So National Energy--see, this is what happens. People make
crap up. They just make it up. Didn't say anything that they
just said, and then they sit there and legislate it.
So I am going to ask unanimous consent, Madam Chair, to
submit for the record a report from the National Energy
Technology Lab that has found that U.S. gas delivered to
Russia--excuse me--delivered to Europe, as compared to Russian
gas, Russian gas has a 41 percent higher emissions profile
delivered to Europe. It has a 47 percent higher emissions
profile delivered to Asia.
So I also, Madam Chair, would like----
Mr. Huffman. Madam Chair, I don't object to this study that
shows that we have the prettiest horse at the glue factory.
Ms. Castor. Without----
Mr. Huffman. Let's put it in the record. We got the
prettiest horse at the glue factory.
Ms. Castor. Without--thank you. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Submission for the Record

Representative Garret Graves

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

June 9, 2022

ATTACHMENT: S. Roman-White, S. Rai, J. Littlefield, G. Cooney, T. J.
Skone,
``Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Perspective on Exporting Liquefied
Natural Gas from the United States: 2019 Update,'' National
Energy Technology Laboratory, Pittsburgh, September 12, 2019.

The report is retained in committee files and available at:
https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2019/09/f66/
2019%20NETL%20LCA-GHG%20Report.pdf

Mr. Graves. Madam Chair, I would like to submit and include
in the record an analysis the Energy Outlook by the Department
of Energy under the Biden administration that projects the
global demand in natural gas growing between now and 2050. So--
--
Ms. Castor. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Submissions for the Record

Representative Garret Graves

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

June 9, 2022

ATTACHMENT: U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), International
Energy Outlook 2021, October 2021, ``Table A6. World natural
gas consumption by region, Reference Case.''

This table is retained in committee files and available at:
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/data/pdf/ref/A06_r.pdf

ATTACHMENT: U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), International
Energy Outlook 2021, October 2021, ``Table A6. World natural
gas consumption by region, High Economic Growth Case.''

This table is retained in committee files and available at:
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/ieo/data/pdf/hm/A06_hm.pdf

Mr. Graves. Thank you.
So once again, people sit up here and they say things that
are just not true. And so then you wonder why, you wonder why
we are in a situation where the right thing doesn't get done.
You wonder why we are in a situation where people are out there
proposing solutions in search of problems. You wonder why in
the world our gasoline prices have more than doubled under this
administration.
Here is why. Because people make crap up and then they go
and legislate on it.
So I appreciate my friends, Mr. Huffman and Mr. Casten,
being here, and I appreciate you all attempting to interpret my
comments that are totally wrong.
I also heard Mr. Casten say that a home bought in South
Louisiana would not survive a mortgage. I would invite you to
come down to South Louisiana. I would love to host you if you
want to come down.
Mr. Casten. Would the gentleman entertain a question?
Mr. Graves. Not right now.
I would love to host you down there.
Mr. Huffman, I appreciate you coming down.
That statement is just completely ignorant. It is
completely ignorant.
Dr. Spinrad, I appreciate you being here. We sent you a
letter together with about 70 Members of Congress, related to
LOAs, related to seismic and offshore energy production.
NOAA has acknowledged--or NMFS, National Marine Fisheries
Service, has acknowledged that their modeling was incorrect, it
was spitting out impacts that were not verified, justified, or
accurate.
It is holding up domestic energy production activities in
the United States that directly is contrary to the statements
that President Biden has made about the number of 9,000 APDs
that have been approved in the United States.
Could you tell me your plan forward on ensuring that that
is resolved so we can produce energy in the United States which
results in lower emissions than production in other countries?
Dr. Spinrad. Yeah. Thank you, sir. The short answer is that
I am working very closely with Director Lefton over at Bureau
of Ocean Energy Management to make sure that the interpretation
of how incidental take, which is where the data--the area of
the data confusion is addressed, and we make sure that the
interpretation of the incidental take data is applied
appropriately in their activities from here forward, so----
Mr. Graves. Can you give me a timeline?
Dr. Spinrad. Pardon me?
Mr. Graves. Can you give me a timeline?
Dr. Spinrad. Not offhand. We can get back to you with the
specifics of a timeline.
Mr. Graves. I would appreciate it if you could.
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, sir.
Mr. Graves. Secretary Medina, I am going to ask you to fill
in the blank. This is a quote by Fatih Birol, and I am sure I
butchered that, but the Executive Director of the IEA, the
International Energy Administration. This is a comment that he
made toward the end of the Trump administration.
He said, quote, In the last 10 years, the emissions
reduction in the ``blank'' has been the largest in the history
of energy.
Do you know which country he was referring to?
Ms. Medina. Congressman Graves, you got me. I am not going
to try and guess. I am not the energy expert within the State
Department either, so I don't want to----
Mr. Graves. So I will fill it in. In the last 10 years, the
emissions reduction in the United States--in the United
States--has been the largest in the history of energy. United
States' emissions reduction has actually been lower than the
next seven emissions-reducing countries combined.
So, look, we can sit here and we can keep talking about how
we are going to use pixie dust and all these things to power
the nation's economy. Clearly, the strategy that has been
implemented under this administration is impacting those who
can least afford it the most. It has been a complete disaster.
We are out there begging Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Venezuela to
address our energy needs. This is a flawed strategy. It just
doesn't work. It is not working for emissions, it is not
working for affordability, and it is not working for energy
security.
And this shouldn't be a partisan issue. Nothing about it
should be partisan. Just ask people to be rational and tell the
truth. That is the only way we are going to solve these
problems.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next we will go to Representative Levin.
Welcome. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Chair Castor. And thanks to everybody
for being here.
You know, I am also honored to represent a beautiful
coastal district, California's 49th District. It has some of
the world's leading climate scientists, and as the
representative for that community, the very least that I can do
is listen to them.
And one of the measures that has been really instrumental
in my understanding of the climate crisis for my whole adult
life is the Keeling Curve and the measure of CO
2
in
the Earth's atmosphere, which I look at.
You can follow it on Twitter. That is done at the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography right there in La Jolla. And just
as of yesterday, 421 parts per million of CO
2
. That
is a data point that is so indisputable.
The question that we all have is what we are going to do
about it. And I intend to work with whoever will work with me
across the aisle to try to get anything done that we can to
reduce our greenhouse gas footprint, whether it is from the
cars we drive, the buildings we build, or the type of
electricity we are generating, the way we are growing food.
We have to do it all, and we have to do it now. The science
demands we act and that we take bold measures that are actually
going to be up to the task.
So, with that in mind, my district is also home to
beautiful estuaries, so I want to bring up a piece of
bipartisan legislation. I introduced something called the
bipartisan Resilient Coast and Estuaries Act, which would
reauthorize the Coastal and Estuarine Land Conservation
Program, which was created to provide grants to state and local
governments to purchase land to protect coastal systems and
wetlands.
Congress stopped funding this program in 2013, and other
Federal funding mechanisms ran out in 2017. So our bill would
reauthorize this crucial program and add climate change
mitigation as one of the program's goals.
Dr. Spinrad, can you talk about the role that protecting
coastal ecosystems plays in combatting the effects of the
climate crisis?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Congressman. And I appreciate you
bringing to bear some of the information we are getting from
NOAA's resources, including the Keeling Curve from the Mauna
Loa Observatory.
I would just simply add, in my office I have vials from
each of the observatories around the globe, including Barrow,
Alaska, and the South Pole, and the trend is not limited to
Mauna Loa.
So the role that coastal environments play in this regard
is one that has, through recent scientific research, been
demonstrated unequivocally, not just in terms of limiting
activities, if you will, exploitative activities, extractive
activities in many cases, but also serving as a key place for
the development of blue carbon, as we discussed a little bit
earlier, and, of course, as, if you will, nurseries for
ensuring the biodiversity and the sustained growth of the
ecosystem, which also contributes to the blue carbon inventory.
So these special places, in our case it is the National
Marine Sanctuaries or the National Estuary and Research
Reserves, are critical components not just of conserving 30
percent of our lands and waters, but also ensuring that we
become more climate resilient.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that. So our bipartisan bill would
also strengthen the National Estuary and Research Reserve
System by requiring NOAA to establish five new reserves and
expanding research guidelines to include long-term data
monitoring and modeling on the impacts of climate change.
How does the reserve system and the research done there
help us measure the impacts of climate change on our nation's
coastal communities?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you. One of the things--I used to run
the NERRS program when I was the head of the National Ocean
Service, and I was particularly excited with the ``R'' that is
associated with ``research'' in the National Estuary Research
Reserve System, because protection of those environments is one
thing, but using them as natural laboratories is really where
we get the most bang for the buck.
So there are a limited set of natural laboratories that we
can use to assess impacts of climate change. The NERRS system
is really one of the jewels in the crown for that capability.
Mr. Levin. I want to turn for a moment to the blue economy.
If done sustainably, aquaculture can create jobs in coastal
communities and increase domestic seafood production. However,
these industries are vulnerable to the effects of climate
change as well.
How is NOAA supporting new, sustainable, ocean-based
industries to spur sustainable economic growth, and how are we
ensuring that these opportunities, like aquaculture, are being
deployed in a way that is resilient to the impacts of climate
change in the future?
Dr. Spinrad. The buildout of the blue economy, and
specifically what I call the new blue economy, is one of the
pillars that I brought to the agency as a focal point for what
we do.
I am convinced that the use of knowledge, data, and
information from the ocean is the gold of the future. That is
going to drive economic development, by some estimates, to the
tune of an emerging $100 billion industry in climate services
to serve the needs of local communities. Building upon the
fundamental products we will provide but doing something
similar for climate, as was done with the commercial weather
industry over the last 40 years, but for the full spectrum of
ocean acidification, precipitation, sea level rise, all of the
other phenomena.
Mr. Levin. Thank you very much. I am out of time, but I
just want to encourage us all, let's step away from politics,
let's just look at the science, and let's act in a manner
commensurate with what the science demands.
Thank you, and I will yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Next up, Rep. Crenshaw, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you, Dr.
Spinrad, for being here. Thank you, Assistant Secretary Medina.
I want to talk about cleanliness in our oceans. None of us
want trash in our oceans. None of us want plastic in our
oceans. None of us want these things in our oceans either. And
these are passed out for the committee hearing. It says, more
ocean, less plastic.
Is this better in the ocean than this? Is there any
compelling reason why that might be the case?
Dr. Spinrad. Assuming you are addressing the question to
me?
Mr. Crenshaw. Yeah. Yeah.
Dr. Spinrad. I would argue, anything we are putting into
the ocean that is manufactured is not good for the ocean.
Mr. Crenshaw. I agree. If I throw this away right now, is
there a good chance it will end up in the ocean?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Really? American trash is what is ending up
in the ocean?
Dr. Spinrad. Globally.
Mr. Crenshaw. Really? Okay. So there is pretty good studies
on this that would say that in the Pacific Ocean, trash,
plastic specifically, the vast, vast majority of it, over 90
percent comes from Asia, African countries. Is that not true?
Dr. Spinrad. I think the numbers do tend to show that sort
of increase on the part of the Asian countries, but that
doesn't mean that we are not contributing to part of that as
well.
Mr. Crenshaw. How much do we contribute?
Dr. Spinrad. I don't have the answer off the top of my
head.
Mr. Crenshaw. It is like less than a percent, isn't it?
Dr. Spinrad. I don't know.
Mr. Crenshaw. It is. I mean, because walk me through that.
So if I throw this in the trash can right now, how does that
end up in the ocean and not in the landfill nearby?
Dr. Spinrad. I can't give you the whole chain of how it
goes from your----
Mr. Crenshaw. But you said there is a good chance. You said
that with some authority, that there is a good chance this ends
up the ocean. How is that true?
I spent--I was a Navy SEAL in my prior career. I spent a
lot of time in America's oceans. So how does this end up in the
ocean so easily?
Dr. Spinrad. Well, again, I can't give you the whole chain
of events associated with how our trash gets in the ocean, but
I can tell you that the data is there. You can look at what is
in the ocean.
Mr. Crenshaw. The data is there, that America is
responsible for an incredibly small percent of any plastic in
the ocean. Doesn't mean that is okay either. Look, we all want
to diminish any kind of plastic waste in the ocean.
So maybe let's talk about advanced recycling. You know, in
my district, actually, there is a company called Huntsman that
does amazing advanced recycling, if they are allowed to. There
is also legislation in the CLEAN Future Act that would
practically prohibit any new recycling facilities that deal
with plastics, any new production of plastic.
You know, and I wonder, is that really a--is that a good
thing to do?
Dr. Spinrad. To reduce the source of plastic----
Mr. Crenshaw. From our trash.
Dr. Spinrad [continuing]. Tthat would end up in the ocean?
Mr. Crenshaw. Does it end up--no, we already covered
whether it ends up in the ocean or not. It clearly doesn't.
Dr. Spinrad. No, but I am trying to understand the
question.
Mr. Crenshaw. No. Advanced recycling. Because you might do
one thing, right, and maybe it has good intentions. You want to
have less plastic production in the United States. But it also
has the second and third order consequence of reducing or
making it impossible to engage in advanced recycling
techniques.
You know, what is the state of recycling in our country
right now, considering we don't really export it to China the
way we used to?
Dr. Spinrad. I can't answer that. I am not an expert on
recycling technologies.
Mr. Crenshaw. Ms. Medina maybe--she looked like she wanted
to answer.
Ms. Medina. I can add just a little bit of light to this.
The first thing is that we do still export a tremendous amount
of our refuse, our waste. And it is true that only 5 or 6
percent of U.S. plastic is recycled today, and that has gone
down in the last year. It is going in the wrong direction,
which is why we are working so hard on a global agreement to
combat plastic pollution everywhere, all over the world. And we
need a global solution to this because it is not really
different from climate.
Plastic is everywhere. And if we can't stop having as much
plastic in the system, we will never get it out of the system.
We need different materials, we need better recycling, and the
agreement will take on the full lifecycle of plastic.
And we are standing shoulder to shoulder with the industry
on this, not just the retailers, but also the makers of the
very products that we are trying to figure out how to curb the
pollution of.
So I am pretty optimistic. It is going to take a lot. We
are going to need a lot of innovation, we are going to need
more plants that do that recycling. We are going to need to
create an economy where that recycled bottle has value. This
one too. This one has more value, which is why it is a little
less likely----
Mr. Crenshaw. I want to ask one more question. Your answer
makes a lot of sense, and I appreciate you acknowledging that
it is clearly a global problem that you have to deal with other
countries on, especially the countries that are putting the
vast, vast majority of waste into the ocean.
The next question was--it was mentioned earlier that you
think sea levels will rise in the Gulf by 2 feet by 2050.
The obvious next question is, is there anything we can
actually do to stop that? Because that question indicates what
the solutions might be. If we stopped all carbon emissions
globally right now, would that change that rise in sea level?
Dr. Spinrad. The answer to your last question is that if we
went to net zero tomorrow, we would still have to deal with sea
level rise, ocean acidification, all those factors, that is the
flywheel effect, as we call it, and that we are seeing in
climate change. It is going to happen.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right. It is going to happen, and it makes
preparing for it and the infrastructure necessary to deal with
it all the more important. And if I had more time I could go on
a long tirade about cost and benefit and how we should spent
that money, but I don't and I am out of time. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Huffman. Madam Chair, could I ask a very quick point of
inquiry? Because I am genuinely curious, and if I understood
the gentleman correctly, I think he was suggesting that this
may be a form of plastic bottle. I think----
Ms. Castor. You want to ask--I will let you ask.
Mr. Huffman. I want to ask if you could clarify. I believe
this is aluminum, and I believe it is truly recyclable, unlike
the so-called recyclable plastic which we know is a joke. Can
you just clarify what the heck this is, so that we all have a
common set of facts?
Mr. Crenshaw. In typical disingenuous form, I will answer
your disingenuous question.
Mr. Huffman. Well, no, I am asking----
Mr. Crenshaw. Of course, I realize it is different, which
is why I made the comparison.
Mr. Huffman. Okay. Well, I think I misunderstood you then.
Mr. Crenshaw. What I was asking was, is this--we pass these
out, almost making the implication that these are better for
the environment than this, but--and it says ``ocean'' on it,
right?
So there is an implication here that this is better for the
ocean than this one, which is why I asked that question,
because, clearly, any trash in the ocean is the opposite of
what we want, right?
Ms. Castor. Well, I look forward to the next hearing maybe
when we can dive into this a little bit more.
But thank you so much for joining us on Capitol Hill Ocean
Week, Dr. Spinrad and Secretary Medina. Thank you for your
service to America. Thank you for all that you do to protect
our ocean resources that are key to the economic vitality of
communities across the country.
So, without objection, I would like to enter into the
record an October 15, 2021, letter from 118 organizations and
businesses supporting the development of the U.S. Ocean Climate
Action Plan.
[The information follows:]

Submission for the Record

Representative Kathy Castor

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

June 9, 2022

ATTACHMENT: Letter to President Biden from 118 organizations and
businesses
supporting the development of an U.S. Ocean-Climate Action
Plan, October 15, 2021.

This letter is retained in committee files and available at:
https://oceanconservancy.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Final-
Ocean-Climate-Action-Sign-On-Letter-to-Administration.pdf

Ms. Castor. Without objection, members will have 10
business days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses. And I ask you to please respond as
quickly as you are able.
And thank you to the SCUBAnauts for being in attendance
today.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:39 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

United States House of Representatives

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

Hearing on June 9, 2022

``Turning the Tide for Ocean Climate Action:
Unleashing the Climate Benefits of Our Blue Planet''

Questions for the Record

The Honorable Dr. Richard W. Spinrad

Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere and

NOAA Administrator

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

the honorable kathy castor
1. Many of the critical ocean observations and science that the
United States invests in are utilized to inform climate modelling.
These models are vital tools to help scientists and policymakers
understand complex systems and test potential solutions. Can you
explain how climate models are developed and tested and evaluate the
accuracy of U.S. climate models that are utilized to guide climate
policy?

The span of NOAA's modeling portfolio reflects the span of its
unique world-class mission from the surface of the sun to the depths of
the ocean. Climate models are based on well-documented physical
processes to simulate the transfer of energy and materials through the
climate system. Building and running a climate model is a complex
process of using satellite and on the ground (in-situ) observations and
scientific studies to identify and quantify Earth system processes,
representing them with mathematical equations, setting variables to
represent initial conditions and subsequent changes in climate forcing,
and repeatedly solving the equations using supercomputers.
To develop the models, NOAA scientists use objective tools to
determine which measurements are to be used in analyses. They apply
rigorous quality control and quality assurance measures, which are
subject to peer review in producing analyses and model-observations
comparisons. Temperature and salinity measurements are used to
calculate Ocean Heat Content (OHC), one of the most important climate
variables.
Climate models can be tested using a process known as hindcasting.
This process runs the model for a period of time in the past. The model
results are then compared with observed climate and weather conditions
to see how well they match. This testing allows scientists to check the
accuracy of the models and, if needed, revise their equations. Science
teams test and compare their model internal process calculations and
overall outputs to observations and results from other models to
improve the representation of the processes and interactions leading to
climate states including variability and changes.
Climate models are further evaluated against other international
models in the peer-reviewed literature and as part of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Sixth Assessment
Report (AR6) \1\ evaluation of climate models compared to observations.
Independent assessments of NOAA's climate models routinely report that
they are among the best performing in the world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar6/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA remains committed to continuously improving models for future
use. For example, with enhanced ocean model resolution, climate models
can achieve excellent simulations of global weather and climate
extremes. Increased observations and evaluation of surface climate and
ocean heat content can improve key aspects of the overall model
development. Each of these efforts to improve models includes dozens of
comparisons with global satellite and in-situ observations. Further,
historical model-predicted trends in high-impact events, such as
droughts, floods, and wildfires, are compared against long-term trends
observed in climate data records to provide confidence in future
predictions.
To make the findings of climate models accessible to the public and
decision-makers, we published the Sea Level Rise Technical Report
earlier this year. The findings included in this multi-agency report
were used to develop new information and tools such as the interactive
Sea Level Rise Viewer \2\ and NOAA Sea Level Rise Portal,\3\ which
offers tools, services, and educational materials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://coast.noaa.gov/slr/
\3\ https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One of the best examples of facilitating climate information is the
U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit \4\ (CRT), which was designed and
developed to help decision-makers at all levels of government,
businesses, community leaders, and managers of natural and built
environments understand their climate-related risks; and to help them
produce and implement a climate resilience plan. The site offers
regional \5\ and topical \6\ information excerpted from the U.S.
National Climate Assessment (and other authoritative sources), a
compendium of free tools \7\ from across the Federal government, a
library of real-world case studies,\8\ a mapping and graphing tool for
exploring county-scale climate projections \9\ (the Climate Explorer),
and a ``Steps to Resilience'' \10\ framework to help guide people
through the process of producing and implementing a resilience plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://toolkit.climate.gov/
\5\ https://toolkit.climate.gov/#regions
\6\ https://toolkit.climate.gov/#topics
\7\ https://toolkit.climate.gov/tools
\8\ https://toolkit.climate.gov/case-studies
\9\ https://crt-climate-explorer.nemac.org/
\10\ https://toolkit.climate.gov/#steps
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NOAA's climate models can help us understand how the climate could
change in the future. NOAA produces actionable climate projections and
helps inform societal decisions for today and tomorrow. There is a
critical need for improved projections of how climate will change on
regional scales through the next several decades. This period of time
covers a rich decision space for city planning, urban and rural
infrastructure, natural resource and energy management, emergency
management, national security, finance and insurance, and numerous
other policy areas for understanding carbon neutrality. These models
and the information they provide for decision makers are key to helping
meet the Administration's climate goals.

Questions for the Record

The Honorable Monica Medina

Assistant Secretary of State

Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs

U.S. Department of State

the honorable kathy castor
1. As we know, the ocean is a global system, making international
cooperation toward addressing the ocean-climate nexus even more
critical. Can you tell us about why it is important that the ocean is
increasingly being included in international negotiations like the
Paris Climate Agreement or the upcoming Convention on Biological
Diversity meeting?

The ocean and climate crises are having a wide range of
environmental, economic, and social impacts. These are global problems
that require international cooperation and coordination to tackle their
root causes. To address the threats facing the ocean, I believe we must
engage the international community to identify concrete solutions and
generate a combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches to
implementation. Because the ocean is connected to climate change,
biodiversity loss, and pollution, I believe it is also critical to work
with the international community to break down silos. By collaborating
across fora, we can achieve better integration and efficiency in the
implementation of ocean and climate solutions.

2. How do ocean nature-based solutions support mitigation and
adaptation to climate change, and what is the U.S. doing to advance
these efforts globally? How do these compare to other mitigation and
adaptation solutions?

Nature-based solutions, such as the conservation and restoration of
``blue carbon'' ecosystems, contribute to mitigation by sequestering
excess carbon from the atmosphere. Ocean nature-based solutions also
provide adaptation co-benefits to coastal communities by reducing storm
impacts, preventing erosion, and providing habitat for valuable marine
species. In April, the United States launched the Ocean Conservation
Pledge to encourage countries to join us in a commitment to conserve,
protect, and restore at least 30 percent of ocean waters under their
jurisdictions by 2030. Nature-based solutions are also a key cross-
cutting theme across the President's Emergency Plan for Adaptation and
Resilience (PREPARE), the Administration's cornerstone international
adaptation response.

3. How is climate change threatening U.S. security interests, and
how can we better confront those escalating changes?

The most vulnerable people, often those caught in or displaced by
conflict, so often suffer the most from the climate crisis. The
linkages between migration, health security threats, food insecurity,
conflict, and climate change are clear. Climate change can exacerbate
conflict and political instability--and conflict can undermine efforts
to address climate change's impacts. The U.S. government launched the
President's Emergency Plan for Adaptation and Resilience as the
cornerstone of
the U.S. foreign policy response to address the increasingly
devastating impacts of the global climate crisis, improve the ability
of vulnerable communities around the world to confront them, and, as a
result, bolster regional stability and national security.

4. The production and disposal of plastics, especially virgin
single-use plastics, contributes to global emissions, while waste can
end up in the ocean, where it further degrades, releasing emissions and
threatening biodiversity. How is the U.S. collaborating with our
partners abroad to address the damaging global effects of plastic
pollution on the ocean?

The United States is combating plastic pollution--both domestically
and internationally--by building recycling and waste management
capacity, investing in innovative research and solutions, and engaging
with our global partners in international environmental bodies, such as
the UN Environment Assembly. Most recently, we joined other countries
to launch negotiations on a global agreement on plastic pollution. By
working closely with interagency colleagues, as well as the private
sector and civil society stakeholders, OES is assisting other countries
in improving and implementing best practices, expanding public
awareness, developing innovative solutions, funding related projects,
and highlighting U.S. technology and expertise.
