- TRIBAL VOICES, TRIBAL WISDOM: STRATEGIES FOR THE CLIMATE CRISIS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRIBAL VOICES, TRIBAL WISDOM:
STRATEGIES FOR THE CLIMATE CRISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE
CLIMATE CRISIS
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD
NOVEMBER 18, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-11

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

www.govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-891 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE CLIMATE CRISIS

One Hundred Seventeenth Congress

KATHY CASTOR, Florida, Chair
SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon             GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana,
JULIA BROWNLEY, California             Ranking Member
JARED HUFFMAN, California            GARY PALMER, Alabama
A. DONALD McEACHIN, Virginia         BUDDY CARTER, Georgia
MIKE LEVIN, California               CAROL MILLER, West Virginia
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                KELLY ARMSTRONG, North Dakota
JOE NEGUSE, Colorado                 DAN CRENSHAW, Texas
VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas              ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio

------

Ana Unruh Cohen, Majority Staff Director
Marty Hall, Minority Staff Director
climatecrisis.house.gov

C O N T E N T S

----------

STATEMENTS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Page
Hon. Kathy Castor, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Florida, and Chair, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................     3
Hon. Garrett Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Select Committee on the
Climate Crisis:
Opening Statement............................................     4
Hon. Sean Casten, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Illinois, and Member, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Prepared Statement...........................................     5
Hon. Dan Crenshaw, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Texas, and Member, Select Committee on the Climate Crisis:
Prepared Statement...........................................     6

WITNESSES

The Honorable Fawn Sharp, President, National Congress of
American Indians; and Vice President, Quinault Indian Nation
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
The Honorable Melvin J. Baker, Chairman, Southern Ute Indian
Tribe
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Dr. Casey Thornbrugh, Climate Change Program Manager, United
South and Eastern Tribes, Inc.; and Tribal Climate Science
Liaison, DOI Northeast and Southeast Climate Adaptation Science
Centers
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
Pilar Thomas, Partner, Energy, Environment & Natural Resources
Practice Group, Quarles & Brady LLP
Oral Statement.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    26

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Press release from The Navajo Nation, ``Navajo Nation Opposes
Withdrawal for Development at Chaco Canyon, Tribal Consultation
Ignored,'' submitted for the record by Mr. Graves..............    48
Article from NET Power, ``NET Power Delivers Electricity to Grid
in Major Technological Breakthrough,'' submitted for the record
by Mr. Graves..................................................    48
C2ES topic summary on carbon capture technology, submitted for
the record by Mr. Graves.......................................    48
Resolution from the National Congress of American Indians,
``Amending and Updating NCAI Resolution #SD-15-024 and
Supporting Tribal Disaster Resilience and Climate Change
Principles,'' submitted for the record by Ms. Castor...........    49
Resolution from the National Congress of American Indians,
``Additional Tribal Disaster Resilience and Climate Change
Common Principles,'' submitted for the record by Ms. Castor....    49
Report from the International Monetary Fund, Still Not Getting
Energy Prices Right: A Global and Country Update of Fossil Fuel
Subsidies, submitted for the record by Ms. Castor..............    49

APPENDIX

Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Hon. Fawn
Sharp..........................................................    49
Questions for the Record from Hon. Garret Graves to Hon. Fawn
Sharp..........................................................    51
Questions for the Record from Hon. A. Donald McEachin to Hon.
Melvin J. Baker................................................    53
Questions for the Record from Hon. Garret Graves to Hon. Melvin
J. Baker.......................................................    54
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Casey
Thornbrugh.....................................................    56
Questions for the Record from Hon. Garret Graves to Casey
Thornbrugh.....................................................    57
Questions for the Record from Hon. A. Donald McEachin to Casey
Thornbrugh.....................................................    57
Questions for the Record from Hon. Kathy Castor to Pilar Thomas..    58

TRIBAL VOICES, TRIBAL WISDOM:
STRATEGIES FOR THE CLIMATE CRISIS

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2021

House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Kathy Castor
[chairwoman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Castor, Bonamici, Huffman,
McEachin, Casten, Escobar, Graves, Palmer, Carter, and
Crenshaw.
Ms. Castor. The committee will come to order. Welcome to
the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis committee meeting
this morning, ``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for
the Climate Crisis.''
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
And, as a reminder, members participating in a hearing
remotely should be visible on camera throughout the hearing. As
with in-person meetings, members are responsible for
controlling their own microphones. Members can be muted by
staff only to avoid inadvertent background noise.
And I would like to remind members, per the guidance of the
Attending Physician, members, staff, and all others physically
present in an indoor U.S. House of Representatives space,
including this hearing room, are required to wear masks, unless
seeking or under recognition by the chair.
In addition, statements, documents, or motions must be submi
tted
to the electronic repository at
[email protected]
.
Finally, members or witnesses experiencing any technical
problems should inform committee staff immediately.
Thank you all for joining this hybrid hearing. I will now
recognize myself for an opening statement--if I can locate it.
A-ha. Okay.
Good morning again.
The original stewards of the land, indigenous peoples and
communities, have a great deal to teach us about tackling
climate change. While over the centuries Tribal nations have
carried the painful scars of stolen land, forced removal, and
genocide, they have also endured, survived, and proudly held on
to sacred traditions, unique traditional ecological knowledge,
and wisdom they inherited from their ancestors.
Today, during Native American Heritage Month, we will have
an opportunity to listen to distinguished Tribal leaders and
experts from across Indian Country on how they are addressing
the climate crisis, and we will discuss how Congress can
partner with Tribal nations to create an equitable clean-energy
future for all communities.
Tribal nations are on the front lines of the climate
crisis. Extreme weather events are impacting sacred lands,
burial sites, and cultural traditions. And the long-term risks
of climate change, including sea level rise, extreme heat, and
decreased precipitation, are threatening the health and
livelihoods of millions of Native Americans.
As we work to solve the climate crisis, Congress has a
responsibility to respect Tribal sovereignty and to help Tribal
nations build resilience to climate impacts and to support
their leadership in transitioning to a clean energy economy. We
must partner on innovative solutions, drawing on the extensive
ancestral knowledge and capabilities across Indian Country. And
we must ensure Tribal voices have a seat at the table and that
the Federal Government ensures free, prior, and informed
consent as part of Tribal consultation informing Federal
decisions.
Today, we have reason for optimism. This week, during a
Tribal Nations Summit at the White House, President Biden
announced a historic initiative to integrate Tribal knowledge
into Federal decisionmaking. And, earlier this year, President
Biden tapped our former House colleague, Deb Haaland, to lead
the Interior Department, and she became the first Native
American Cabinet Secretary in history. The President also has
appointed more than 50 Native American leaders to positions
throughout the administration and, last month, officially
declared Indigenous Peoples' Day as a Federal holiday.
The Biden-Harris administration also has taken tangible
steps to protect lands sacred to Tribes. In a short year, the
administration has restored protections for Bears Ears and
Grand Staircase-Escalante, protected Arctic waters and the
Bering Sea, and suspended oil leases in the Arctic National
Wildlife Refuge.
The President has also made a point of collaborating with
Tribal nations on the ``America the Beautiful'' initiative, a
voluntary nationwide effort to conserve 30 percent of our lands
and waterways by 2030.
And, here in Congress, we are also making very important
progress. On Monday, America cheered as President Biden signed
the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which
will invest over $13 billion in Tribal communities and
indigenous peoples. This historic infrastructure law invests
more than $3 billion for Tribal transportation initiatives, and
over $2 billion for Tribal broadband and digital equity, and
nearly $1 billion for Tribal drinking water and clean water
investments.
The bipartisan infrastructure law also will invest $150
million in plugging, remediating, and restoring Tribal orphan
well sites and $130 million for Tribal community relocation
projects.
But that is not all. This week, the excitement is building
as we are poised to build on those investments with the Build
Back Better Act, which includes a major investment to address
health disparities in Tribal communities as well as in Tribal
resilience and adaptation.
And, as you will hear from today's witnesses, these
investments are critical right now. And I want to thank them
all for being with us today, and I look forward to today's
discussion.
And, at this time, I am happy to yield 5 minutes to the
Ranking Member, Garret Graves of Louisiana.
Good morning, Garret.
[The statement of Ms. Castor follows:]

Opening Statement of Chair Kathy Castor

Hearing on
``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

November 18, 2021

As prepared for delivery

The original stewards of the land, Indigenous people and
communities, have a great deal to teach us about tackling climate
change. While, over the centuries, Tribal Nations have carried the
painful scars of stolen land, forced removal, and genocide, they've
also endured, survived, and proudly held on to the sacred traditions,
unique traditional ecological knowledge, and the wisdom they inherited
from their ancestors. Today, during this Native American Heritage
Month, we'll have an opportunity to listen to distinguished Tribal
leaders and experts from across Indian Country on how they are
addressing the climate crisis. And we'll discuss how Congress can
partner with Tribal Nations to create an equitable clean energy future
for all communities.
Tribal Nations are on the frontlines of the climate crisis. Extreme
weather events are impacting sacred lands, burial sites, and cultural
traditions. And the long-term risks of climate change--including sea-
level rise, extreme heat, and decreased precipitation--are threatening
the health and livelihoods of millions of Native Americans.
As we work on solving the climate crisis, Congress has a
responsibility to respect Tribal sovereignty, to help Tribal Nations
build resilience to climate impacts, and to support their leadership in
transitioning to a clean energy economy. We must partner on innovative
solutions, drawing on the extensive ancestral knowledge and
capabilities across Indian Country. And we must ensure Tribal voices
have a seat at the table and that the federal government ensures Free,
Prior and Informed Consent as part of tribal consultation informing
federal decisions. Today, we have reason for optimism. This week,
during a Tribal Nations Summit at the White House, President Biden
announced a historic initiative to integrate Tribal knowledge into
federal decision-making.
And earlier this year, President Biden tapped our former House
colleague, Deb Haaland, to lead the Interior Department, and she became
the first Native American cabinet secretary in history. The President
also has appointed more than 50 Native American leaders to positions
throughout the Administration, and last month officially declared
Indigenous Peoples Day as a federal holiday.
The Biden-Harris Administration also has taken tangible steps to
protect lands sacred to Tribes. In a short year, the Administration has
restored protections for Bears Ears and Grand Staircase-Escalante;
protected Arctic waters and the Bering Sea; and suspended oil leases in
the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. The President has also made a
point of collaborating with Tribal Nations on the America the Beautiful
Initiative--a voluntary, nationwide effort to conserve 30 percent of
our lands and waters by 2030.
Here in Congress, we are also making important progress. On Monday,
America cheered as President Biden signed the bipartisan Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act, which will invest over $13 billion dollars in
Tribal communities and indigenous people. This historic infrastructure
law invests more than $3 billion dollars for tribal transportation
programs; over $2 billion dollars for tribal broadband and digital
equity investments; and nearly $1 billion dollars for tribal drinking
water and clean water investments. The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
also will invest $150 million dollars in plugging, remediating, and
restoring tribal orphaned well sites; and $130 million dollars for
tribal community relocation projects.
But that's not all. This week the excitement is building as we're
poised to build on those investments with the Build Back Better Act,
which includes a major investment to address health disparities in
tribal communities, as well as in tribal resilience and adaptation.
As you'll hear from today's witnesses, these investments are
critical right now. I want to thank them all for being with us today.
And I look forward to today's discussion.

Mr. Graves. Hey, good morning, Madam Chair. Thank you for
holding this hearing.
And I want to thank everybody for joining us today.
You know, the United States is--we are leading the world in
reducing emissions and doing it in an affordable way,
benefiting our Tribal communities, benefiting Americans across
the entire nation, across all of our states and our
territories.
As we move forward, we have got to deploy solutions that
are globally deployable. That means that they are both reliable
and that they are affordable. And we are going to hear today on
the important role that Tribes are playing in ensuring that we
can achieve just that.
But something that is also really important is how we make
decisions in the United States using our abundant resources.
All of our energy and our climate policies must be based on our
assets and resources right here in the United States, and the
same is true for the Tribes. The Tribes are kind of like a
microcosm of what is possible, looking at the assets, the
resources they have, whether it is wind, solar, whether it is
geothermal, maybe wave energy. That could include even things
like fossil fuels, if those are the resources that they have.
And it is important that, as we move forward, we learn from
both the successes and the failures of others. I just got back
from Europe, like Madam Chair did. And we are not Europe, and,
thankfully, we are not pursuing, at least right now, all of
their strategies, although I am hearing more and more about how
we need to move in that direction.
It is crystal clear to me that that direction is not one
that, one, complies with or recognizes the assets and resources
in the United States. Number two, it fails to meet the
reliability test. Number three, it fails to meet the
affordability test.
And, as I have mentioned in this committee before, look no
further than the State of California as to how to not pursue
clean energy strategies--higher emissions, higher prices, most
dependent state upon foreign energy.
One of the Tribes that we are going to hear from today is
the Southern Ute Tribe, who are on the forefront of the clean
energy revolution. The next wave of energy innovation that they
are pursuing will deliver on this promise of an American-based
resource but also one that is carbon-free and, in fact, at
utility scale.
Among all of the advancements that they are developing is a
utility-scale project to utilize their own natural gas
resources, combined with cutting-edge innovation, to generate
affordable electricity with zero emissions on demand. This is
baseload power.
In fact, the company NET Power just announced yesterday
that they delivered to the grid, for the first time anywhere,
zero emissions baseload electricity utilizing natural gas. This
is something that is a global game changer that everyone here
should be thrilled about, and I am shocked that I haven't heard
any of my colleagues make mention of this.
Let me say it again: American resources, natural gas--right
there, Tribal resources, natural gas, zero emissions,
affordable electricity, baseload power put onto the grid. If
you are to believe the science and just about every credible
analysis, then this announcement yesterday is a seismic shift
in advancing the technology essential to achieving meaningful
global action to reduce emis-
sions.
Madam Chair, I heard you talk a lot in your opening about
listening to Tribes and making sure that there is Tribal
consent, and I agree with you. I think that is really important
when we move forward, that we do look at the Tribes like a
microcosm of opportunity and ensure that the Tribes, like the
Southern Ute in this case, that we are listening to them and
how we can not--as many people have failed on their strategy--
not look at the source of energy as the enemy but recognize it
is actually the emissions.
And the Southern Ute Tribe's project is a perfect example
of how we can deliver reliable, affordable, emissions-free
energy that can ultimately be exported around the world, rather
than the strategies that we have seen recently, where our
administration is asking Russia, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Venezuela,
Nigeria, and other countries to basically produce energy.
Lastly, Madam Chair, I think it is important to note, just
yesterday, the lease sale that the courts forced the Biden
administration to pursue ended up providing nearly $200 million
to the Treasury, just from the lease sale. That is not from the
production.
And that is important, Madam Chair, because, in a hearing
this week, they told us onshore renewable energy production
only produced $40 million for the United States, whereas
offshore in recent years has produced $10 billion. If we are
going to fund important BIA efforts, important environmental
protection, important healthcare, education, infrastructure,
and others, we have got to have the resources to do it.
So I look forward to hearing from our witnesses and yield
back.

Statement for the Record

The Honorable Sean Casten

Hearing on

``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

November 18, 2021

Fossil-fuel subsidies continue to be a primary reason for why the
timeline of shifting to renewable energy sources faces further delay.
Whereas ideally we would have a level playing field for cheaper
renewable energy technologies to gain market share, the long sustaining
subsidization of fossil fuels has set the country backwards for the
past several decades.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) calculated in 2020 that total
subsidies equaled $5.9 trillion, or almost 7% of global gross domestic
product.\1\ This analysis rightfully takes into account the hidden
costs of fossil fuels, including their impacts on air pollution and
global warming, as polluters do not pay for the damage they cause to
society.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Parry, I., Black, S. & Vernon, N. Still Not Getting Energy
Prices Right: A Global and Country Update of Fossil Fuel Subsidies. IMF
Working Paper WP/21/236 (International Monetary Fund, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even if one prefers not to consider these life-or-death
externalities, the International Economic Association and the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) estimated
that 52 advanced and emerging economies, representing nearly 90% of
global fossil fuel subsidies, pour more than half a trillion dollars
yearly into artificially lowering the price of fossil fuels. This is
more than triple what renewables receive.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See: https://www.oecd.org/g20/topics/climate-sustainability-
and-energy/OECD-IEA-G20-Fossil-Fuel-Subsidies-Reform-Update-2021.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importantly, action can be taken to reverse these trends. The
International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) found in
2020 that removing consumption subsidies in 32 countries would cut
their greenhouse-gas emissions by an average of 6% by 2025.\3\ This is
in line with a 2018 United Nations report suggesting that phasing out
fossil-fuel support could reduce global emissions by between 1% and 11%
from 2020 to 2030.\4\ That reduction could be amplified if the money
that would have subsidized fossil fuels was instead used to support
renewable energy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Geddes, A. et al. Doubling Back and Doubling Down: G20
Scorecard on Fossil Fuel Funding (International Institute for
Sustainable Development, 2020).
\4\ UN Environment Programme. Emissions Gap Report 2018 (UN, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Some Members on the Republican side of the aisle falsely claim
renewables receive more government assistance than fossil fuels. A 2011
CRS Report found that between 1968-2010 estimated revenue losses
associated with tax incentives for the oil and gas sector sum to $193.4
billion. Meanwhile, data for tax incentives for renewable energy first
introduced in the late 70s has an estimated cumulative cost of $24.6
billion. Even in the most recent decade, annual tax expenditures do not
surpass $7B.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ CRS Report R41227, Energy Tax Policy: Historical Perspectives
on and Current Status of Energy Tax Expenditures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lastly, a 2020 report by the International Renewable Energy Agency
(IRENA) tracked some $634 billion in energy-sector subsidies in 2020,
and found that around 70% went to fossil fuels. Only 20% went to
renewable power generation, 6% to biofuels and just over 3% to nuclear.
The report concluded, ``This overwhelming imbalance of subsidies
between fossil fuels and clean energy is a drag on us achieving the
Paris climate goals.'' \6\ As evidenced by the CRS report, this same
imbalance has persisted over the past two decades, even before
renewable energy technologies started to become more viable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Taylor, M. Energy Subsidies: Evolution in the Global Energy
Transformation to 2050 (International Renewable Energy Agency, 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without changes to this significant subsidy imbalance, oil and gas
expansion will continue to wreak havoc on our climate and further delay
our ability to achieve decarbonization goals.

Statement for the Record

The Honorable Dan Crenshaw

Hearing on
``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

November 18, 2021

During the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis hearing on
``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis'',
many of my Democratic colleagues reiterated the oft-repeated claim that
fossil fuels get inordinate amounts of federal subsidies. Backing up
this claim, my colleagues used a report from IMF, entitled, ``Still Not
Getting Energy Prices Right: A Global and Country Update of Fossil Fuel
Subsidies.''
During my time in Congress, ``subsidy'' has generally been defined
as a sum of money transferred by the government to assist an industry
or business. The term is so broad that it includes tax exemptions or
deductions, grants, loans, and other fiduciary devices.
However, ``subsidy'' has never been defined so broadly as to
include indirect or correlational environmental costs and global
warming costs. But this is the definition that the IMF used to
calculate global fossil fuel subsidies at a whopping $5.9 trillion in
2020 or about 6.8 percent of GDP and are expected to rise to 7.4
percent of GDP in 2025. And, by extension, this is the definition that
my Democratic colleagues used to mischaracterize the subsidies that
fossil fuels receive.
Instead, I would like to direct my colleagues to Congressional
Research Service's calculation of tax preferences and subsidies in the
energy industry.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/R44852.pdf.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

I applaud my colleagues for their concern over the direction of
scarce federal resources. However, it may be a better question to ask--
should we be subsidizing the renewable energy industry to the tune of
$11B a year, for them to produce such a small share of the nation's
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
energy?

Ms. Castor. Now I want to welcome our witnesses.
We will hear from experts on Tribal perspectives on climate
change, the transition to the clean energy economy, and
adaptation to climate impacts.
First, the Honorable Fawn Sharp is the President of the
National Congress of American Indians and Vice President of the
Quinault Indian Nation, a community of 2,500 in Taholah,
Washington. She is the 23rd President of the NCAI, the oldest
and largest American Indian and Alaska Native Tribal government
organization in the country.
The Honorable Melvin J. Baker is the Chairman of the
Southern Ute Indian Tribe. He previously served on the Southern
Ute Tribal Council, the Colorado Commission of Indian Affairs,
and the Southern Ute Indian Housing Authority.
Dr. Casey Thornbrugh is the Climate Change Program Manager
in the Office of Environmental Resource Management for the
United South and Eastern Tribes. He also serves as a Tribal
Climate Science Liaison for the Department of Interior
Northeast and Southeast Climate Adaptation Science Centers. Dr.
Thornbrugh is a citizen of the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe.
And Pilar Thomas is a Partner in the Energy, Environment,
and Natural Resources Practice Group of the law firm Quarles &
Brady, LLP. She previously served as the Deputy Director of the
Office of Indian Energy and Policy Programs at the U.S.
Department of Energy and as the Deputy Solicitor of Indian
Affairs at the U.S. Department of the Interior. Ms. Thomas also
served as the Interim Attorney General and Chief of Staff to
Chairwoman Herminia Frias of the Pascalyaki Tribe, where she is
a member.
Without objection, the witnesses' written statements will
be made part of the record.
And, with that, President Sharp, welcome. You are now
recognized for 5 minutes to give a presentation of your
testimony.

STATEMENTS OF THE HON. FAWN SHARP, PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL
CONGRESS OF AMERICAN INDIANS (NCAI) AND VICE PRESIDENT OF THE
QUINAULT INDIAN NATION; THE HON. MELVIN J. BAKER, CHAIRMAN,
SOUTHERN UTE INDIAN TRIBE; DR. CASEY THORNBRUGH, CLIMATE CHANGE
PROGRAM MANAGER, OFFICE OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT,
UNITED SOUTH AND EASTERN TRIBES, INC., AND TRIBAL CLIMATE
SCIENCE LIAISON, DOI NORTHEAST AND SOUTHEAST CLIMATE ADAPTATION
SCIENCE CENTERS; AND PILAR THOMAS, PARTNER, ENERGY,
ENVIRONMENT, AND NATURAL RESOURCES PRACTICE GROUP, QUARLES &
BRADY, LLP

STATEMENT OF THE HON. FAWN SHARP

Ms. Sharp. [Speaking native language.] Good morning, Chair
Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the House Select
Committee on the Climate Crisis. On behalf of the National
Congress of American Indians, I wanted to thank you for holding
this hearing.
My name is Fawn Sharp, and I serve as Vice President of the
Quinault Nation and President of NCAI.
As you point out, Chairwoman, Tribal nations are on the
front lines of climate change. Every region of NCAI is deeply
impacted by climate change. However, even as Tribal nations are
faced with the severity of climate change impacts, our
traditional ecological practices have allowed our communities
to develop and implement our own innovative approaches in
addressing the climate crisis.
With this week's White House Tribal Nations Summit and with
Special Presidential Envoy John Kerry inviting us to sit on the
U.S. delegation for COP26, this is a critical time for meetings
like this to happen so that our indigenous voices and solutions
are heard at the decision-making table.
To facilitate the committee's work today, my testimony will
highlight existing Tribal climate strategies and will identify
how the committee can support Tribal climate change
initiatives. Additionally, I will highlight some of the
discussions that happened at COP26 with our international
indigenous communities and allies.
Tribal nations have long taken care of their land and
natural resources since time immemorial. Backed with
traditional ecological knowledge and practices, Tribal nations
across Indian Country have been able to respond to climate
change by crafting their own self-governed approaches to
climate resiliency and mitigation efforts.
In my written testimony, I highlighted three Tribal nations
working to address climate change impacts: the Gila River
Indian Community, Blue Lake Rancheria, and the Karuk Tribe.
Each of these Tribal nations have their own innovative
approaches to tackling climate change impacts on their cultural
and natural resources.
From leading drought contingency efforts to becoming
national leaders on clean energy transition and using
traditional ecological practices to combat the damages of
wildfires, these Tribal nations exemplify our need to have
partners in climate mitigation and resiliency efforts.
Congress plays a critical role not only as a convener but
also to support and incentivize intergovernmental initiatives
between Tribal governments and the Federal, state, and local
governments, as well as other interested stakeholders.
This committee and others must also address the funding
barriers associated with accessing Federal climate resiliency
funding as well as advocate for expanding financing for climate
change funding that directly supports Tribal climate resilience
and mitigation projects across Indian Country.
I want to first address community relocation emergencies
and their associated project costs. These projects are
devastating Tribal nations across Indian Country as they work
to combat the climate crisis.
My nation, the Quinault Indian Nation, knows this all too
well. We are located on the southwest corner of the Olympic
Peninsula of the State of Washington along the Pacific Ocean.
Since time immemorial, my nation has relied on the waters of
the Quinault and Queets Rivers and the Pacific Ocean for
sustenance and survival.
The Village of Taholah is the primary population, social,
economic, and government center of our Nation. In 2012, my
Nation began developing a master plan for relocation of our
residents, businesses, and institutions of lower Taholah to a
new village on higher ground. This master plan involves
multiple Federal agencies, including DOI, HUD, and Interior,
and has an estimated price tag of $150 million to $200 million.
And Quinault is only one example of several Tribal nations
working to relocate their communities across Indian Country.
We at NCAI applaud the passage of the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act, which passed a $130 million set-aside
for Tribal community relocation projects. This is the first
federally established community relocation fund that is
specific to Indian Country, so it is crucial that members of
this committee consider establishing a Federal relocation
framework for Tribal relocation efforts and promote the need
for meaningful Tribal consultation on the implementation of the
infrastructure package's $130 million Tribal relocation fund.
In order to adequately address the climate crisis, we must
collectively look to engage with our international partners.
Many Tribal nations, Tribal organizations, and NCAI are
longstanding international climate change partners.
Just this past month, we attended COP26, as the article of
the Paris Agreement, Article 6, which addresses market and non-
market approaches to climate change, were negotiated. On
November 13th, Article 6 was adopted, with many of our
positions included in the final text.
I am happy to discuss this further, and I appreciate the
time and opportunity this morning. And, again, thank you for
convening this very important and critically timely session.
[Speaking Native language.] I am happy to answer any questions.
[The statement of Ms. Sharp follows:]

Written Testimony for NCAI President Fawn Sharp

House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis Hearing

``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

Thursday, November 18, 2021

Introduction
Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the House
Select Committee on the Climate Crisis, on behalf of the National
Congress of American Indians (NCAI), I would like to thank you for
holding this hearing on ``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for
the Climate Crisis.'' My name is Fawn Sharp, and I serve as the Vice
President of the Quinault Indian Nation and President of NCAI. I look
forward to working with members of this Committee and other members of
Congress to identify climate adaptation strategies that incorporate
traditional ecological knowledge and respect tribal sovereignty and
self-determination.
Tribal Nations are on the front lines of climate change--responding
to sea level rise, coastal erosion, ocean acidification and salinity,
increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather disasters,
climate-induced food insecurity, altered seasonal duration, economic
and health impacts, and more.
As place-based peoples, Tribal Nations have sacred histories and
maintain cultural practices that tie them to their current land bases
and ancestral territories. These time-honored ecological practices are
designed to preserve our natural resources and guard against ecological
damages to our food, water, and medicinal plant resources. Climate
change not only threatens these resources and the ability of Tribal
Nations to care for them as they have always done, but it also impairs
the ability of Tribal Nations to build sustainable economies and care
for their citizens.
However, even as Tribal Nations are faced with the severity of
climate change impacts, our traditional ecological knowledge has
allowed for tribal communities to develop and implement their own
unique, and innovative approaches to tackling the climate crisis. In
support of the climate work happening in tribal communities, this
testimony highlights existing tribal climate strategies and identifies
how the Committee can support tribal climate change initiatives by
addressing existing funding barriers, developing a federal relocation
framework, and engaging with international Indigenous communities to
develop a global climate agenda.
Transferable Lessons from Tribal Climate Mitigation and Resiliency
Initiatives
Tribal Nations have taken care of their land and natural resources
since time immemorial. Backed with traditional ecological knowledge and
practices, Tribal Nations across Indian Country have been able to
respond to climate change by crafting their own self-governed approach
to climate resiliency and mitigation practices. As such, NCAI would
like to share with the Select Committee a few examples of the
innovative climate action approaches being carried out by Tribal
Nations within their own communities today.
The Gila River Water Storage LLC & the Gila River Indian Community's
Key Role in Drought Management
In Arizona, the Gila River Indian Community (``Community'') has
become a leader in water management in Arizona, and in the Lower
Colorado River Basin.
Nearly 10 years ago, the Community, in collaboration with Salt
River Project power and water (``SRP''), one of Arizona's largest
utilities, created the Gila River Water Storage LLC in response to
mounting challenges created by increasing water scarcity. The goal of
the project is to make up to five million acre-feet of additional
dependable, renewable water supplies available to central Arizona. Key
to this initiative is ``water-banking'' and the creation of ``long-term
storage credits.'' Since 2010, the Community has used its entitlement
to Colorado River water that is delivered through the Central Arizona
Project (``CAP Water'') to create over 1.5 million acre-feet of long-
term storage credits. In brief, the Community is ``banking'' its
previously unused CAP Water in existing aquifers to earn ``long-term
storage credits'' that may be used for future development. This
inventive program provides security and economic development
opportunities for both the Community and the region.
In May 2019, the Community joined seven Colorado River basin states
and other stakeholders in signing a series of agreements to implement
the Colorado River Drought Contingency Plan. These agreements
formalized the commitment of the Community, states, federal government,
and other key stakeholders to take collaborative steps to protect and
enhance the sustainability of the Colorado River and the estimated 40
million people who rely on the Colorado River for their domestic,
industrial, agriculturial, and infrastructure needs. The Drought
Contingency Plan has been recognized by the U.S. Department of the
Interior as the best path forward toward safeguarding the single most
important water resource in the western United States. The Plan will
address the heightened risk of severe water shortages and falling water
levels due to drought conditions that have been exacerbated by climate
change. The Community was key in not only protecting the Gila River
Indian Community's water rights and water settlement, but in bringing
solutions that were adopted by the State of Arizona, Arizona
stakeholders, and federal partners. This historic agreement serves as
an example of how all governments--tribal, federal, and state--can work
in collaboration to address the impacts of climate action throughout
the United States.
Blue Lake Rancheria's Efforts to Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Blue Lake Rancheria (``Tribe'') is a federally recognized tribe
located in Humboldt County, California. The Tribe began climate action
planning in 2008. Since then, it has made tremendous advances in
reducing greenhouse gases (GHGs) as well as community resiliency. In
particular, the Tribe partnered with Schatz Energy Research Center and
Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E) to develop a $6.3 million ``low-carbon
community micro-grid.'' The grid provides energy to the Tribe's
critical infrastructure, including the government offices, enterprises
(hotel casino, events center, and restaurants) and a certified Red
Cross shelter. Each year the Tribe saves approximately $200,000 in
energy costs and reduces emissions by approximately 195 metric tons.
Blue Lake Rancheria is committed to reducing its greenhouse gas
emissions to zero by 2030.
The Karuk Tribe and Using Prescribed Burns to Combat Wildfire Damages
The Karuk Tribe lives and manages one million acres of their
traditional territory located along the Klamath and Salmon Rivers in
northern California. Decades of non-Native land use has severely
impacted the Karuk people's access to cultural, ceremonial, social, and
traditional food resources and practices. The region's changing
climate--undoubtedly most impacted by the region's wildfires--has only
heightened these effects, which caused the Karuk to experience a
decline in access to key food resources, including salmon, willow,
acorns, huckleberries, and others.
In order to adapt to the changing climate, the Karuk Tribe decided
to return back to their traditional wildfire management systems, where
the Tribe maintained the time-tested tradition of prescribed fire
burning as a climate adaptation tool. Since 2009, the Tribe has
published over five eco-management plans and several reports that
address the social, physical, and climate changes of their environment
and the long-term effects the Karuk people would be facing if their
traditional ecological practices were removed from land management
practices. In 2016, the Tribe co-authored a report entitled ``Retaining
Knowledge Sovereignty,'' \1\ which highlights the current cultural and
institutional barriers for the sovereignty of traditional ecological
knowledge and provides a range of policy recommendations that would
elevate tribal co-management practices on the local, state and federal
levels.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See the Karuk Tribal Climate Change Project's Retaining
Knowledge Sovereignty Report, 2016. (https://
karuktribeclimatechangeprojects.com/retaining-knowledge-sovereignty/).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, the Karuk Tribe carries out a meaningful collaboration with
the U.S. Forest Service, the State of California, the Klamath National
Forest, and the Six Rivers National Forest that upholds and honors the
practice of prescribed fire burning to co-manage within the Klamath and
Six Rivers National forestlands. Backed with federal, state, and local
support, the Karuk's fire burning practices have helped the Tribe
restore the Klamath forestlands' food resources and helped restore the
Klamath region to a safe environmental health standard that promotes
tribal usage of traditional resources and ceremonial practices.
These examples listed above exemplify the need for Tribal Nations
to have partners in climate mitigation and resilience efforts. Congress
plays a critical role, not only as a convener, but also to support and
incentivize intergovernmental initiatives between tribal governments
and federal, state, and local governments as well as other interested
stakeholders. This means acknowledging Tribal Nations as true Nation-
to-Nation partners in developing climate strategies, and that this
Committee and other bodies of Congress must enact or strengthen laws
and policies that incorporate and defer to Tribal Nations as primary
climate change decision-makers, with the ability to include Indigenous
traditional ecological knowledge in developing environmental
sustainability solutions. Additionally, Congress must support efforts
for tribal co-management of federal lands that have cultural or
historic significance to Tribal Nations. Tribal Nations can be strong
partners in land management to ensure environmental sustainability and
mitigation of climate impacts. All of these solutions require adequate
funding--not just now, but over the long run--so that Tribal Nations
can continue to develop, implement, and sustain their tribal climate
strategies.
Funding for Tribal Climate Change Mitigation and Resiliency Efforts
Tribal Nations are sovereign entities who are on the front lines of
combating climate change and supporting environmental sustainability,
and must have their own direct funding sources and should be given
governmental parity in federal funding programs. However, Tribal
Nations face several hurdles in accessing federal climate change
programs, including:

1.  Competitive grant-making, which disadvantages Tribal Nations by
requiring them to compete with other states, corporate entities, and
non-profits for limited funding pools;
2.  Requiring Tribal Nations to provide matching funds for federal
funding programs, which is a barrier to access that is consistently
reported; \2\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See e.g. National Congress of American Indians Resolution #PHX-
08-039, ``Oppose SAMHSA Matching Fund Requirements.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3.  Several federal climate change funding programs directly pass
through state entities or partners, requiring Tribal Nations to obtain
climate change resilience and mitigation funding through state
requirements and management systems. The process to receive funding
should be directly between Tribal Nations and federal entities.

This Committee and others can address some of these funding
barriers and directly support tribally determined climate resilience
and mitigation projects by implementing some Congressional climate
responses, including:

1.  Ensuring governmental parity in climate change funding (e.g.
any federal assistance provided to state and local governments should
also be provided to tribal governments);
2.  Protecting and expanding financing for federal climate change
funding that directly benefits tribal climate resilience and mitigation
strategies. For example, the Department of the Interior (DOI) houses
the Tribal Climate Resiliency Program, a funding entity that has funded
over 700 awards to Tribal Nations totaling more than $60 million to
assist with adaptation and implementation planning goals.\3\ Congress
and DOI should expand the current Tribal Climate Resiliency Program
from single- or two-year funding to include longer, multi-year funding
options. The option for multi-year grant funding is crucial for Tribal
Nations to enhance their climate change program capacity without
exhausting grant management and application resources and technical
assistance; and
3.  Implementing full and meaningful consultation processes with
Tribal Nations in federal funding planning convenings to ensure federal
funding programs are accessible to Tribal Nations (e.g. addressing
matching funds or grant management issues prior to implementation).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See the Department of the Interior's Climate Action Plan, 2021.

By implementing this non-exhaustive list of Congressional
responses, accessibility to climate change funding programs can become
more available for Tribal Nations seeking to apply so that they may
continue to implement their own climate change strategies and planning
processes.
Funding for Tribal Relocation and Protect-in-Place Efforts
In 2020, DOI's Bureau of Indian Affairs released an
``Infrastructure Needs Report of Tribal Nations and Alaska Native
Villages in Process of Relocating as a Result of Climate Change''. This
Report's initial analyses estimate the costs of unmet infrastructure
needs due to relocation at almost $5 billion for Tribal Nations in the
contiguous 48 states ($1.365 billion) and for Alaska Native Villages
($3.45 billion over the next 50 years).\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See the Department of the Interior's Informational Report: The
Unmet Infrastructure Needs of Tribal Communities and Alaska Native
Villages in Process of Relocating to Higher Ground as a Result of
Climate Change, May 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCAI applauds and greatly appreciates the work of all members of
this Committee that advanced the historic Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act. This bill includes approximately $15 billion for tribal
specific funding, with $130 million set-aside for tribal community
relocation projects. This tribal relocation set-aside funding is
incredibly timely and significant, but as this Committee reported in
2020, the federal government has not established a federal tribal
relocation program or a relocation framework for the development and
implementation of adaptation planning for Tribal Nations and Indigenous
communities.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Solving the Climate Crisis, Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis, Majority Report, June 2020. (https://
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
climatecrisis.house.gov/sites/climatecrisis.house.gov/files/
Climate%20Crisis%20Action%20Plan.pdf).
With the implementation of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act on the horizon, it is critical that members of this Committee and
other members of Congress take the following actions:

1.  Create a Federal Relocation Framework for the development and
implementation of the $130 million tribal community relocation fund in
the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act;
2.  Promote the need for full and meaningful consultation on the
development of a Tribal Community Relocation Program at DOI to ensure
tribal priorities on relocation funding are identified and the
priorities are incorporated into the Program's implementation process;
3.  Assist in developing a tribal community relocation fund that
does not require a competitive grant making process placing one Tribal
Nation against another Tribal Nation; and
4.  Advocate for increased appropriations and other financing
opportunities that would allow for a tribal community relocation fund
to be established and sustained at DOI, especially after the initial
$130 million investment has been depleted.

This moment in Congress and the Administration demands and needs
tribal leadership on climate change. Tribal Nations find themselves a
pivotal juncture--severely challenged by environmental degradation and
climate-induced infrastructure damages, simultaneously presented with
significantly expanded opportunities to exercise tribal self-
determination, and receiving once-in-a-lifetime infusions of federal
resources. These efforts should shift from being historic to being the
norm in supporting tribal governments and addressing the climate
crisis. This moment requires us to elevate and strengthen the voices of
tribal leaders to coordinate, collaborate, and participate in local,
national, and international adaptation and sustainability strategy
planning.
Engagement with International Indigenous Climate Leadership
In order to address environmental sustainability and climate change
impacts, we must also look to engage with partners around the globe.
Many Tribal Nations, tribal organizations, including NCAI are long
standing international leaders in climate change. NCAI has participated
in the most significant international body addressing climate change,
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
since at least 2015. NCAI was notably present and active for the
Conference of the Parties (COP) 21 in Paris, where the landmark Paris
Agreement was negotiated. While not party to this international treaty,
which established a framework for climate change mitigation,
adaptation, and finance, Tribal Nations and NCAI continue to advocate
for Indigenous rights and the inclusion of Indigenous-led solutions
towards climate change. One of the highlights of our UNFCCC work is our
active role in the International Indigenous Peoples Forum on Climate
Change, which collectively advocates as a unified Indigenous voice at
the UNFCCC. I have just returned from our most recent international
advocacy work as I and our NCAI team attended the COP26 in Glasgow.
There, Tribal Nations, NCAI, and international Indigenous
organizations, gathered to make sure our needs and solutions were heard
as the final article of the Paris Agreement, Article 6, was negotiated
by the state parties. I am happy to report that on November 13th,
Article 6 was adopted, with many of our positions included in the final
text, including language on the rights of Indigenous peoples and an
independent international grievance mechanism.
Conclusion
Tribal Nations have nurtured, lived, and thrived on the lands of
Turtle Island since time immemorial. Our cultures, traditions,
lifestyles, communities, foods, treaty rights, and economies are
inextricably linked to our ability to manage these natural resources.
On behalf of NCAI, we are greatly appreciative of the Select
Committee's time and interested in hearing, learning, and understanding
tribal approaches to climate mitigation and resiliency. We look forward
to continuing our work with all members of this Committee to develop
and sustain long-term, time-tested strategies to address the climate
crisis. Thank you for the opportunity to testify.

Ms. Castor. Well, thank you, President Sharp.
And it was very apparent at the COP26 in Scotland the
growing impact and influence of indigenous peoples from the
United States but all across the globe. So we are going to talk
a little bit more about that.
Next, Chairman Baker, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. MELVIN J. BAKER

Mr. Baker. Thank you. Good morning, everyone. Good morning,
Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of the
select committee.
My name is Melvin J. Baker. I am the elected Chairman of
the Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council, the governing body of
the Southern Ute Indian Tribe. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today on the Tribe's efforts to protect the
environment by utilizing the Tribe's energy resources to
support a broader mission around the energy transition and
carbon neutrality.
All modern economies require a reliable and affordable
energy supply, and, in turn, energy development has an
environmental impact. The fact is, we must embrace innovative
ways of thinking to solve problems for our future generations.
The environmental impact that is receiving significant
attention today and is the subject of today's hearing is the
effect of energy development on climate change. The challenges
around the current trajectory of increasing CO
2

emissions in the Earth's atmosphere are real. We must work
together globally to implement change that puts us all on the
path to carbon neutrality so CO
2
levels in the
atmosphere don't continue to increase as a result of the human
activities on Earth.
We must also be mindful that, while we solve these
challenges with climate change, it is not at the expense of
other aspects of the environment or the standard of living we
strive to provide to our Tribal members. We support a holistic
approach to climate change by leveraging a natural resources
niche region where energy is developed to reduce carbon
emissions on Tribal lands.
Within the United States and around the world, with many
well-meaning ideas and proposals introduced nearly every day,
we cannot allow policy changes to exclude technological
advancements because they are not considered renewables, nor
can we export carbon emissions from one area of the country to
another or even to a different part of world, as our Earth has
one atmosphere.
A holistic approach to carbon emissions, delegation of
Federal environmental programs, and project lifecycle
environmental impacts require transformation of future business
and energy development to address climate change and other
environmental or cultural impacts. America remains the land of
innovation and technology advancements, including methods to
tame climate change in ways that do not result in deterioration
of our material standard of living.
One example of our Tribe managing energy resources on the
reservation is our Methane Capture Project. Methane and
CO
2
naturally seep out of the ground on parts of the
reservation where the Fruitland coal seam comes to the surface,
also known as outcrops.
From 2008 to 2018, the Tribe successfully implemented a
project that included a collection system to capture these
gases and allowed us to sell over 420,000 metric tons of carbon
credits associated with the project. This was possible because
personnel from our Tribal government, Tribal businesses,
industry, and academia supported the project. We are now
working on an enhanced version of this project with deployment
of newer technology to increase the amount of methane captured.
Another example of our Tribe partnering with others to
provide solutions is our involvement in the Coyote Clean Power
Project. Our partnership with 8Rivers Capital will pursue the
development, construction, and operation of a NET Power plant
that utilizes innovative technology to produce 284 megawatts of
electricity from natural gas while capturing and storing
CO
2
emissions.
NET Power continues to advance their technology towards
commercial scale deployment. In fact, this portion of the
testimony has been recently updated to highlight the critical
milestone reached where the NET Power test facility in Texas
has successfully delivered electricity onto the grid.
The commercial-scale facility planned on the Southern Ute
Indian Reservation will be the first of its kind and can
provide carbon neutral baseload power to support a reliable
grid as more coal-powered plants are retired and intermittent
renewables are added.
If Congress had not supported a renewable tax credit, solar
and wind would not now make up to 10 to 15 percent of today's
U.S. supply to the electrical grid. We encourage Congress to
consider increasing the value of a carbon credit associated
with 45Q legislation to expedite deployment of carbon capture
infrastructure and new technologies that can be part of the
future solution to a carbon neutral environment.
The Tribe's history of environmental stewardship and energy
development both on and off the reservation is vast and
unparalleled. This includes development of one of the first
utility-scale solar farms in southwest Colorado, the recovery
of naturally venting methane, and other alternative projects
such as biofuels.
The Tribe is interested in pursuing projects that continue
our long legacy of leadership, vision, and environmental
stewardship by collaborating with stakeholders who share the
same vision to develop and commercialize real-world solutions
for the energy transition.
Thank you for the time today to testify before you today
and for your interest in the Southern Ute Indian Tribe. At this
point, we would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
And I do have some staff from our energy department in the room
with me.
So thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Baker follows:]

Prepared Statement of Honorable Melvin J. Baker

Chairman, Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council

On behalf of the

Southern Ute Indian Tribe

Before the Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

United States House of Representatives

Hearing

``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

November 18, 2021, 9:30 a.m. EDT

Remote via WebEx

Good morning Chairman Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and members of
the Select Committee.
My name is Melvin J. Baker. I am the elected Chairman of the
Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council, the governing body of the Southern
Ute Indian Tribe. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today on the Tribe's efforts to protect the environment while utilizing
the Tribe's energy resources to support a broader mission around the
energy transition and carbon neutrality.
The Southern Ute Indian Reservation consists of approximately
700,000 acres of land located in southwestern Colorado. Approximately
311,000 surface acres of that land is held in trust by the federal
government for the benefit of the Tribe. The Tribe, with just under
1,500 members, is a leader in Indian Country with a demonstrated and
sterling record of foresight and business acumen. The Tribe is the only
Indian tribe in the nation with a AAA+ credit rating, which was earned
through years of steady governance and successful and prudent business
transactions. Though the Tribe has a diversified portfolio, energy
development--predominantly natural gas--remains a key component of the
Tribe's strategy.
As we move forward to acknowledge the science behind the need for
energy transition, nearly every aspect of our lives involves energy in
some way. When the federal government placed the Mouache and Capote
bands of Ute people on a reservation, the resources beneath the soil,
as well as the value of those resources, were unknown. With our
traditional way of life forbidden, our people were forced to find new
ways to survive. When the Homestead Act opened ``vacant'' tribal lands
to settlers, our Reservation became checkerboarded and soon we began
seeing our neighbors' profit from resource development. The impeccable
timing of our tribal leaders and their intuitive decision making
allowed the Tribe to sit in the driver's seat toward self-
determination. However, the Tribe has never forgotten our traditional
responsibility as caretakers for mother earth and all she provides. The
Tribe's environmental management remains a priority through production
of tribal resources. The traditional territory for Ute people covered
the entire State of Colorado and into neighboring states, and the Tribe
has zero intention of destroying the small tract of land that remains
of our traditional homeland for generations yet to come.
All modern economies require a reliable and affordable energy
supply, and, in turn, energy development has an environmental impact.
The fact is we must embrace innovative ways of thinking to solve
problems for our future generations. The environmental impact that is
receiving significant attention today and is the subject of today's
hearing is the effect of energy development on climate change. The
challenges around the current trajectory of increasing CO
2

emissions in the earth's atmosphere are real. We must work together
globally to implement change that puts us all on a path to carbon
neutrality so CO
2
levels in the atmosphere don't continue to
increase as a result of human activities on earth. We must also be
mindful that while we solve the challenges with climate change, it is
not to the detriment of other aspects of the environment or the
standard of living we strive to provide to our tribal members
We support a holistic approach to climate change by leveraging the
natural resources in each region where energy is developed to reduce
carbon emissions on Tribal lands, within the United States, and around
the world. With many well-meaning ideas and proposals being introduced
nearly every day, we cannot allow policy changes to exclude
technological advancements because they are not considered
``renewables.'' Nor can we export carbon emissions from one area of the
country to another, or even to a different part of the world, as our
earth only has one atmosphere. A holistic approach to carbon emissions,
delegation of federal environmental programs, and project lifecycle
environmental impacts require transformation of future business and
energy development to address climate change and other environmental or
cultural impacts.
America remains the land of technological innovation in all fields,
including ways to tame climate change in ways that do not result in a
deterioration of our material standard of living.
One example of our Tribe managing our energy resources on the
Reservation is our Methane Capture Project. Methane and CO
2

naturally seep out of the ground on parts of the Reservation where the
Fruitland Coal seam comes to the surface, also known as ``outcrops.''
From 2008-2018, the Tribe successfully implemented a pilot project that
included a collection system to capture these gases and allowed us to
sell over 420,000 metric tons of carbon credits associated with the
project. This was possible because personnel from our tribal
government, tribal businesses, industry, and academia supported the
project in various ways. We are now working on an enhanced version of
this project with deployment of newer technology to increase the amount
of methane captured. Our tribal entities leading the project benefit
from support from the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs, congressional
personnel, industry, and academia. Even though the characteristics of
the gas naturally venting are similar to ``Renewable Gas'' from
landfills, collection of this gas is not treated legislatively the same
as renewable gas. We urge Congress to consider updating federal
legislation, revising existing tax laws, to allow ``Renewable Gas'' to
include naturally venting methane.
Another example of our Tribe partnering with others to provide
solutions to the challenges we face today is our involvement in the
Coyote Clean Power Project with 8Rivers Capital, LLC, to pursue the
development, construction and operation of a NET Power plant that
utilizes innovative technology to produce 284 MW of electricity from
natural gas while capturing and storing all of the resulting
CO
2
emissions. This first of its kind facility can provide
carbon neutral baseload power to support a reliable grid as more coal
power plants are retired, intermittent renewables are added, and
electricity demand increases due to an increase in electric vehicle
deployment. Commercial deployment of new, innovative technologies has
challenges during early stages of development and Congress has a
history of supporting innovative technology development as demonstrated
through the Investment Tax Credit (``ITC'') and Production Tax Credit
(``PTC'') for solar and wind energy. If Congress had not supported ITC
and PTC tax credits, solar and wind would not now make up 10-15% of
today's U.S. supply to the electrical grid. We encourage Congress to
consider increasing the value of a carbon credit associated with
Internal Revenue Code section 45Q legislation to expedite deployment of
carbon capture infrastructure and new technologies that can be part of
the future solution to a carbon neutral energy environment.
Climate change is complex and implementing meaningful change to the
current trajectory of carbon emissions requires collaboration between
governments, academia, industry, and NGOs to leverage expertise from
scientists, engineers, environmentalists, trade workers, and
economists. The Tribe's history with environmental stewardship and
energy development both on and off the Reservation is vast and
unparalleled. This includes development of one of the first utility
scale solar farms in Southwest Colorado, the recovery of over 420,000
metric tons of CO
2
equivalent by capturing naturally venting
methane, and other alternative projects such as biofuels. Participation
in the Coyote Clean Power Project and the pursuit of enhanced capture
of naturally venting methane along the Fruitland Outcrop will continue
our long legacy of leadership, vision, and environmental stewardship
while providing economic benefit and essential services to our
membership. The Tribe has successfully owned, operated, and
participated in numerous energy development opportunities and is
interested in leading the way by collaborating with stakeholders who
share the same vision to develop and commercialize real world solutions
for the energy transition.
Thank you for the time to testify before you today and for your
interest in the Southern Ute Indian Tribe, and at this point would be
happy to answer any questions you might have.

Ms. Castor. Thank you, Chairman Baker.
Next, we will go to Dr. Thornbrugh.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. CASEY THORNBRUGH

Dr. Thornbrugh. [Speaking native language.] Good morning,
Chair Castor, Ranking Member Graves, and committee members.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify at today's hearing.
[Speaking native language.] My name is Casey Thornbrugh,
and I am a citizen of the National Wampanoag Tribe. I live on
Cape Cod, Massachusetts, on the original homelands for those of
us who call ourselves Wopanaak, also known as Wampanoag, the
People of the First Light. It is important to acknowledge that
several Tribal nations on the Atlantic seaboard refer to
ourselves as ``People of the Morning,'' ``People of the Dawn.''
USET is a nonprofit intertribal organization serving 33
federally recognized Tribal nations from the northeastern
woodlands, south to the Everglades, and across the Gulf of
Mexico.
Climate change will have lasting impacts on Tribal lands,
seascapes, waters, and communities. As the first nations of
this continent, Tribal nations have witnessed and adapted to
changes in the climate that have occurred over millennia.
However, Tribal nations now face a rapidly changing climate
while working to protect the health and well-being of our
communities, lands, and waters on a fraction of our original
homelands.
Since the start of the 20th century, the average annual
temperature in the U.S. has increased between 1.2 and 1.8
degrees Fahrenheit. However, northeastern areas of the USET
region have observed an increase of 3 degrees. Although these
may seem subtle, they are reflected in notable changes in
ecosystems and weather patterns.
Over the past hundred years, global sea levels have risen 7
to 8 inches, and this has also been seen on the Atlantic coast
in our region. However, with sinking land in coastal areas and
damage to coastal wetlands, some areas in our region,
especially in the Gulf, have seen sea level rise of 1 to 3
feet. Future projections indicate that sea levels will rise
another 1 to 4 feet, with an 8- to 11-foot rise possible by
2100.
My background shows a salt marsh which is one of the few
places our Tribal nation can access to fish shellfish and
practice our culture. A 1-foot sea level rise it could survive.
An 8-foot sea level rise would put it under water.
Specific changes in our region also include the Gulf of
Maine as one of the fastest warming bodies of water in the
world. Warm water marine species are showing up in the Gulf of
Maine and staying longer in the summer. It is uncertain if the
Gulf of Maine will remain suitable habitat for cold water
species for future generations.
And for Tribal nations, it is not just about species. They
are our relations. We are culturally related. They are
traditional foods. They are also the namesake of some of our
Tribal nations and some of our clan kinship networks.
In the Southeast, landfall of higher-category hurricanes
has impacted the infrastructure and safety of USET Tribal
nations. Tribal emergency response and public safety are
increasingly having to respond and prepare for such events.
Tribal nations across the USET region have experienced more
extreme weather events in areas and during seasons for which
they have been historically less frequent.
Tribal nations are working to become more resilient to the
impacts of climate change. Currently, there are over 60 climate
change adaptation plans, with more to come. However, there are
barriers to Tribal climate adaptation planning, such as
competitive funding for Tribal climate resiliency projects.
Also, the 2009 Carcieri Supreme Court decision challenges
our ability to have lands placed into trust, even when those
lands are on Tribal homelands and territories. Those Tribal
nations may face difficulties if adaptation means relocating or
reacquiring lands.
With regard to relocation, such a term is profoundly
sensitive for Tribal nations, given our experiences with forced
relocation and removal from our homelands. It is understood
that climate change impacts are going to require the movement
of communities and infrastructure in some places. However,
Tribal nations must be afforded the dignity and the means to
move to preserve the well-being of our Nations, as well as our
rights to our ancestral places, which must be maintained even
if these places become submerged.
USET supports the administration's new initiative elevating
indigenous knowledge in Federal policy decisions. Tribal
nations have lived sustainably in our ancestral homelands for
countless generations, relying on our Traditional Ecological
Knowledge, TEK. This has led to practical solutions improving
forest management, wildlife corridors, and dealing with sea
level rise. However, TEK must be respected and protected as
Tribal proprietary knowledge. This is important because Tribal
nations and cultures carry the responsibility of its
application.
In conclusion, it is important for the United States to
meet its trust and treaty obligations to Tribal nations through
ensuring accessible, long-term funding for Tribal climate
change adaptation. Also critical is removing the barriers that
Tribal nations face, while upholding our right to free, prior,
and informed consent.
[Speaking in native language.] I thank you all for your
time and for this opportunity to testify before you today.
[The statement of Dr. Thornbrugh follows:]

Testimony of Dr. Casey Thornbrugh

United South and Eastern Tribes

Before the House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

for the Hearing

``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

November 18, 2021

Kuweeqasunumuw. Good morning, Chairwoman Castor, Ranking Member
Graves, and Committee Members. Thank you for the invitation to testify
at today's hearing. Nutusees Casey Thornbrugh kah nutomas Maseepeeut.
My name is Casey Thornbrugh, and I am a citizen of the Mashpee
Wampanoag Tribe. I live in Mashpee on Cape Cod Massachusetts on our
original homelands and seascapes for those of us who call ourselves
Wopanaak or ``Wampanoag'' the People of the First Light.
I serve as the Program Manager for the Climate Change Program in
the Office of Environmental Resource Management of United South and
Eastern Tribes, also known as USET. Established in 1969, USET is a non-
profit, inter-Tribal organization serving 33 federally recognized
Tribal Nations from the Northeastern Woodlands to the Everglades and
across the Gulf of Mexico. USET is dedicated to enhancing the
development of Tribal Nations, improving the capabilities of Tribal
governments, and improving the quality of life for Indian people
through a variety of technical and supportive programmatic services.
I also serve as a Tribal Climate Science Liaison supported by the
Bureau of Indian Affairs Tribal Climate Resilience Program, and I work
with the Department of the Interior's Northeast and Southeast Climate
Adaptation Science Centers. In these roles and through USET's Climate
Change Program, we work to connect Tribal Nations with technical
support and information to support Tribal resilience to the impacts of
Climate Change.
Climate Change will have lasting impacts on Tribal lands,
seascapes, waters, and communities. As the First Nations of this
continent, Tribal Nations have witnessed and adapted to glacial
retreats, sea level rise, and changes in the climate that have occurred
over thousands of years. However, Tribal Nations are now contending
with a rapidly changing climate, one that is human-induced by
greenhouse gas emissions and changing not over thousands of years, but
over decades. And we are forced to mitigate and adapt to Climate Change
while trying to protect the health and wellbeing of our communities,
lands, and waters on a fraction of our original homelands.
Since the start of 20th century, the average annual temperature in
the U.S. has increased between 1.2-1.8+ degrees Fahrenheit (Vose et
al., 2017). However, northeastern areas of the USET region have
observed an increase of 3.0+ degrees Fahrenheit (Dupigny-Giroux et al.,
2018). If the rates of greenhouse gas emissions remain at a ``business-
as-usual scenario'' temperature increases will range from 6-12+F by the
year 2100 (Vose et al., 2017). However, should global greenhouse gas
emissions be reduced, the average temperature increase could be less,
and at 3-7+F by the year 2100 (Vose et al., 2017). Over the past 100
years, global sea levels have risen 7-8 inches (Sweet et al., 2017),
and this has also been observed on the Atlantic coast in the USET
region (Fernandez, 2015). However, with sinking land in coastal areas
(subsidence) and damage to coastal wetlands from dredging and unnatural
canals, some areas in our USET region, especially in the Gulf, have
observed a sea level rise of 1-3 feet (Carter et al., 2017). Future
projections indicate that sea levels will likely rise another 1-4 feet
with an 8 to 11-foot sea level rise within the realm of possibility by
2100 (Dupigny-Giroux et al., 2018).
South and Eastern Tribal Nations: A Historical Context
Much of the current broad understanding of Tribal Nations and
historical context within this country stems from the 19th century,
when the United States and settlers expanded westward. Tribal Nations
were forced to sign treaties, cede large tracts of land, and reside on
reservations yet were promised autonomy and support from the federal
government to manage natural resources, education, and health care.
Tribal Nations within the USET region also signed treaties and were
forced to cede lands. However, many USET Member Tribal Nations are
``First Contact Nations'' and faced 17th and 18th-century local
colonial governments and distant European nations at the onset of
colonization of North America.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, colonial wars and disease also
decimated Indigenous populations. Within decades after establishment of
the United States, a federal policy of removal was adopted, and many
Tribal Nations whose aboriginal territories were in the Appalachians,
Southeast, and Midwest were forcibly removed to western territories.
For example, the ``1830 Indian Removal Act'' split entire Tribal
Nations and families and forced tens of thousands of Indigenous people
to reservations in Oklahoma. Despite these removals some Tribal Nations
(e.g. USET Tribal Nations) found ways to remain within our territories
showing resolve and determination to remain within our original
homelands.
USET Tribal Nations have persevered despite colonization and
federal policies of assimilation, termination and other events that
have unfolded over the past 400 years. Despite disease, warfare, and
removal, our Tribal Nations have persisted and continue to exhibit
profound resilience. In environments considered harsh to European and
American settlement such as the Gulf Coastal Bayous, the Everglades,
the Appalachians, or the Northern Forests, Tribal Nations not only
survived, but adapted and rebounded as communities and Nations. Tribal
communities even integrated into more populated landscapes, have
maintained self-governance and distinct cultural identities tied to
cultural and traditional homelands and family kinship systems. The 20th
century witnessed a rebound in population of Indigenous communities
within the USET region and a resurgence of Tribal voices on a national
platform to promote Tribal sovereignty and self-determination,
management of natural resources on remaining Tribal lands that are now
mere fractions of once held territories, and the restoration of Tribal
lands lost to the colonies and early states.
Climate Change Impacts Exasperated by Dispossession of Tribal Nation
Homelands
On average, Tribal Nations retain jurisdiction for approximately
2.6% of our original Tribal homelands (Farrell et al., 2021). Although
Tribal Nations across the United States have regained the management of
natural resources for over 100 million acres of Tribal homelands, USET
member Tribal Nations continue to have substantially smaller Tribal
land bases from which to assert direct jurisdiction and management of
natural resources, and Climate Change impacts to these vulnerable land
bases pose serious threats to Tribal cultures and lifeways. Often, fish
and wildlife, traditional foods, medicinal plants, and places of
cultural significance, some of which may be outside of Tribal
reservation or trust lands, are impacted by Climate Change. This means
Tribal Nations must work with federal, state, and local jurisdictions
to address Climate Change impacts on natural resources of cultural and
economic significance beyond Tribal lands. At best, institutional
barriers arise as the interests and management plans of non-Tribal
jurisdictions often do not align with Tribal priorities or cultural
values. At worst, Tribal Nations are not even included in local and
regional plans that would have implications on our natural resources
and areas of cultural significance.
Ultimately, one of the greatest threats of Climate Change is the
migration of species and shifting of ecosystems beyond Tribal homelands
or even beyond Tribal regions, rendering the fixed political boundaries
and territories of present-day homelands unconnected to long held
traditional lifeways.
Specific climate change impacts in the USET Region include the
following:

Temperature change has greatly impacted the timing of
species migration and reproduction across the USET region. For
example, the timing for fish that migrate from the sea to
freshwater rivers, such as salmon and herring, for spawning has
been changing.

In the USET region, the Gulf of Maine is one of the
fastest warming bodies of water in the world. Warm water
species such as blue crabs, and black sea bass are showing up
in the Gulf of Maine and staying longer in the summer. It is
uncertain if the Gulf of Maine will remain suitable habitat for
cold water species such as cod, haddock, pollock, or Atlantic
salmon for future generations to come.

The ranges of many culturally significant plant and
animal species are moving northward on land and in the oceans,
beyond the homelands of Tribal Nations while Tribal lands, due
to U.S. policies forced upon us such as reservations and
relocation, remain fixed. Further, invasive plant and animal
species that are favored by warmer conditions have moved into
ecosystems, thus competing with native species Tribal Nations
have relied upon for millennia.

Certain species adapted to warmer climates are
showing up in more northern locations. For example, deer ticks
which are vectors for Lyme disease are now more common in the
Northeast woodlands. Warmer winters also allow moose ticks to
survive longer, plaguing the moose population.

In our region, Tribal and state agencies are also
working to keep an invasive species, the Emerald Ash Borer
(EAB), at bay. EAB is an invasive insect that is a threat to
Brown Ash trees, a tree of cultural significance for Tribal
Nations of the Northeastern Woodlands.

The winter season is getting shorter. Winter
snowpack, frozen ponds, rivers, and lakes are no longer a
guarantee each winter in the Northeast woodlands.

In the Southeast, landfall of higher category
hurricanes has impacted the infrastructure and safety of USET
Tribal Nations. Tribal emergency response and public safety are
increasing having to respond and prepare for such events.

Tribal Nations across the USET region have observed a
higher frequency of extreme weather events such as heat waves,
tropical storms, cold snaps, ice-jam flooding from early ice
thaws on rivers, and tornados in areas and during seasons for
which they have been historically less frequent.

Rainfall is getting heavier throughout most of the
USET region, due to more moisture in a warmer atmosphere.
However, extended dry periods and droughts continue to occur as
well, and when they occur, they are more damaging under warmer
conditions.

Sea level rise poses a greater risk to coastal
habitats and coastal communities from tidal and storm surge
flooding. Several of our USET Member Tribal Nation communities
are directly on the coast or in tidal areas susceptible to the
impacts of sea level rise.

Many of the places that have significance to the cultural
heritages, identities, and physical and mental health of Indigenous
peoples from Tribal Nations within the USET region are located off
Tribal reservation or trust lands. In many instances, places of
cultural significance are now located within national parks, monuments,
wildlife refuges, and seashores, or state parks, forests, or private
lands. While Climate Change impacts the ecosystems, water, and
landscapes of these places, our Tribal Nations continue to struggle
with non-Tribal jurisdictions for access to these places for activities
of cultural, spiritual, or ceremonial importance. USET member Tribal
Nations and their citizens often find themselves in a position of
having to request access to locations of cultural significance to
partake in cultural activities they have been engaging in for thousands
of years. Loss of access to these places impacts both the physical and
mental health of Indigenous peoples and has been doing so for many
years. Climate Change impacts do threaten sites, practices, and
relationships with cultural, spiritual, or ceremonial importance which
are foundational to Indigenous peoples, yet current barriers to access
and a lack of a meaningful role in the Climate Change adaptation
planning process of these areas compounds the issue.
Tribal-led Climate Change Adaptation and Institutional Barriers
Tribal Nations are working to become more resilient to the impacts
of Climate Change. As of this year, there are over 60 Tribal Climate
Change adaptation plans and vulnerability assessments across Indian
Country, with many more currently in development (University of Oregon,
2021). Some of the first Tribal-led Climate Change adaptation plans
within the United States came from Tribal Nations in the USET region.
The impacts of the 2012 northeastern summer drought and heat wave,
as well as coastal flooding from Hurricane Sandy, respectively,
prompted the Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe and the Shinnecock Indian Nation
to complete Climate Change adaptation plans for their homelands,
waterways, and communities in 2013. Other Tribal Nations within the
USET region have followed suit through exploring Climate Change
adaptation options and opportunities to fund adaptation activities.
Often, departments within Tribal Nations, such as natural resource or
cultural preservation departments, take the lead, but not exclusively,
as Tribal emergency management or economic development programs have
also explored Climate Change adaptation options.
Despite exceptional efforts toward Climate Change adaptation, there
remain significant institutional barriers to Tribal Climate Change
adaptation planning. The same institutional barriers of limited
jurisdiction and access to traditional territory or places of cultural
significance remain factors in Tribal Climate Change adaptation
planning. Though there have been significant increases in federal
funding toward Tribal Climate Change resilience, including through the
recent infrastructure bill, funding for long-term Climate Change
adaptation remains a challenge. Tribal Climate Change resiliency
funding remains very ``project-based,'' and unsustainable for long-term
Climate Change adaptation plan implementation.
Furthermore, despite federal trust and treaty obligations, Tribal
Nations con-
tinue to be limited to competitive funding for Climate Change
resiliency projects.
This makes such funding inaccessible to Tribal Nations with limited
grant pursuit staffing capacity, regardless of significant Climate
Change impacts and concerns (ATNI, 2020). In addition, federal natural
and cultural resources funding can be very sector-, species-, or place-
specific, whereas Tribal Nations are concerned about the health of our
whole communities and environments. Many Tribal Nations are forced into
the position of pursuing multiple grants and searching for funding from
different sources with varying objectives required in order to address
larger Climate Change impact on our homelands and communities. Federal
funding for Climate Change adaptation is also at the whim of political
power shifts in Congress and the White House. Opportunities available
this year may not be available next, hobbling a consistent or long-term
Climate Change adaption plan.
Climate Change adaptation must also include placing lands into
trust to provide communities safety from sea level rise and to provide
Tribal Nations access to species of cultural importance whose ranges
have shifted due to Climate Change. Tribal Nations also seek to restore
our homelands to restore our jurisdiction so that we may care for and
protect natural and cultural resources. In addition to extremely
burdensome and lengthy federal processes to restore our homelands, the
2009 Carcieri Supreme Court decision further challenges the ability of
Tribal Nations to have lands taken into trust, even when those lands
are on Tribal homelands and territories. Thus, if a location becomes
uninhabitable or ecosystems with cultural significance shift due to
Climate Change, Tribal Nations may face difficulties and opposition, if
adaptation means relocating to and re-acquiring lands that provide
access to cultural resources and safety from sea level rise.
When it comes to Tribal Nation relocation, it cannot be overstated
that such a term is profoundly sensitive for Tribal Nations, as we have
had multiple experiences in U.S. history with forced or coerced
relocation and removal of access to our homelands. It is understood
that sea level rise, riverine erosion, and other Climate Change
impacts, and worst-case scenario projections are going to require the
movement of communities and infrastructure in some locations. Tribal
Nations must be afforded the dignity and the means to move to places
that will continue the health and well-being of our Nations and
communities. However, our rights and access to our original homelands,
waters, and coasts must be maintained and protected, even if these
places become submerged.
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK)
USET acknowledges and supports the Biden Administration's
commitment to elevating Indigenous Knowledge in federal policy
decisions. This also represents a partial solution to management of
public lands not held in trust. Tribal Nations, being the sovereign
First Nations of this continent with thousands of years of experience,
are in the position to be leaders and partnering Nations with the
United States to address the Climate Crisis. Tribal Nations have lived
sustainably in our ancestral homelands for countless generations,
relying on our Indigenous Knowledge, also commonly referred to as
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK), a body of information built
upon observations, experiences, and lessons derived from living in a
sustainable manner with the natural environment. The application of TEK
has also led to practical solutions improving forested management,
wildlife corridors and dealing with sea level rise (Leonard, 2021).
However, TEK must be respected and protected as Tribal proprietary
knowledge, as Tribal Nations and cultures carry the responsibility of
its application for the well-being of our communities, homelands, and
seascapes.
Conclusion
Successful adaptation for USET member Tribal Nations will rely on
use of Indigenous knowledge, resilient and robust social systems and
protocols, and a commitment to principles of self-determination.
However, it will also require additional action from the federal
government to address the institutional barriers USET member Tribal
Nations face today in adapting to Climate Change. Ultimately, it will
be important for the United States to meet its trust and treaty
obligations to Tribal Nations through ensuring accessible, flexible
long-term funding for Tribal Climate Change adaptation. With regard to
TEK, it will be important to uphold an approach of free, prior, and the
informed consent of Tribal Nations when TEK is sought for local and
regional Climate Change adaptation. Successful adaptation will also
require respect for Tribal Nations to develop our own Climate Change
adaptation frameworks and strategies that capture our Indigenous
knowledge systems for resilience in the face of Climate Change
(Leonard, 2021). Tribal Nations in the USET region and across the
country have demonstrated commitment and resolve in protecting and
restoring our homelands with proportionally less funding, lower
staffing capacity, and fewer resources at hand. Competitive project-
based funding remains unsustainable for long-term Climate Change
adaptation planning. Tribal Nations require support from our federal
partners in the trust relationship to build long term Tribal department
staff and program capacity to develop and implement adaptation plans to
the long-term impacts Climate Change. USET acknowledges and supports
the significant increase in Climate Resilience Funding in the current
Infrastructure Bill and the Administration's commitment to elevating
Indigenous Knowledge in federal policy. In accordance with trust and
treaty obligations to support Tribal sovereignty, self-governance, and
self-determination, we urge additional federal action and policy to
support sustainable Tribal Climate Change adaptation planning and
resilience to sustain our lifeways for generations to come.

References

Affiliated Tribes if Northwest Indians (ATNI). (2020). Tribal
Review of the 2020 Congressional Action Plan on the Climate Crisis,
Climate Crisis Action Plan--ATNI Climate Change (atnitribes.org).
Carter, L., A. Terando, K. Dow, K. Hiers, K.E. Kunkel, A.
Lascurain, D. Marcy, M. Osland, and P. Schramm. (2018). Southeast. In
Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National
Climate Assessment, Volume II [Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R.
Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart
(eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp.
743-808. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH19. Southeast--Fourth National
Climate Assessment (globalchange.gov).
Dupigny-Giroux, L.A., E.L. Mecray, M.D. Lemcke-Stampone, G.A.
Hodgkins, E.E. Lentz, K.E. Mills, E.D. Lane, R. Miller, D.Y. Hollinger,
W.D. Solecki, G.A. Wellenius, P.E. Sheffield, A.B. MacDonald, and C.
Caldwell. (2018). Northeast. In Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the
United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II
[Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M.
Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change
Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 669-742. doi: 10.7930/
NCA4.2018.CH18. Northeast--Fourth National Climate Assessment
(globalchange.gov).
Farrell, J., Burow, P. B., McConnell, K., Bayham, J., Whyte, K., &
Koss, G. (2021). Effects of land dispossession and forced migration on
Indigenous peoples in North America. Science, 374(6567), eabe4943.
Fernandez, I.J., C.V. Schmitt, S.D. Birkel, E. Stancioff, A.J.
Pershing, J.T. Kelley, J.A. Runge, G.L. Jacobson, and P.A. Mayewski.
2015. Maine's Climate Future: 2015 Update. Orono, ME: University of
Maine. 24pp.
House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis. (2020). Solving the
Climate Crisis: The Congressional Action Plan for a Clean Energy
Economy and a Healthy, Resilient, and Just America, Climate Crisis
Action Plan.pdf (house.gov).
Leonard, K. (2021). WAMPUM Adaptation framework: eastern coastal
Tribal Nations and sea level rise impacts on water security. Climate
and Development, 1-10, Full article: WAMPUM Adaptation framework:
eastern coastal Tribal Nations and sea level rise impacts on water
security (tandfonline.com).
Status of Tribes and Climate Change Working Group (STACCWG).
(2021). Status of Tribes and Climate Change Report, Institute for
Tribal Environmental Professionals, Northern Arizona University,
Flagstaff, AZ. [Marks-Marino, D. (ed.)], http://nau.edu/stacc2021.
Sweet, W.V., R. Horton, R.E. Kopp, A.N. LeGrande, and A. Romanou.
(2017). Sea level rise. In: Climate Science Special Report: Fourth
National Climate Assessment, Volume I [Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A.
Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart, and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S.
Global Change Research Program, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 333-363, doi:
10.7930/J0VM49F2. Sea Level Rise--Climate Science Special Report
(globalchange.gov).
United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund (USET-
SPF). (2019). Testimony of United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty
Protection Fund Submitted to the House Natural Resources Subcommittee
for Indigenous People of the United States for the Record of the
February 12, 2019 Hearing, ``The Impacts of Climate Change on Tribal
Communities,'' Microsoft Word--7.3 Comments Climate Change Tribal
Nations clean copy 022619 (003) (usetinc.org).
University of Oregon. (2021) The Tribal Climate Change Guide.
Tribal Adaptation Plans. Adaptation Plans | Tribal Climate Change Guide
(uoregon.edu). Accessed November 15, 2021.
Vose, R.S., D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, A.N. LeGrande, and M.F.
Wehner. (2017). Temperature changes in the United States. In: Climate
Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I
[Wuebbles, D.J., D.W. Fahey, K.A. Hibbard, D.J. Dokken, B.C. Stewart,
and T.K. Maycock (eds.)]. U.S. Global Change Research Program,
Washington, DC, USA, pp. 185-206, doi: 10.7930/J0N29V45. Temperature
Changes in the United States--Climate Science Special Report
(globalchange.gov).

Ms. Castor. Thank you, Dr. Thornbrugh.
Next up, Ms. Thomas.
You are recognized for 5 minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF PILAR THOMAS

Ms. Thomas. Good morning, Madam Chair, Ranking Member
Graves, and honorable members of the committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to provide my views on Indian Country's
substantial opportunities to contribute to this nation's
efforts, ambitious efforts, to reduce carbon to better prepare
and adapt to the now too real impacts of climate change on
Tribal communities.
Certainly, coming on the heels of the now-enacted
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, this hearing is timely
and important to identify the critical role the Federal
Government can play and should play in supporting Indian
Tribes, Alaska Native villages, and other indigenous
communities, and the strategies and actions necessary to
protect these vulnerable communities from the worst of these
impacts.
Let me start with the good news. According to a recent
analysis by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in 2018,
Indian Country has over 6 percent of the total technical and
economically feasible renewable energy resources in the United
States. And that is compared to having about 2 percent of the
landmass. So, clearly, an outsized amount of resources that
Tribes have, with respect to solar, wind, biomass, geothermal,
and hydroelectric.
Despite having almost 21,000 terawatt hours of potential
generation capacity, which is more than enough power to power
the whole United States multiple times over, there are only two
commercial scale renewable energy projects operating on Indian
lands.
So Indian Country's clean energy resources can and should
and, in fact, must be brought to bear on the United States'
efforts to reduce its carbon emissions if the nation is going
to succeed at meeting its commitments to future generations and
the world in mitigating climate change.
Furthermore, these resources can be brought to bear on
Tribes' and Alaska Native villages' efforts to protect
themselves from climate change through the use of these same
resources in distributed energy projects, whether that is
rooftop solar, community solar, microgrids, and as a way to
enforce and reinforce energy self-sufficiency, energy
sovereignty, but, almost more importantly from a climate change
perspective, energy resiliency and reliability.
But these goals can only be accomplished through mass
deployment of these types of technologies. With the plummeting
costs especially around solar and storage, Federal support,
such as additional technical and financial assistance, can be
more impactful and more meaningful.
But while this Federal support is necessary, it is not
sufficient. Leveraging these kind of resources can still be
very expensive. Distributed energy projects, of course, while,
again, we are reducing costs, the cost of storage is still
relatively high. The cost of micro-grids is still relatively
high. Even Blue Lake Rancheria, which President Sharp
referenced in her testimony, the only Tribe with two actual
working micro-grid facilities used for energy resiliency, were
still multimillion-dollar projects.
So the challenge for Tribes and the Federal Government is,
how can we take advantage of other financing opportunities,
public-private partnerships, to see more mass deployment of
these efforts, of these types of technologies from an energy
reliability standpoint? How do we focus on what would be
critical infrastructure, especially schools, and hospitals? We
saw how important it was, of course, to have robust public
health systems in the last year and a half with COVID, how
important it was to have robust water, wastewater, and other
types of public health infrastructure, which, of course, cannot
operate without energy. How do we protect government campuses,
our Tribal enterprises, and fisheries and farms--everything
that does, in fact, still require power and is the most
vulnerable with respect to climate?
A couple of key challenges that we still have and still
remain is, from a community-scale perspective, a distributed
energy perspective, is the exercise of Tribal sovereignty over
that development. And so Congress and the Federal Government
can really assist Tribes with promoting more interaction at the
state level, promoting more Tribal sovereign authorities over
the exercise of energy development, and providing more
technical and financial resources.
And so, with that, again, I thank you for your time, and I
look forward to answering any questions you might have.
[The statement of Ms. Thomas follows:]

Testimony \1\ of Pilar M. Thomas

Prepared for the

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

United States House of Representatives

on

``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

Chair Kathy Castor and Ranking Member Graves, thank you for the
opportunity to provide my views on Indian Country's substantial
opportunities to contribute to the United States', President Biden's
and state and local governments' ambitious carbon reduction goals and
to better prepare and adapt to the now too real impacts of climate
change on tribal communities. Coming on the heels of the now enacted
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, and on the verge of the
(hopefully) soon to be passed Build Back Better Act, this hearing is
timely and important to identify the critical role the federal
government can play--and should play--in supporting Indian Tribes,
Alaska Native villages, and other indigenous communities in the
strategies and actions necessary to protect vulnerable communities from
the worst of those impacts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The views expressed here are those of the witness, and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Firm or its clients. Some of this
testimony is adapted from previous testimony before the
House Energy and Commerce Committee on July 8, 2020. That testimony can
be found at: https://energycommerce.house.gov/sites/
democrats.energycommerce.house.gov/files/documents/Testimony-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thomas-Tribal%20Communities%20Hearing_070820.pdf.
In June 2020, the Select Committee issued its Majority Staff Report
on ``Solving the Climate Crisis.'' That report included a section on
partnering with Tribes and Indigenous Communities. I'm encouraged that
the House and this Committee recognize the importance of renewable
energy, energy efficiency and workforce development for Indian tribes,
and the roles that tribes can, and should, play in the nation's clean
energy future.

Tribal Clean Energy Development Should be Unleashed to Achieve
Climate Change Mitigation Goals

According to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory's Techno-
Economic Renewable Energy Potential on Tribal Lands, published in
2018,\2\ Indian Country has over 6% of the total technically and
economically feasible renewable energy resources in the United States.
A summary of the resources is shown in the following table:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/70807.pdf.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Generation
Installed    Generation   Capacity-- %
Resource / Technology         Capacity     Capacity      of United
States
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Solar PV                         6,035 GW     10,688 TWh     5.4%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wind                             891 GW       7,701 TWh      8.3%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biomass                          542 MW       2 TWh          1.6%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Geothermal                       330 MW       228 thousand    .6%
MWh
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Hydroelectric                    21 GW        124 TWh       36.4%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total                            9,063 GW     20,912 TWh     6.5%
------------------------------------------------------------------------

With almost 21,000 TWh of generation capacity, there is enough
energy potential to power the whole United States \3\ multiple times
over. And yet, despite these immense clean and renewable energy
resources, there are only two commercial scale renewable energy
projects operating on Indian lands. Indian Country clean renewable
energy resources can, should, and must be brought to bear on the United
States' efforts to reduce carbon emissions if the nation is going to
succeed at meeting its commitments to future generations and the world
in mitigating climate change.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ According to the Energy Information Administration, the United
States consumed 4 trillion kWh (4 TWh) in 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, there are many obstacles remaining that need to be
overcome if this contribution is to be unlocked. Those include:

Access to transmission, transmission capacity and state siting
processes. Access to the Bulk Transmission System and Wholesale Markets
through ``middle grid'' development--and the capital necessary to build
it--is necessary for Tribes to be able to access wholesale markets for
electricity purchases or to sell power into the market.

Access to off-takers, buyers, and markets. One way to expand access
to markets is through leveraging corporate off-takers. According to
several recent studies in 2017, private corporations entered into
contracts to procure almost 2 GW of solar and wind power. Corporations
are engaged in these direct procurement efforts for several reasons,
including corporate sustainability goals, renewable energy commitments,
climate change commitments, and economic benefits. Recently for
example, over 1,500 United States companies--from Fortune 500 to small
businesses--have committed to supporting the Paris Climate Accord.
Corporate procurement is now one of the major drivers of new renewable
energy deployments. These companies are prime partners for tribes that
are still interested in commercial scale projects--generating and
exporting renewable power off of the reservation. Commercial projects
primarily benefit tribes through lease payments, development fees,
taxes, and construction, operations and maintenance jobs. A typical
commercial scale project requires an experienced developer, a tax
equity investor (to monetize the federal tax credits), a willing
lender, and a credit worthy off-taker. In the past, the off-taker has
typically been the local utility. But, in many states, the ability to
sell to the utility can be challenging at best. As more and more
companies are devising ways to directly procure renewable power, tribes
with good locations and plenty of renewable energy potential may have
another advantage--as a minority supplier to a corporate direct user
off-taker. Another benefit of working directly with a corporate off-
taker is that Tribes could use their substantial renewable energy
resources to attract companies--especially those that are in energy
intensive industries, or have renewable energy goals that cannot be met
by local utilities--to locate on the reservations. This effort would
require investment in energy infrastructure and human capital. And, it
has the added benefit of bringing jobs to Indian reservations.

Development support. Capacity building and development capital are
still in short supply to assist tribes, tribal leaders and tribal staff
with development-related activities for commercial scale renewable
energy projects. While it is not rocket science, development activities
are hard, complicated and expensive. Environmental review processes,
market and financial analysis, transmission interconnection and
studies--to name just a few major development activities--take time,
money and staff power. Yet, there is little to no federal support for
this critical (and fatal flaw) component of actually bringing projects
to fruition.

Inclusion in state and FERC planning efforts. FERC recently
announced a transmission task force, which include 10 state utility
commissioner representatives. But, not a single Indian Tribe
representative sits on this important task force. If Tribes are going
to participate in the clean energy economy, projects located on tribal
lands will need access to transmission. And, transmission line projects
that will bring clean energy resources to load centers will, in many
instances, have to be routed through tribal lands.

Inclusion in state energy regulatory decision-making. With the
exception of California, no state public utility regulatory body has a
tribal consultation policy or incorporates regular outreach to and
input from Indian Tribes. So, while many states have increased their
clean energy standards, none have done so with the renewable resources
in Indian Country in mind.

Complexity of deal structures and financing to monetize tax
benefits. As long as federal tax incentives continue to drive the
economics of renewable energy projects, complex deal structures will
continue to be the hallmark of clean energy projects. This complexity
further adds to the disincentives to include tribes in the development
of projects.

Triple sovereign regulatory jurisdiction. Virtually every project
on Indian lands has to be approved in some way by all three
sovereigns--tribes, the federal government and the state utility
regulatory body. This adds further cost and complexity to developing
and implementing projects on tribal lands.

TRIBAL CLEAN ENERGY AND UTILITY DEVELOPMENT IS THE KEY TO

ADAPTATION AND RESILIENCY IN THE FACE OF CLIMATE CHANGE

IMPACTS

All Indian Tribes and Alaska Native villages are capable of
implementing distributed energy resource projects that support energy
self-sufficiency, energy sovereignty, and energy resiliency and
reliability. These goals can be accomplished through mass deployment of
community solar, distributed energy, storage, energy efficiency and
microgrids or through tribal utility authorities. With plummeting costs
of these technologies, federal support--such as technical and financial
assistance--can be more impactful and more meaningful. The proposed
increases in funding to USDA, DOE, Commerce (among others) through the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act and increased appropriations
will go a longer way in supporting project development and
implementation. But, while this federal support is necessary, it is not
sufficient.
Leveraging clean energy resources through the implementation of
community solar, distributed energy, microgrids and energy efficiency
projects as climate resiliency tools is imperative for Indian Tribes
and Alaska Native villages. Lower costs of solar, wind and storage have
made distributed energy projects more economically feasible.
Distributed energy projects can include rooftop solar, small wind, and
community scale solar or wind up to 5-10 MW. The key is that the
project is located in the electricity distribution system and is
intended to be used directly by a single or multiple buildings (or
homes). The primary benefits of a distributed energy project are to
reduce the carbon footprint, save money (by offsetting the amount of
power purchased from your utility), create jobs, and increase
resiliency and reliability (protection from natural and man-made risks
to big grid failure). There are still technological challenges with
integrating intermittent renewables into the distribution system. And
utilities are very concerned about the economic impacts on their
business model as more people and companies deploy distributed energy
projects. But, a recent study of utility executives in 2017 reveals
that at least 60% of them expect distributed energy projects to
continue to proliferate and their utilities will have to obtain the
necessary expertise and technology to integrate those projects with
minimal disruption to the distribution system.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Accenture Consulting, ``Power Surge Ahead: How Distribution
Utilities Can Get Smart with Distributed Generation'' (2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Almost all of the tribal renewable energy projects deployed in the
last 5 years have been distributed energy projects. Several tribes have
deployed 1-3 MW systems, with many also deploying rooftop solar on
tribal member homes. These projects have generally been limited in size
due to the various federal grant programs. But, many more tribes can,
and should be, exploring larger ``community scale'' projects: projects
that are between 5-30 MWs that can power critical infrastructure, such
as schools, hospitals and health care, public safety, government
campuses, tribal enterprises, wastewater treatment, fisheries, farms,
and tribal housing. These projects are typically too costly for the
federal grant programs but are ripe for public-private partnerships to
leverage tax credits that will reduce the cost to construct (and thus
the cost of power).
The start-up of tribal-owned electric utilities has accelerated in
the last decade primarily due to feasibility study financial assistance
from the Department of the Interior and technical assistance from the
Department of Energy. Tribes are learning the about the major economic
benefits of tribal electric utility ownership and operation which
include, but are not limited to:

Tribal sovereignty, energy self-sufficiency and
control over the source of the tribe's electricity

Cost reduction and management of electricity costs

Revenue generation and job creation

Through a tribal utility, tribes can reduce their dependence on
fossil fuel electricity (such as coal and natural gas), increase their
use of renewable energy and distributed energy resources, and reduce
electricity costs through the acquisition of electricity of their
choosing. Furthermore, a tribal utility can be a vehicle for developing
tribal renewable energy resources for both on-reservation and off-
reservation use. This provides the tribe with a greater degree of
control over the development of those energy resources, while
maintaining a separation of effort between the tribal government and
the tribal utility's enterprise efforts.
In addition, a tribal utility can control its electricity costs
through access to the wholesale electricity market. As regulated
utilities and rural electric cooperatives continue to increase retail
rates, the wholesale cost of power has stayed relatively flat.
Furthermore, tribes that are serviced by incumbent utilities--whether
investor owned, rural electric cooperative, or a public power company--
lack control over both the source of power and the price they pay for
power. A tribal utility can directly access the wholesale market, or
negotiate for long term electricity contracts, that will most likely
result in lower power costs for the tribal government, enterprises, and
tribal members who live on the reservation.
Moreover, instead of making payments to outside utilities, the
tribal government, enterprises and members will make payments instead
to the tribal utility. These revenues would go directly to a tribal
entity that is more responsive to the tribal community. The revenues
will also go towards electricity procurement, operations and
maintenance of the electricity system and reinvestment into the
community. In addition to energy choice, the tribal utility will have
more flexibility in operations and customer service.
Lastly, the tribal utility will result in funds and jobs remaining
in the tribal community. Tribal utilities can promote tribal member
workforce development and job creation through the operations and
maintenance of the utility. Depending on the size of the reservation,
the energy system, and the number of facilities to be serviced, there
can be dozens of new jobs for tribal members. If the tribal utility
makes the determination that it can produce its own electricity--such
as through distributed energy systems like community solar, wind, or
small natural gas generation--the construction and operation of those
types of projects will result in further job creation.
Notwithstanding all these potential benefits of tribal electric
utility ownership, almost no tribal utility is vertically integrated--
that is, they do not produce or generate their own electricity. Tribal
utilities continue to operate as distribution utilities only and import
all the electricity used within the utilities' service area. Most
electric power for tribal utilities comes from the federal power
marketing authorities (primarily Western Area Power Administration and
Bonneville Power Administration), with additional power coming from
wholesale power markets or bi-lateral power purchase agreements.

ADDITIONAL POLICY SUPPORT FOR TRIBAL CLEAN ENERGY OPPORTUNITIES

Additional policy support to help move the needle for Indian Tribes
and Alaska Native villages to take full control of their clean energy
resources to support their climate adaptation and resiliency goals and
implementation actions include support for, among others:

The exercise of tribal sovereign authority over
energy services and development on tribal lands. For the most
part, tribal energy development is dependent on state
electricity policy and regulatory regimes through the state's
jurisdiction over and regulation of utility companies that
serve tribal lands. If tribes want to develop and use their own
clean energy resources, they have to comply with state policies
and regulations--tribal energy policy is cabined by state
energy policy.
Federal agencies, such as the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
the Environmental Protection Agency, can also support the full
exercise of tribal sovereign authorities through the promotion
and technical support for tribes to take advantage of HEARTH
Act (25 USC Sec. 415(h)) and Tribal Energy Resource Agreements
(25 USC Sec. 3504) for leasing and other land agreements and
``Treatment as State'' status for Clean Air Act (42 USC
Sec. 7601(d)(2)(B)) and Clean Water Act (33 USC
Sec. 1377(e)(2)) permitting.

Specific financial and technical assistance to tribes
for tribal energy utility formation and operations to give
Indian Tribes the ability to control energy costs, create jobs,
control energy sources, and keep revenues within the Tribe. For
example, many of the grid resiliency programs enacted in the
recent American Energy Act (PL 116-260, Div. Z) and
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (PL 117-58) include
tribes, but it is not clear that tribal utilities are eligible
for these financial assistance programs. The Department of
Energy should be encouraged to conduct specific outreach and
program development geared towards the unique aspects of
tribal-owned utilities.

Tribal--incumbent utility partnerships to leverage
federal support for infrastructure investment and economic
viability. Grid modernization is expensive, but necessary to
improve grid performance, integrate distributed energy and
storage, or otherwise improve grid resiliency and reliability.
Most tribes will not be able--or want to--start up tribal owned
and operated electric utilities. The Department of Energy could
leverage its relationship with incumbent utilities and utility
regulators to improve interactions between tribes and their
incumbent utilities and to provide additional financial and
technical assistance support for tribal-incumbent utility
partnerships to develop clean energy infrastructure on tribal
lands and in tribal communities.

Redefine the energy transition challenge. One major
challenge with thinking about the energy transition in Indian
Country is the very limited way in which this term is used.
While it is no doubt important to provide support and
assistance to fossil fuel tribes--those that have energy
economies based on coal, oil and gas--there is a broader issue
with the energy customer--those that use energy services. For
example, as the ``electrification'' efforts escalate to reduce
carbon emissions, retrofitting tribal government buildings,
housing, and enterprise facilities and change out vehicles will
be expensive and time-consuming. There are currently no federal
programs to support electrification in Indian Country. One
tribe in Minnesota recently received a substantial state grant
for a ``net zero carbon emission'' project to reduce carbon
emissions across the whole tribal community. The key effort in
this will be to electrify the building stock, replacing natural
gas and propane heat with electricity.

Deployment of distributed energy resources and
upgraded distribution grids to accommodate the transition to
electrification and carbon emission reductions. More states and
local governments are developing low-income and disadvantaged
communities programs to support these aspects of energy
transition and climate resiliency efforts. But, very few are
incorporating tribal communities into these efforts. Federal
support will be necessary to step into this gap to ensure
tribal communities are not left behind in the broader
electrification, carbon reduction and climate resiliency
efforts leveraging distributed clean energy resources across
the country.

Thank you again for the opportunity to provide this written
testimony and information to the Select Committee on the Climate
Crisis. I look forward to answering any further questions from the
members.

Ms. Castor. Well, thank you very much.
And thanks to all of the witnesses for their very
insightful testimony. And thank you for getting up early, for
our witnesses from the West Coast especially.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes to kick off the
questioning.
Well, all of the witnesses have really highlighted the
enormous opportunities that clean renewable energy brings to
Tribal lands and in Tribes and to all of us across this
country. What I have heard from you is that clean and renewable
energy will create jobs, it will lower cost, it will clean up
the air, it will reduce pollution, and provide health benefits
in areas of the country that really need it.
So, President Sharp, you are a leader in this. What do we
need to do in Tribal consultation to really bring these
opportunities to indigenous peoples across this country?
Ms. Sharp. Yes, I really appreciate--I know you have a
question, but--your remarks in the opening statement. The issue
of free, prior, and informed consent and the ability for Tribal
nations to have a decisive say, that is something that I have
started to advocate in advance as a policy in which nobody has
to give that to us. We are not seeking FPIC from state agencies
and Federal agencies. The idea that a Tribal nation, like any
other governmental body, should have a decisive say over our
land, territories, and resources is an international standard
that transcends national borders.
And for Tribal nations to be able to seize the
opportunities that Pilar had mentioned, when you look at the
opportunity that we have within Indian Country, there is no
question that Tribal nations, in assisting and partnering with
the United States to unleash and unlock the energy potential
within this country, we should have a decisive say.
And so it is critically important that, as we build out our
climate strategies, that Tribal nations are able to exercise
the full spectrum of governmental powers, authorities, and
decision making.
Ms. Castor. Ms. Thomas, you make a very compelling point
about clean energy development being a key part of adaptation
and resilience and economic opportunity for Tribal nations. And
I see investments in community solar and micro-grids building
climate resilience across the country but also providing those
enormous, as you called, outsized economic opportunities.
Could you give us a few examples or two of clean energy
projects in Tribal communities and the broader impacts they are
having?
Ms. Thomas. Yes. So, again, you know, the Blue Lake
Rancheria, which I think is in Representative Huffman's
district, there are--thankfully, over the last few years or so,
there has been a real shift in Federal financing for these
smaller, community scale distributed energy projects, because
they provide lots of different benefits to Tribes. One, first
and foremost, jobs, right? These are the kind--you can't
outsource these jobs, and you can't automate these jobs. So
they provide jobs for Tribal members.
They provide added economic benefit of reducing energy
costs, right? If I offset that power cost, I don't pay the
utility, I get to keep those funds in the community and
reinvest them in the Tribal community. If it is operated by a
Tribal utility, again, I am creating more jobs through that
Tribal utility.
And you see this around the whole country. There has been a
very broad geographic effort, from Washington State with the
Spokane Tribe, down to the Seminole Tribe in Florida, and
everywhere in between, a very robust diversification of
renewable energy projects at the smaller scale level. And that
is because everybody can do smaller scale renewable energy
projects.
And so that has been critical. We have seen lots of new
Tribes come out with energy economy opportunities for job
training and putting Tribal members to work in installing solar
panels and doing energy efficiency.
We have to operate and maintain those systems, so these are
sustainable jobs. These aren't just 600 people building a big
solar project and then, as I say, three guys and a bottle of
Windex taking care of it later. So there is----
Ms. Castor. And, in fact, Chairman Baker highlighted that
the Southern Ute have developed utility-scale solar that has
reduced their dependence on fossil fuel.
So, Chairman Baker, why did you all make the decision to
diversify your energy resources?
And, Chairman, I have run out of time, so let's--we will be
sure to come back to you, so we will give you some time to
think about your answer on that. And I will have to go to
Ranking Member Graves for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baker. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Graves. And, Chairman Baker, I think you were on mute
as well.
Mr. Baker. Yes, I was.
Mr. Graves. Hey, thanks again to all of you for
participating today. I really appreciate you all's testimony.
Chairman Baker, you all have pursued, as the Chair just
noted, both solar as well as conventional fuel projects that
all result in net-zero emissions.
Can you talk a little bit about the importance of just
innovation and innovative technologies in helping the Tribe
achieve your, kind of, financial health and sustainability,
baseload power for your Tribe?
Mr. Baker. Yes. The Coyote Clean Power Project has the
potential to positively benefit the Southern Ute Indian Tribe
and the local community by providing clean, affordable,
baseload power to the grid in part of the country where coal
plants are continuing to be retired over the coming years.
Additionally, the Coyote Clean Power Project will be
located on the Southern Ute Indian Reservation, creating
employment opportunities in the community. Per Federal law, the
project will be giving contracting preference for Indian-owned
businesses and hiring enrolled Native Americans to support the
project.
During the peak of the construction, it is anticipated that
the project will create over 1,000 indirect and direct jobs.
Post-construction and during the operational period, it is
anticipated that the project would directly create two to three
dozen direct jobs, providing local high-tech employment
opportunities for the community, along with future indirect job
creation.
So we are always looking for, you know, how can we
implement job opportunities for our membership.
Mr. Graves. So it is job opportunities, and it is financial
assistance to the Tribe as well.
There was an article from the Associated Press in June of
this year that noted that there was a boom in Native American
oil activity and how that potentially complicates what the
Biden administration is doing.
If the administration comes in and tries to prohibit or
stop Tribes from producing conventional fuels, and, as we have
talked about, in some cases with net-zero emissions, what does
that do to the Southern Ute?
You are on mute.
Mr. Baker. Yeah.
Mr. Graves. You are good.
Mr. Baker. Since the project consumes fossil fuels--why
would the Southern Ute develop a project that consumes fossil
fuels, given the concerns on climate change? First, we believe
that all energy development has some type of environmental
impact. And, when we evaluate projects, we look at the
environmental and social impacts through the entire lifecycle
of the project, which can include air emissions, climate
change, water and land use, wildlife, waste generation, labor,
et cetera.
The Coyote Clean Power Project utilizes natural gas, which
we see as playing a big role in the overall energy transition
due to the fact that it is readily available in the United
States, has a lower carbon footprint than other types of fossil
fuels, and, when coupled with innovative technology, can
eliminate air pollutants associated with combustion and capture
over 97 percent of the CO
2
generated from the
project for sequestration.
The project is truly an innovative way to supply affordable
baseload power to the grid while providing solutions to climate
change we summarized into three buckets: Fossil fuels can be
used cleanly. Fossil fuels still make up more than 80 percent
of the energy consumed around the world. Carbon capture----
Mr. Graves. So, Mr. Chairman, it sounds like you all have
your own process where you review, kind of, from beginning to
end and look at it and determine, just holistically, if this is
the right move for the Tribe. And that is a great process and,
I think, something that doesn't discriminate against energy
technologies.
President Sharp, I am curious--a couple things. One, there
were some quotes from you earlier this year where you basically
said you were going to, quote, ``take Big Oil down.'' Hearing
from Chairman Baker about their ability to use conventional
fuels in a way that is net-zero emissions, I am curious as to
how those two things align.
Ms. Sharp. Yes. I really appreciate that question, because,
in that context, I was very passionate about taking Big Oil
down because, when you look at the scale of the global crisis
that we are all facing, the public treasury is having to pay
for it. And, every single day, Big Oil is emitting, polluting,
and denigrating our environment with no consequence. There is
no carbon fee.
And so that is my intent, that Big Oil should be held
accountable for devastating our natural world and putting the
price tag on the public treasury.
Now, with regard to any Tribal nation's ability and desire
to build their own fuel sources and energy, we fully support
that. And to reconcile those two things: We are in a period of
transition. We need to transition away from fossil fuels to
renewable energy. And there is a space and a window, an
opportunity, and we support any Tribal nation's desire to
unlock the energy potential within their own sovereign lands.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
And thank you, Madam Chair. I just want to make note, the
Biden administration ignored the Navajo Tribe whenever they
asked for an appropriate buffer, and they put a ban in place.
So the administration is not listening to Tribes.
In regard to President Sharp's comments, the reality is,
for every 1 ton of emissions the United States has reduced, the
global community has increased by 10 tons. And so it is not the
United States.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next we will go to Rep. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you to the Chair and Ranking Member and
to our witnesses.
I want to note that the title of this hearing includes
``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom,'' and I just know that, as
policymakers, we benefit greatly when we listen to Tribal
voices and we heed the Tribal wisdom which our witnesses
brought to this hearing today.
You know, many of the witnesses have spoken either in their
oral or written testimony about the expertise of Tribal nations
in natural resource management and the value of indigenous
traditional ecological knowledge.
On November 15, the Office of Science and Technology Policy
and the White House Council on Environmental Quality released a
memo detailing the administration's commitment to elevating
indigenous traditional ecological knowledge in Federal
policymaking processes, and that includes the convening of an
interagency workgroup. This workgroup will promote mutually
beneficial partnerships between the Federal Government and
Tribal communities on indigenous traditional ecological
knowledge.
So I want to ask Dr. Thornbrugh, what would you like to see
this working group consider as it prepares the guidance
document for release next year? And what recommendations do you
expect the guidance will ultimately offer?
Dr. Thornbrugh. Thank you, Representative Bonamici.
The main things I would like to see, of course, is, you
know, clear communication with Tribal nations, to, you know,
respect the proprietary information around our Traditional
Ecological Knowledge. You know, we are excited that it is
brought higher to the forefront, but, as processes go, ongoing
communication is so important.
And I want to also highlight President Sharp in terms of
the continued importance of FPIC. You know, that this is
knowledge that comes from our histories, you know, very much a
part of who we are, so it is important to have the utmost
respect for it but also our consent in how it is applied.
So I would just say, you know, in conclusion, just
continuing that respect and regular communication. That way, if
issues or concerns come up, they come up sooner rather than
later.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. That is very helpful.
President Sharp, welcome. It is very nice to see you again.
I will always remember the beautiful traditional invocation
your son provided when you were here at the Capitol previously.
I want to thank you for the important contributions of the
National Congress of American Indians and what those
contributions meant to this committee's Climate Action Plan.
Tribal feedback on the Climate Action Plan, as well as
comments in your testimony, reflect the challenges that Tribal
nations and intergovernmental Tribal groups face in accessing
Federal programs and funding. And you mentioned that in your
testimony again today.
Tribal entities like the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish
Commission, or CRITFC, in the Pacific Northwest have told me
about some of those challenges they have had in accessing
Federal grants and programs.
So, President Sharp, how can we make sure that Tribal
nations and entities have equitable access to Federal energy
and climate programs? And how does maintaining the status quo--
or how would maintaining the status quo undermine our
collective response to the climate crisis?
Ms. Sharp. Excellent. And before I begin to answer the two
questions, I do want to touch back on the previous question
which I answered.
When you look at the scale of the climate crisis facing
this country and this world, relying almost entirely on the
public treasury, appropriation through state capitols, state
legislatures, and Congress, is simply not enough. We do have to
hold Big Oil accountable and those who are directly
responsible.
But, of the limited public treasury, it is important that
Tribal nations have a steady and a secure source of multiyear
funding. It is very difficult to plan. Climate resiliency
projects are multiyear, if not multigenerational. So it is
critically important that we do have a reliable and steady
source of revenue as Congress works to hold those who are
accountable responsible.
And I would also suggest, in a lot of conversations, there
is a discussion of public-private partnerships to fund climate
related impacts. So anything Congress can do to incentivize
public-private partnerships, to hold Big Oil accountable to pay
their fair share and price for centuries of devastation, and
creating a framework for us to be able to access those directly
from congressional appropriations would be incredibly helpful.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you.
And what would be--how would it undermine the collective
response if you did not have access to that funding?
Ms. Sharp. It would undermine the response in that Tribal
nations are already left vulnerable with little to no
resources, as is evidenced in the U.N. Commission on Human
Rights that was--Civil Commission on Human Rights that was
delivered to Congress. We are chronically underfunded.
And so, without the added support of addressing climate
change, you take that away--and the impact of COVID-19 has
revealed just how critically vulnerable Tribal nations are. So
we would see our lands, our resources, our territories, even
our traditional foods and plants disappear. And they are
already disappearing. So it would prove to be devastating for
Indian Country.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you.
And I am over time, but I just want to note as I yield
back, I hope you stayed safe during the atmospheric river
events in the Pacific Northwest. We had some serious flooding
recently. Take care.
Ms. Sharp. Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Castor. Next up, Rep. Palmer.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses for being here.
Chairman Baker, I am hopeful that one thing we can learn
from the Tribes is that climate has a history. I keep bringing
this up. I keep hearing a misappropriation of historical data
and, in some cases, scientific data.
And my colleagues on the committee have complained since I
have been on it that fossil fuels are causing all the droughts
that the world faces. And my question is, if the use of fossil
fuels is causing current droughts, what caused the droughts
that took place in the southwestern United States in the mid-
13th century that resulted in the disappearance of Tribes like
the Anasazis?
Do you have any idea?
I believe you are muted.
Mr. Baker. Yes. I don't have any idea, but we see that all
around us in our southwest region, where, you know, again, we
are close to the Mesa Verde ruins, and the history tells us,
you know, how they lived, how they survived. And, you know, we
see certain--we hear stories of the water levels that were
higher back in the day. There was plenty of water. And, today,
this whole region is drying up in our area. We are in a
drought, high drought, for the year. Our lakes in the area are
really, really drying up.
So, with like anything else, I guess just like our past
ancestors, you have to adapt and figure out a way to survive,
whatever it is, at all means and all costs. And, you know,
right now, that is a big issue for us again, the water, the
drought. What is it going to look like in 5 years?
So we are always--our teams are always looking for answers.
Mr. Palmer. Yeah.
Well, actually, Professor Scott Stine, who spent decades
studying tree stumps in parts of the Sierra Nevada, found that
the past century has been among the wettest in the last 7,000
years. He also notes that the tree ring data shows that
California had a 240-year drought that started in 850 AD, over
1,000 years before fossil fuels, power like coal plants and oil
were used.
And my point is--and that includes the Mississippian
culture. Where I grew up, I lived near mounds near Hamilton,
Alabama. There are mounds south of Tuscaloosa and near
Florence, Alabama. There was a thriving culture, Mississippian
culture, that disappeared because of a major drought that
occurred around 1300, 1350.
And the point that I am trying to make is that we spend all
this time attacking Big Oil, and I think it is because people
have self-interest involved. The science doesn't support a lot
of what is being said.
But the historical record, the geologic record, shows that
the climate changes all the time, for a number of reasons. And
the indigenous peoples of America--and I have Native American
background, as well, that I am very proud of--didn't have the
technological ability to develop the natural resources to
mitigate and adapt to the climate change. They had to migrate.
And that is what happened with the Anasazis. I think they
assimilated eventually into the Navajo Tribe.
But we keep focusing on these things that--even some of the
top scientists that this committee has brought in have admitted
that if we completely eliminated all CO
2
emissions,
it wouldn't stop climate change.
We have imposed restrictions on Native Americans,
particularly on the reservations, that, as of a few years ago,
the Energy Information Administration put out data that showed
that 14 percent of the Native Americans on reservations had no
access to electricity.
Chairman Baker, do you think it is right for the Federal
Government to deprive the Tribes of the right to utilize the
natural resources that exist on their Tribal lands, to develop
a power plant if they want to, a hydroelectric plant, natural
gas, or even oil?
Because there are literally reservations where people are
suffering from energy poverty and living in poverty because you
haven't been able to do that.
Mr. Baker. No, I don't think it is right at all, you know.
It is very, you know--it is just not fair for all Native
Country all around, all Indian Country.
But, you know, again, you know, for us, we are looking at
self-determination as far as what can we do, how do we move
forward. You know, we never stop. We have great teams in place.
We collaborate with others. We do a lot of research as we move
forward, no matter what the issue is.
And not only when we talk about, you know, the energy and
all that, our Tribe, we also diversify in many other aspects--
real estate, just many things out there in this world--we are
always thinking; we are always moving. We can't focus on just
one.
But when we are focused on one, like this clean energy--you
know, we know CO
2
is a greenhouse gas, you know.
These types of things, we are never going to stop moving
forward and sharing that experience with other Tribes. When we
talk about meeting and coming together, we do have Tribes that
want to meet with us and come and ask us, how did you do it?
And we are willing, more than willing, to share that story with
anyone who wants to come and meet with our team.
Mr. Palmer. I congratulate you on your commitment to your
people.
Mr. Baker. Thank you.
Mr. Palmer. I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next up, Rep. Escobar, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Madam Chair, for bringing
us together in this hearing, and I would also like to express
my gratitude to the panelists for sharing their wisdom and for
participating with us here today.
I am so proud that we have the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo in El
Paso, which is the oldest Tribal community in the State of
Texas, and the Tigua Tribal Council is the oldest government in
the state as well.
The Pueblo, just like most other Native groups, continues
to depend on the land and its resources not just to further
their way of life, but also, as part of their spiritual
practices. But, of course, the climate crisis has completely
changed what is available to them. And they have shared their
concerns with me about drought and lack of access to water and
the dire impacts that it has had on them and their ability to
preserve that important way of life.
I had the privilege yesterday of meeting with Governor
Silvas from the Tigua Tribe, and one of the concerns he shared
with me is the inflexibility that exists with government
funding that is tied to the Tribe.
And so, I actually want to explore that a little bit so we
can better understand what we can do in order to provide the
flexibility necessary so that the resources, especially as they
relate to addressing the climate crisis and being able to fully
utilize them to avert disaster, I would like to explore what
some of those impediments and roadblocks have been for some of
our panelists.
So, President Sharp, in your testimony, you had mentioned
the need for the Federal Government to provide funds directly
to Tribes and through multiyear grants. Could you share with
the committee how these changes would accelerate projects on
the ground? And, if possible, is there an example you can think
of that you can share with us?
Ms. Sharp. Yes. I really appreciate the question, because
the issues you raise affect every Tribal Nation in the United
States that are on the front lines of dealing with climate
change.
And I will give you an example from my community. In the
1950's and 1960's, we had millions of sockeye blueback salmon
return to the Mighty Quinault, and the Quinault River is just
out my window here, millions. And that was from when time
began, from time memorialed. The year I got elected in 2006, we
only had 3,000 blueback return. And our scientists have been
doing a tremendous amount of work in adapting and mitigating
those impacts, constructing engineered logjams, et cetera. But
we are at a place now where we don't even have the resources to
really understand the scope of the problem, and without Tribal
nations, having a direct source of funding would provide us
with the capacity to begin to do some of the identifying of the
problem, and then based on identifying the science and having
the capacity to do that, then build out adaptation and
mitigation strategies. We don't even have the resources to
fully wrap our minds around all of the scientific implications
of what is happening.
So if we had a dedicated source of funding, we would be
able to clearly identify the challenges that our communities
are facing, identify the goals and objectives related to
climate resilience, and build a point to our partners, whether
it is the Federal Government and agencies, state, or even the
private sector. But until we have the resources to really
understand the scope of our challenges, we are just simply
putting out--literally putting out fires.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much.
Ms. Thomas, what are some of the other roadblocks that make
it difficult for Tribes to access Federal funds for clean
energy and resilience, in particular? And how would you
recommend we fix them?
Ms. Thomas. Thank you very much.
So being a former Fed and having worked on policy and
programs of the Department of Energy, the primary challenge
around accessing Federal support is the multiple silos that
exist, right. There is a great number. I think, by our last
count, there were about 75 Federal programs across nine
agencies that could be leveraged for energy development, for
energy efficiency, for weatherization, whether it is LIHEAP at
HHS, or the Weatherization Assistance Program at DOE, or the
EDA program, Economic Development Administration, Department of
Commerce.
So aligning Federal programs, aligning them in such a way
that gives Tribes the flexibility and the--not just the
resources, but really the flexibility in leveraging those
resources.
And so, that is a function of mostly statute, but also
regulation and other guidance that the Federal agencies have
implemented. And so, a good starting point would be, much as
the President has just announced, the Task Force Around Tribal
Consultation, additional task forces around how to make the
Federal programs more accessible to Tribes and Tribal
communities as they are trying to put together and piece
together Federal funds that help do.
As I mentioned, a microgrid project can be a $20 million
project. So I can go get that money from six or seven different
agencies, but it is a very challenging and daunting process to
do that.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
Next up, Rep. Huffman, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Huffman. Good morning, Madam Chair. And thanks so much
for this hearing. And welcome to our witnesses.
Ranking Member Graves, of course, piqued my interest with
his opening remarks about, you know, a Wright brothers' moment,
a breakthrough on carbon capture utilization and storage using
natural gas to push electricity onto the grid in a net zero
way.
And, you know, as I was trying to follow the testimony, I
was also digging into, you know, whatever information I could
find about this, and, you know, my mind remains open to any
technology that can help us achieve zero emissions and meet our
goals. But I am not sure that this really is the Wright
brothers' moment from what I can gather about this pilot
project in Texas. And I do want to ask you a little more about
your larger project, Chairman Baker, using the same technology
because I am curious about it.
But from what I can gather, this at best is a more
efficient way of creating a cycle that burns natural gas and
captures the CO
2
, but we haven't yet figured out
what to do with that CO
2
. And it looks like it is
just going to the same old thing, enhanced oil recovery.
So I think you are taking great liberties with the term
``net zero'' when you are talking about burning natural gas and
then using the CO
2
that you can mostly capture
through that process and then just going out and developing
more oil to be burned in cars and other fossil fuel uses. That
is not a climate solution. That is just oil and gas business as
usual.
And so, I remain pretty skeptical, but let's continue the
conversation for sure. And the problem I have with representing
this as a breakthrough is that right now, adding new renewables
to generate electricity is actually cheaper than natural gas
electricity that doesn't capture the carbon. So you add in the
costs of carbon capture, and then all of the uncertainties
about what you do with that CO
2
after you capture
it, no one yet has been able to figure out a way to safely and
reliably store it so that it doesn't get into the atmosphere.
There is just reason for skepticism, I believe.
And so, let me ask you, if I could, Chairman Baker--and I
applaud you for the solar project that you have pursued and the
leadership you are showing in trying to develop clean energy--
as you look at expanding the use of this technology, what are
you going to do with the CO
2
?
Mr. Baker. Okay. Thank you for the question.
Our plan is to store the CO
2
in the ground. And
also we don't develop oil on the reservation, you know. We do a
lot outside the reservation. As we have grown, our energy
department, you know, we are all over the place, not just
strictly on our reservation. As well as the oil, we don't do
that on our reservation, it is all natural gas. But our plan is
to store the CO
2
in the ground.
Mr. Huffman. Have you identified a place and demonstrated
that you can safely store it over the long term without leakage
and other problems?
Mr. Baker. Could you repeat that question?
Mr. Huffman. Yes. Have you found a place to safely store it
without leakage or other problems, or are you just going to
have someone else take care of that?
Mr. Baker. Okay. I am off mute. I was lost a second.
Okay. You know, right now, that is kind of like
confidential information as our team moves forward. I think we
are still working on it, and we are not saying that we do not
have the answer. But as anything else, we are progressing
toward that. I am sure once we develop that and come up with a
plan--you know, because, again, like we have said from day one,
we are always looking out to protect our reservation, our
homelands, you know, where it is within our area and all that.
But we don't have that information that our team is working on.
It is confidential at this point because we are not yet at the
finish line. We are still trying to develop it and always doing
things in the right way, not just for our reservation but for
the whole earth as well as our sister Tribes across the
country.
Mr. Huffman. Okay. But you are not just going to pipe it
off somewhere to be used for enhanced oil recovery?
Mr. Baker. No. That is not in the works yet. You know,
again, we don't have that answer. We are looking at various
opportunities, and what is the right way? What is the best way?
Again, at times, but it is possible to do that if you find the
right, you know, mechanism of how that can go, where it can go
in a safe manner. But, again, we are still, you know, working
on all of these issues because, again, we don't want to present
something without all of the facts, looking into it and knowing
that.
Mr. Huffman. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. And I really
do appreciate your leadership on these issues and what you are
trying to do for your Tribe. But, as with so many other
instances where we have heard of a great promise of carbon
capture utilization and storage, when you ask the hard
question, it is not quite ready for prime time. And, meanwhile,
renewables are cheaper than natural gas. So I hope to keep our
focus there.
And with that, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Next up, Rep. Crenshaw, you are recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
To Chairman Baker, your answer can simply be, we can do
whatever we want because of Tribal sovereignty. So that can be
your answer.
Let's debunk a couple of things. No, renewables are not
cheaper than natural gas. That is complete nonsense, complete
nonsense. They are only cheaper because they get massive
subsidies to make them cheaper. There is not a single
manufacturer of solar panels or wind turbines or generators
that I have talked to that say they could do this in an open
and free market.
Oh, but oil and gas gets subsidies, too. That is what they
say. Lies. Another lie that needs to be debunked. There are no
direct tax credits. There are no direct subsidies to oil and
gas.
Here is another lie that needs to be debunked: Carbon
capture technology is not ready for market. Lies. Illinois is
starting a project. Chairman Baker is talking about this
project here in Colorado. Houston has already piloted it, and
we just hooked it up to the energy grid. It is profitable. The
only thing they used is a 45Q tax credit.
These things are profitable, they work. And in some cases,
they are carbon negative because the technology exists--and it
is well developed technology--that pipes that well
underground----
Mr. Huffman. Madam Chair----
Mr. Crenshaw [continuing]. And saves it for 10,000 years.
Mr. Huffman. Madam Chair, point of order. Point of order,
Madam Chair.
You know, the gentleman is welcome to disagree with me and
make points, but I would ask that his words be taken down for
accusing me of lying.
Mr. Crenshaw. Oh, well, your hurt feelings are noted.
If I may continue.
Ms. Castor. Gentlemen, wait.
So you are not--would you like to yield to Mr. Huffman, Mr.
Crenshaw?
Mr. Crenshaw. No, I will not yield.
I would like to yield to Mr. Baker.
Chairman Baker, do you think that a person can be in the
business of natural gas and also care about the environment?
Mr. Baker. Yes. As I have always mentioned, as I mentioned,
we as a Tribe, we are caretakers of the land. We have always
been raised that way. No matter where we are, we are always
going to have our land come first and be careful in, you know,
how it affects our neighbors.
Mr. Crenshaw. And Tribal lands are not exempt from this
natural gas tax that is going to be in the reconciliation bill.
Any member of your Tribe that operates a facility that
produces, transmits, processes, or otherwise touches natural
gas will be subject to a tax as assessed purely by the EPA.
So how will this harm the members of the Southern Ute
Tribe?
Mr. Baker. I am not sure exactly how that would come
because, again, like I said, we have so many other things that
we work on that benefit our Tribe, not just oil and gas, you
know. And, again, the lack of snow, lack of rainfall, you know,
a lot of that does cause the droughts that are in our area.
But, again, that is a great question. I am not the
technical expert on this technology, but in the room, Kourtney
Hadrick, Operating Director of our energy, and Coy Bryant, and
the government should not tax our resources.
Mr. Crenshaw. Right. I agree with that.
And to address this--again, back to the general discussion
of natural gas. Again, the facts are that natural gas and the
fracking industry and the technology associated with that is
the--it is almost 100 percent responsible for our reduction in
emissions in this country back to 1992 levels. There is no
disputing that. There is no disputing the fact that if we were
to replace coal-burning--coal-fired power plants around the
world with our U.S. natural gas, you would have more reduction
in emissions than in any other solution that we are talking
about here.
And, look, to Mr. Huffman, I don't mean to call you a liar,
and I will just apologize for that. But what you are saying is
deeply, deeply untrue and misleading and, frankly, probably
damaging to our mutual goals of reducing emissions in this
country and around the world. That is the truth. That is the
truth. And the facts back this up.
The facts back up that these technologies, carbon capture
technologies are indeed ready for market. It is happening right
before our eyes. And we can refuse to acknowledge it. We can
cover our ears and cover our eyes and pretend we don't see it
and pretend that renewables are cheaper and that they are more
effective and that they are reliable. We can pretend all that.
We can write a fiction novel about it. But none of it will be
true. It will never be true.
And to oversubsidize those technologies, renewable
technologies to the detriment of reliable clean technologies,
like carbon capture and nuclear energy, is insanity. It is
insanity, especially at a moment around the world where people
are having trouble keeping the lights on. That is a very, very
bad place to be in.
I yield back.
Mr. Palmer. Yield the balance of his time?
Mr. Crenshaw. Yes, I will.
Mr. Palmer. I thank the gentleman.
The National Carbon Capture Center is in my district, and I
would be happy to host the committee if they want to visit
that. We are sequestering carbon and concrete blocks and other
materials. There is no leaking or leaching. And I do think that
it might be good for the committee to have an expanded view of
what is actually happening in regard to that technology.
And I thank the gentleman, and I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you for that offer, Mr. Palmer.
We all know that we do--there is a role for carbon capture
and storage when it comes to industrial processes, like
concrete and steel. But, as I think Mr. Huffman makes a very
strong point, it is still unproven when it comes to oil and
gas.
So next we are going to go up to--go to Rep. Casten, you
are recognized for--oh, Mr. McEachin is going to go first. We
recognize Rep. McEachin for 5 minutes.
Mr. McEachin. I am sorry, Madam Chair. You caught me off
guard. I thought I was after Rep. Casten, but I will go ahead
since he has been kind to me today.
Madam Chair, first of all, thank you for convening today's
hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for joining this
hearing.
Across the nation, communities are feeling the impacts of
climate change and, of course, that includes Native American
Tribes and indigenous people in my district. Like other
historically underrepresented people, indigenous groups have
been disproportionately impacted by the impacts of climate
change.
According to experts, this is part--it is attributable to
the historic wrongs that led to Tribal lands' dispossession and
forced migration to less economically productive lands.
As I have said before, access to clean air, clean water,
and a healthy environment should not be a luxury. And as we
have seen, we need to make sure that as we go forward we
address the climate crisis to move towards a clean energy
future.
The Select Committee has made recommendations as to how to
ensure this is the case, and President Biden has committed to
doing so as well through the Justice40 Initiative, a goal
delivering 40 percent of overall benefits of the relevant
Federal investments to disadvantaged communities, including
Tribal communities.
I look forward to working with my colleagues and with the
administration to ensure that we follow through on this promise
and that our Tribal nations have the resources and capacity to
address climate threats and take advantage of the opportunities
presented by the ongoing clean energy transition.
This question is for all the witnesses. And I will just ask
that you take it in the order that you--that you answer in the
order that you gave your testimony.
You know, when drafting the Environmental Justice for All
Act, it was critical for me to get feedback from a variety of
stakeholders on the legislation, including Tribal and
indigenous leaders.
As new policies are created and grants are distributed from
the infrastructure package, can you please clarify how you feel
the Federal Government can best ensure meaningful stakeholder
engagement, including the types of engagement that would be
most helpful?
Ms. Sharp. Thank you. I will go first.
I really appreciate not only the question but that
background because it is so important for everybody to
understand and recognize the place of not only indigenous
peoples but communities of color as disproportionately
impacted.
The one thing that I could offer and suggest that would be
very helpful is to formalize the engagement of Tribal nations
on climate policy. As Pilar mentioned, we have to deal with
various silos within the Federal Government. But to consolidate
and be able to provide a national climate strategy that is both
informed as well as engaging Tribal nations at every level
would be helpful.
And I can say, as representing 574 Tribal nations, that we
are prepared. We are ready. We just need to have those multiple
points of opportunity to bring not only our traditional
knowledge, but our innovation and the things that we are doing
across Indian Country.
So we welcome any opportunity, and I thank you for that
question.
Mr. McEachin. All right. I have less than 2 minutes. Please
continue, folks.
All right. Ms. Thomas, would you answer next then, please?
Ms. Thomas. Sure. I think. So there is lots of ways to
have--lots of methods for engagement. And, you know, you have
your national Tribal organizations, such as NCAI. You have the
regional organizations, such as USET, where Casey works, and
those all over the country. The biggest challenge as well,
though, is with direct Tribal communities. And as much as there
is a government-to-government relationship that the Federal
Government has to uphold at all levels, sometimes the voices of
individual Tribal members and Tribal communities, those have to
be brought to the table as well.
So there is a multilevel challenge that the Federal
Government has, but as with anything, you know, the big thing
is how to eat an elephant; one bite at a time. You have just
got to get started. So, you know, we have got to do some--maybe
some things a little bit differently, and hopefully some of the
models that this administration is putting together will be a
good way to do that.
We have got to find natural allies and partners who are in
the same boat, and try and create partnerships across
communities of color, across organizations, and across levels
of government. And encouraging Tribes, for example, to engage
with their cities and counties, as well as with state
governments, is another way to come at this.
Mr. McEachin. Well, thank you for those answers.
Dr. Thornbrugh, and to the Chairman, I am not going to try
to get you all to answer in less than 20 seconds. But I would
ask that you just send us an answer to that question, if you
would.
Mr. Baker. Okay.
Mr. McEachin. It is a sincere question. And we have a lot
of work to do to make sure we have the right communication
between, obviously, Tribal and indigenous peoples, but all
folks who have been disadvantaged by the climate crisis.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. McEachin.
Next we will go to Rep. Casten. You are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you so much and thanks to our witnesses.
I want to start just by apologizing. It breaks my heart
that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have seemed
to have climbed in a time machine this morning and gone back to
1995 and said that the climate is always changing, the fossil
fuel industry isn't subsidized, that people who would suggest
that have special interests. My goodness. We had a $100 billion
of damage this year, real people who lost their homes from
fires and floods, and we are going to talk about tree ring
data?
The International Monetary Fund says that the world
subsidizes the fossil fuel industry by $6 trillion a year, $650
billion in the U.S. We are going to call those lies? Show some
respect, for this committee, for this science, and for the
planet we all call home. My goodness.
I want to try and end on an optimistic note, but I want to
start, President Sharp, with a question for you. And it is a
hard question for me to grapple with, and I am hoping that you
have got more wisdom than me on this.
For not all of the Tribes in our country, but for an awful
lot of them, the lands they live on are lands that they were
forcibly relocated to. We moved them off productive land. We
moved them to more marginal land, and an awful lot of that land
is now areas that, in many cases, is most at risk of climate
change. Areas that are harder to obtain water, more risk of
drought. I see you nodding your head.
My question for you is, number one, are the programs that
we have available in this country for adaptation sufficient for
those communities, and can they get access to them? And, number
two, to the extent that they are--that those folks are living
in areas where the best thing to do is to help folks relocate
to a more productive area, how can we be most culturally
sensitive for communities that have been told by the Federal
Government to move before and may be a little bit skeptical?
And I would welcome your thoughts on both of those
questions, with the hope that I can end with a little bit of
time for Dr. Thomas before we are done.
Ms. Sharp. Yes. Thank you.
And to your first question, adaptation funding is simply
not enough. And we need additional resources to begin to not
only adapt with new and emerging science and the things that
are readily available, but the centuries of knowledge that we
have with respect to adaptation and cultivating and developing
that with our elders is critically important.
To your second question, yes, how can we make those
adjustments and moves in a more culturally sensitive way. But
the one way to do that is to acknowledge that Tribal nations
should have a decisive say, through free prior and informed
consent, on all Federal actions. When the United States or any
other government can take unilateral action without our
consent, it puts us in an imperiled position.
So those are the two suggestions that I would offer.
Thank you.
Mr. Casten. Thank you.
And moving to Dr. Thomas, and I want to try to end on a
more uplifting note. You know, we talk a lot about the pain of
climate change, and I think sometimes we talk too little about
the economic gain, notwithstanding what some of my colleagues
seem to suggest. If you invest in things that have no marginal
operating costs, you make a lot of money. It is pretty awesome.
Actually, there is reasons why the private sector likes this.
In your former capacity as the Deputy Director of the DOE's
Office of Indian Energy Policy, I wonder if you could comment
on, we have all of these programs to try to make sure that we
are investing dollars in the areas where we have the maximum
opportunity for renewable resources, where the wind resources
are, where the solar resources are. You talked a little bit
about that in your opening testimony.
Are the programmatic ways that we get money into Indian
Country sufficient to make sure that those monies flow to the
optimal places, notwithstanding where the land is and who lives
on it, or are there things we can do to tweak and better
accelerate this transition to a cleaner and cheaper future?
Ms. Thomas. So, as I had mentioned before, the biggest
challenge is the silos within the agencies themselves and
across agencies and being able to leverage as much Federal
support as possible, whether it is technical assistance or
financial assistance.
Between rural development in our U.S.'s programs, the
Department of Energy's programs, the Department of the
Interior's programs, piecing these all together can be a huge
challenge. Everybody has got a different calendar. Everybody
has got a different set of criteria for what kind of projects
work.
The commercial scale projects, the two commercial scale
projects, didn't use any Federal money from a grant standpoint.
They used tax credits, but those projects are so big that the
small amounts--the relatively small amounts of Federal money
don't really help with the commercial scale.
Now, financial assistance, yes. And these smaller scale
projects where Tribes can use their wind and solar for
themselves, that is really where the Federal support becomes
more impactful, and you see less of the private sector, at
least right now, being interested in supporting, you know, a
20-kilowatt solar project. So the Federal support becomes more
important there.
So, really, the big opportunities for the administration, I
think, as with any administration, is how do we better
coordinate amongst ourselves? And part of that really should
start with asking the Tribes who are trying to develop
projects, what do you need from us, and what can we do, from
the Federal Government perspective, to support that effort?
Mr. Casten. Thank you.
I see I am out of time. I really appreciate your response.
I yield back.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you very much.
As we close out this hearing, I would like to take--provide
the witnesses with 1 minute each to give us some closing advice
and wisdom. And let's go in reverse order and start with Ms.
Thomas, 1 minute for closing words to us.
Ms. Thomas. So I usually just try and end, usually when I
talk about this, with two key concepts: One, Tribal sovereign
authorities. Tribes aren't going to be able to accomplish most
of what they need to do from a clean energy and from a climate
resiliency standpoint if they don't have the Federal
Government's support for them exercising their own sovereign
authorities for what makes sense for the Tribal community.
And then, secondly, I do think the Federal Government could
be more ambitious around supporting mass deployment of whatever
technology works for the Tribes around climate resiliency. And
that is going to require putting our shoulder to the grindstone
to really figure out what is it we can do. We can plan. We can
assess. And President Sharp is right, we still need more money
for that. But in the end, we have got to actually do something
to protect ourselves, and so that is going to require more
Federal Government coordination in that regard.
Ms. Castor. Dr. Thornbrugh.
Dr. Thornbrugh. Thank you.
So, first and foremost, it is important for Tribal nations
to be leaders and to guide Traditional Ecological Knowledge
initiatives.
I also want to highlight direct funding for Tribal nations
for climate change adaptation and resilience. Competitive
funding puts a burden on the Tribal nations and is not
representative of the trust and treaty obligation.
Also, I want to mention, it is important for early
consultation with Tribal nations. We need the time to look at
initiatives, and understand how they impact our Nation and
communities in that way, so early consultation.
I just want to mention a couple of brief things on the
climate change side.
You know, we recognize that climate has changed throughout
geologic time. In the northeast where I live, it took 10,000
years for the glaciers to recede. We are looking at changes
within 100 years, or within lifetimes.
Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Mr. Baker.
Mr. Baker. Thank you.
And I want to thank everyone for, you know, participating
in this. It is some good discussion.
I believe that everyone on this call contributed to
emissions in our atmosphere. We aren't here to debate climate
change. We are here to promote working together with different
views and open minds to put real-world solutions in place as we
move forward, and we advocate for our sovereignty and work
nation to nation around the world to solve the problems, you
know, to mention, because who knows best about their own
homelands than the Natives and their work in their own
reservations? We know what we have got to do as caretakers of
the land.
And also we would like to invite anyone who would like to
come and tour what we are working on at our reservation here at
Southern Ute.
So thank you for allowing me to speak today in regards to
this testimony.
Ms. Castor. Thank you.
And President Sharp.
Ms. Sharp. Yes. [Speaking Native language.]
My 1 minute, I would just like to encourage every member of
the committee to continue to advance, as leaders of this
country, with bold and courageous and decisive climate action.
We are running out of time.
And I would like to leave you with this thought. From my
perspective, there is no way we are going to be able to
negotiate, legislate, or buy our way out of this climate
crisis. We have to return to our traditional life ways that the
indigenous peoples of this continent have exercised for
millennia. And that is my one takeaway from COP26. When I
worked with indigenous peoples from all over the world, it is
very clear we do manage 80 percent of the world's biodiversity,
and it is only with us at the table to bring that timeless
knowledge to restore balance to this planet. We can't take
selective science to advance political objectives that benefit
multinational corporations who seem to suggest that the health
and future of our planet, and even humanity, is reduced to
nothing more than a cost of doing business.
We have to be bold, courageous, speak truth, and speak
honest truth as we navigate through this crisis.
[Speaking Native language.] Thank you.
Ms. Castor. Well, thank you to all of our witnesses for
your Tribal wisdom and advice to the Congress. We certainly
need it.
So I will go to Representative Graves for a unanimous
consent request.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I ask unanimous consent the statement from the
Navajo Nation regarding the Biden administration's actions on
Chaco Canyon be included in the record; secondly, an article
regarding the NET Power facility on dispatching zero emission
natural gas generated electricity to the grid; and then,
lastly, an analysis by C2ES, which is a Pew associated group,
that make note that, I believe, the former head of it is now
working for John Kerry in the administration, that has an
analysis of carbon capture and sequestration that lists a
number of successful projects over decades.
[The information follows:]

Submissions for the Record

Representative Garret Graves

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

November 18, 2021

ATTACHMENT: Navajo Nation (2021 November), ``Navajo Nation Opposes
With-
drawal for Development at Chaco Canyon, Tribal Consultation
Ignored.''

The press release is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://www.navajonationcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/
Chaco_ Opposition_2021.11.16.pdf

ATTACHMENT: NET Power (2021 November), ``NET Power Delivers Electricity
to
Grid in Major Technological Breakthrough.''

The article is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/net-power-delivers-
electricity-to-grid-in-major-technological-breakthrough-
301425894.html

ATTACHMENT: C2ES, ``Carbon Capture.''

This topic overview is retained in the committee files and available
at:
https://www.c2es.org/content/carbon-capture/.

Ms. Castor. Thank you, Rep. Graves.
And as I close out the hearing, I do want to say that I
know that members are strong advocates for their communities
back home and their policy positions, but members like
Representative Crenshaw, his remarks today really crossed the
line when he spoke in terms of lies and liars. That violates
our rules of decorum here in the House, and it was appropriate
for him to apologize to Representative Huffman today, and I am
glad he did that, especially when it comes to an--and I will
offer this as a unanimous consent request, his assertion that
there are no--oil and gas doesn't receive subsidies from the
U.S. Government.
So, without objection, I will enter into the record a
September 2021 report from the International Monetary Fund
titled ``Still Not Getting Energy Prices Right: A Global and
Country Update of Fossil Fuel Subsidies,'' and finding that
globally, fossil fuel subsidies were $5.9 trillion in 2020 as
Rep. Casten mentioned.
Also, an October 2021 resolution from the National Congress
of American Indians titled ``Amending and Updating NCAI
Resolution SD-15-024 in Supporting Tribal Disaster Resilience
and Climate Change Principles,'' and an October 2021 resolution
from the National Congress of American Indians titled
``Additional Tribal Disaster Resilience and Climate Change
Common Principles.''
[The information follows:]

Submissions for the Record

Representative Kathy Castor

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

November 18, 2021

ATTACHMENT: National Congress of American Indians (2021 October).
``Amending
and Updating NCAI Resolution #SD-15-024 and Supporting Tribal
Disaster Resilience and Climate Change Principles.''

The resolution is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://ncai.assetbank-server.com/assetbank-ncai/assetfile/
176.pdf

ATTACHMENT: National Congress of American Indians (2021 October).
``Additional
Tribal Disaster Resilience and Climate Change Common
Principles.''

The resolution is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://ncai.assetbank-server.com/assetbank-ncai/assetfile/
177.pdf

ATTACHMENT: Parry, I., Black, S., and Vernon, N. (2021 September).
Still Not
Getting Energy Prices Right: A Global and Country Update of
Fossil Fuel Subsidies. International Monetary Fund.

The report is retained in the committee files and available at:
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2021/09/23/Still-
Not-Getting-Energy-Prices-Right-A-Global-and-Country-Update-of-
Fossil-Fuel-Subsidies-466004

Ms. Castor. Without objection, all members will have 10
business days within which to submit additional written
questions for the witnesses. I ask our witnesses to respond
promptly as you are able.
Thank you all. And the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:04 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

United States House of Representatives

Select Committee on the Climate Crisis

Hearing on November 18, 2021

``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate Crisis''

Questions for the Record

The Honorable Fawn Sharp

President, National Congress of American Indians

Vice President, Quinault Indian Nation

the honorable kathy castor
1. President Sharp, the Build Back Better Act contains incentives
like tax credits for new and used electric vehicles and investments in
electric vehicle charging as well as rebates for residential appliance
and equipment electrification. Would you agree that these types of
investments can help reduce demand for oil and gas and reduce exposure
to volatile fossil fuel prices?

Thank you for your questions, Chair Castor. Incentives are a step
in the right direction for promoting widespread use of electric
vehicles, however there are significant obstacles for Indian Country.
Large parts of Indian Country are rural, and thus underserved by
electrical grids and lack of charging station infrastructure.
Additionally, due to the rural nature and long distances among many
Tribal communities, many Tribal citizens require electric vehicles with
greater battery capacity and storage. Further, the cost for these
vehicles, even with the current incentives, is prohibitive for many if
not most Tribal citizens. Lastly, it's important to know where the
electricity for these vehicles is being sourced from. Electric vehicles
are not as beneficial if the electrical grid they are charged from is
still powered by fossil fuels such as coal, or destructive
hydroelectric dams.

2. President Sharp, could you describe some of the jobs that could
be created in Tribal Nations as a result of investments in clean
energy?

There are several Tribal Nations employing their own citizens in
their clean energy initiatives. The Moapa Southern Paiute Solar
Project, located in Clark County, Nevada, co-owns a solar project with
non-Tribal energy entities to create wages and benefits for Tribal
citizens. Currently, the project provides over 115 construction jobs
for Tribal citizens, with hopes to provide employment to at least 600
Tribal citizens throughout the lifetime of the project through
construction and operations positions.

3. President Sharp, should Congress explore strategies to reduce
the carbon footprint of the manufacturing of climate solutions like
wind and solar energy while supporting the transition to a clean energy
economy?

Yes, Congress should explore strategies to reduce carbon emissions
in all sectors. When exploring strategies to reduce the carbon
footprint, it's important to consult Tribal Nations to ensure any
climate projects are not happening on culturally significant areas.

4. President Sharp, do you believe that technologies like grid-
scale storage and demand response can help achieve a more flexible grid
that can integrate higher levels of renewable energy as we phase out
unabated fossil fuel-fired electricity generation?

Yes, short to long term storage technologies will be vital to
ensure grids dispense uninterrupted electricity to the end users. Grid-
scale storage is part of this solution.

5. President Sharp, the Climate Crisis Action Plan recommends
policies to advance a range of carbon-free electricity generation
sources so that different regions and communities can advance solutions
that work for them. Could you please explain why it is important for
regions and communities to be able to have that choice and prioritize
renewable energy if that is what they would prefer?

Indian Country is a diverse place, each Tribal Nation has unique
circumstances that require individualized electricity generation
solutions that respect their inherent sovereignty. On top of regional
and environmental differences, there are cultural aspects that may
render some areas and means of electricity generation not suitable for
some Tribal Nations. Federal and state actors must be aware of these
factors, while acknowledging and embracing Indian Country as a willing
partner in carbon-free electricity generation. Federal, state, and
local actors must involve Tribal Nations when planning and developing
electricity generation projects and all climate change projects to
avoid issues of cultural and community concern.

6. President Sharp, the Climate Crisis Action Plan recommends a
broad suite of technologies to decarbonize the economy, including
carbon capture and storage where there is a clear climate benefit.
However, in the last year, there has been news coverage of carbon
dioxide pipeline leaks sickening vulnerable communities. Link: https://
www.huffpost.com/entry/gassing-satartia-mississippi-co2-
pipeline_n_60ddea9fe4b0ddef8b0ddc8f. Do you agree that
the development of carbon capture technologies should also include
protections to promote environmental justice?

Yes, the development of carbon capture technologies should include
protections to promote environmental justice. Environmental justice
should also be a consideration in the development of policies and
approaches to addressing climate change overall to ensure that Tribal
Nations are equitability included and appropriately consulted.

7. President Sharp, can you describe some of the ways the Biden
Administration is working to improve Tribal consultation and strengthen
relationships with Tribal Nations?

On January 26, 2021, President Biden signed a Presidential
Memorandum titled ``Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening
Nation-to-Nation Relationships.'' implementing Executive Order 13175,
``Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments.'' This
memorandum reaffirmed the Obama Administration's commitment and
recognition of Tribal self-determination and the federal trust and
treaty obligations to Tribal Nations. This year we have seen almost
every federal agency host consultations on developing a consultation
action plan. Since issuing this Presidential Memorandum, federal
agencies have held more than 150 national-level consultation sessions
totaling more than 350 hours of government-to-government interaction.
With all the comments and feedback provided by Tribal Nations, we are
eager to see the results and changes to consultation policies across
federal agencies. We are grateful the Biden Administration is taking
meaningful steps to be responsive to Tribal needs and aligning federal
planning with our values and principles.
the honorable garret graves
1. President Sharp, you have historically been critical of the
American oil and gas industry, saying in our hearing that you want to
take big oil down. The Biden Department of Energy just released
projections that show a significant increase in global demand for
natural gas and oil in every modeled scenario--that is a global
reality.

a.  Given that reality, do you think the best approach to meet
this global demand is to shut down production in the United States,
including on tribal lands, and cede supply to foreign entities--in
particular state-owned enterprises in Russia, Iran, Venezuela, etc.--
where lifecycle emissions are up to 50 percent higher than if produced
in the United States?

NCAI supports energy strategies to increase tribal self-
determination over natural resources so that the Tribal Nations are
able to choose the most suitable avenue of energy development for the
benefit of their sovereignty and their citizens. As Indian Country is
extremely diverse, this can take many forms, including renewable energy
and fossil fuel extraction.

b.  To the extent there is global demand, shouldn't we want that
demand to be met by the lowest emission producers, like those in the
United States, providing the most environmentally friendly production
as well as creating and sustaining domestic jobs, including on tribal
lands?

NCAI supports energy strategies to increase tribal self-
determination over natural resources so that the Tribal Nations are
able to choose the most suitable avenue of energy development for the
benefit of their sovereignty and their citizens. As Indian Country is
extremely diverse, this can take many forms, including renewable energy
and fossil fuel extraction.

c.  Some renewable energy technologies, such as wind turbines and
solar panels, rely on fossil resources for their production and, for
wind turbines, in their use. Given your opposition to oil and gas, do
you oppose the use of wind or solar energy if oil, gas, or coal was
involved in their production or use?

NCAI does not hold a position for or against any energy resource
being used for the development of renewable energy technologies.

d.  Both wind and solar are intermittent resources that today
rely on natural gas for backup power. Do you support natural gas as a
means to utilize wind and solar today or should we shut down all wind
and solar that rely on natural gas until such time that it can be
affordably relied upon without natural gas?

NCAI supports the continued transition to renewable energy sources
without interruption of electricity services to Tribal Nations and
their citizens.

2. Chairman Baker has outlined an approach that will depend upon
Tribal natural gas resources, utilizing American innovation, and
producing affordable carbon free electricity on demand.
While there are lifecycle considerations--such as the exposure to
slave labor when producing solar panels in China or the mining and
uncontrolled coal powered processing of critical minerals in China--
when it come to the use in the generation of electricity, can you
explain the emissions difference in the electricity generation between
the zero-emission natural gas technology that the Chairman Baker's
testimony discusses, and the renewable options referenced in Ms.
Thomas' testimony?

The natural gas technology and renewable energy options that
Chairman Baker and Pilar Thomas laid out during their testimonies were
both valued options for Tribal Nations to consider in their own energy
strategies. We defer to their testimony and expertise.

3. At our hearing you stated that NCAI supports ``any Tribal
nation's desire to unlock the energy potential within their own
sovereign lands.''

a.  Do you support the efforts of the Southern Ute Indian Tribe
to utilize its resources?

Yes, NCAI supports Tribal Nations' choice to explore for their own
self-determined energy strategies.

b.  Do you support the Southern Ute exercising their sovereignty
to partner with NET Power to develop zero carbon emissions baseload
power?

Yes, NCAI supports energy strategies to increase tribal self-
determination over natural resources so that the Tribal Nations can
choose the most suitable avenue of energy development for the benefit
of their sovereignty and their citizens.

c.  Would you be concerned with efforts from the Federal
government to dictate   whether or not the Southern Ute can affordably
take advantage of their abundant resources--including natural gas--that
is developed on their sovereign land?

NCAI believes that any federal efforts that would limit the
exercise of tribal self-determination must be consulted on with Tribal
Nations, with free, prior, and informed consent required from the
Nations being affected.

4. I mentioned at the hearing that the Navajo Nation issued a press
release following the Biden Administration's decision on a 20-year ban
on oil and gas drilling within a ten-mile radius of the Chaco Canyon
Heritage Area. The Navajo Nation's Speaker, Seth Damon, stated that,
``The Biden Administration bypassed previous requests to Congress for
field hearings and for leaders to hear directly from our Navajo
families affected in the Chaco Canyon region. The position of the
Navajo Nation Council is for the creation of a 5-mile buffer within and
around this sacred site. It is important that the federal government
consider and work with our Navajo allottees to further advance
development. The Administration must respect our tribal sovereignty and
what the government-to-government relationship entails.''

a.  Do you support the Biden Administration's decision even
though they ignored specific requests from the Navajo Nation for field
hearings and consultation with the Tribe?

NCAI defers this question to the Navajo Nation out of respect to
their Sovereignty.

b.  Have you called on, or will you call on the Biden
Administration to reverse its decision and agree to the Navajo Nation's
request before deciding, and base the final decision on what is best
for the Navajo Nation?

NCAI defers this question to the Navajo Nation out of respect to
their Sovereignty.

c.  The United States has been the undisputed leader in carbon
sequestration innovation. It is vital to look at the science and the
facts regarding its viability and the huge global emissions reduction
opportunities with successful deployment both here in the U.S. and
worldwide. According to the experts, based on the science and the
facts, carbon sequestration is safe, proven, and been widely used for
decades. The referenced Department of Energy report \1\ makes several
key points:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Ibid.

``The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has invested more
than $1 billion during the past two decades through its Carbon
Storage Research and Development (R&D) Program to develop the
technologies and capabilities for widespread commercial
deployment of geologic storage. This investment has made DOE a
leader in this worldwide effort.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid.

``CCUS projects supported by DOE and other organizations
around the world, which in 2019 injected more than 25 million
metric tons of CO
2
, have shown no adverse impacts to
human health or the environment. And no DOE supported project
has observed migration of CO
2
outside of the
intended storage reservoir or confining cap rock.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Ibid.

``The assurances we can make today about the secure storage
of CO
2
in deep geologic reservoirs are based on: (1)
a foundation of nearly five decades of oil and gas industry
experience injecting CO
2
into oil- and gas-filled
formations; (2) the 20 years of technology advancements made
from R&D programs like DOE's Carbon Storage Program; (3) field-
testing campaigns, such as the Regional Carbon Sequestration
partnerships (RCSPs) that have validated monitoring tools and
strategies and developed best practices; (4) improved
understanding of the physics, chemistry, and mechanics involved
throughout the life of a CCUS project.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ibid.

Given that the United States Department of Energy has
worked on energy technologies for decades, spanning multiple
administrations of both political parties, do you view them as
a qualified expert when it comes carbon capture and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
sequestration?

NCAI understands and acknowledges that the Department of Energy has
experts in the field of carbon sequestration and capture, and supports
their efforts to reach out and collaborate with Indian Country and
tribal experts.

Questions for the Record

The Honorable Melvin J. Baker

Chairman

Southern Ute Indian Tribe

the honorable a. donald mceachin
1. When drafting the Environmental Justice for All Act, it was
critical that Chairman Grijalva and I get feedback from a variety of
stakeholders on the legislation, including from Tribal and Indigenous
leaders.
As new policies are created, and grants are distributed from the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act can you please clarify how you
feel the federal government can best ensure meaningful stakeholder
engagement, including the types of engagement that would be most
helpful?

Representative McEachin. Thank you for your comments and your work
with Chairman Grijalva on behalf of Indian country. The Environmental
Justice for All Act, H.R. 2021, is important in ensuring that minority
communities do not suffer a disparate impact from environmental
hazards. Indian country has historically been a depository by the
federal government and others for toxic waste, which has had a
devastating impact on Native communities.
At the same time, many Indian tribes--including the Southern Ute
Indian Tribe (the Tribe)--rely on prudent natural resource development,
including renewable and traditional energy, to fund their government
programs and services.
The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, H.R. 3684, is lengthy
and complex. Thoroughly engaging with Tribes can be difficult due to a
number of factors, including poor or non-existent internet, delays in
postal deliveries, and remote locations. In addition, the substance of
the legislation can change quickly as it moves through the legislative
process, making it hard for Tribes to keep up with critical
modifications.
However, as we saw in the recent Supreme Court case of Yellen v.
Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation, sloppy drafting can
lead to differences in legislative text that can have a major impact on
those Native communities that are entitled to federal relief and those
that are not. This can cause unnecessary division among Tribes and
other Native communities. That is why Tribal engagement at every stage
of the legislative process is important. After legislation has passed,
we find that Tribes are often unfamiliar with the nature of the
programs offered due to the complexity of the legislation, itself.
The following are some suggestions the Tribe feels would be helpful
in consulting with Indian country during the legislative process and
after the legislation has passed:
The Tribe finds it is helpful to have frank and direct
communications with the Committees while legislation is being
considered. This has included:

a.  Setting up remote meetings between representatives of the
Committees and Tribes to discuss legislation.
b.  Forwarding the legislation to Tribal representatives by email
and regular mail to ensure they are aware of the legislation and have
an opportunity to provide comments.
c.  Encouraging the Tribe's local representatives to communicate
with them on key legislative initiatives that might directly affect
them. The Colorado delegation is excellent at communicating with the
two Tribes located within the state's borders.

Once the legislation has passed, government agencies vary in their
tribal engagement. Some are very proactive. Others less so. Here are
some thoughts on what we believe works best:

a.  The White House does a good job of holding meetings with Tribes
on legislation that has passed. This is a starting point.
b.  Often governmental agencies will hold a national webinar on
legislation that affects Tribes. Again, this is a good starting point.
But given the difficulties in communication with Indian communities, it
is not enough. Moreover, there is limited opportunity on these calls
for questions or comments.
c.  Local engagement is best. Reach out to the Tribes by region or
state. Make sure they are aware of the meetings by multiple methods--
email, phone and letter. Keep in mind that delivery by mail in Indian
country is slower than much of the rest of the country. Add at least a
week on the expected delivery date.
d.  Engage with tribal organizations. This includes the National
Congress of American Indians but also other groups such as the Tribal
In House Counsel Association (TICA).
e.  We often find that with important legislation such as the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, there are so many provisions
affecting Indian Country that there can be a degree of ``information
overload.'' Notices of funding opportunities come from multiple
agencies with consultations at different times. In some cases, applying
for one grant at one agency will result in being considered ineligible
for another grant at a different agency. There is little or no
coordination among government agencies. Having a single meeting
discussing all funding opportunities coming out of a single piece of
legislation would be helpful.
the honorable garret graves
1. Chairman Baker, the hearing covered quite a bit of ground and
there was limited time to respond to all that was covered. Are there
any additional comments that you would like to share with the
committee?

Thank you, Representative Graves, for the opportunity to provide
additional comments. We appreciate the opportunity to participate in
the hearing ``Tribal Voices, Tribal Wisdom: Strategies for the Climate
Crisis.'' We encourage the committee members, participants and other
stakeholders to be open to new ideas and technologies that can be part
of a potential solution to provide reliable, affordable, and carbon
neutral energy to meet our country's needs, irrespective of the source.
Due to history, many tribes in the United States and indigenous persons
around the world have had to adapt in order to preserve their
communities and cultures. The quicker we can open our minds to all
possibilities and embrace working together with those who have
different views, the quicker we can iterate potential solutions
reducing the carbon footprint of human activity in the atmosphere.
America's example is illustrative: in terms of fuel for our homes
and industry we have progressed from wood to whale oil, then on to
coal, oil and gas. We are in the transition from these traditional
energy sources to renewable and other fuel sources.
The support from Congress through renewable tax credits over the
past two decades has allowed renewable technology to improve rapidly
and for renewable energy supply to grow in the marketplace, becoming an
instrumental part of the solution to a carbon neutral energy future.
However, it is important for policy makers to acknowledge that all
energy sources have an environmental impact and renewables alone will
not solve all the energy challenges of the future due to their
intermittency. We encourage all stakeholders and decision makers to not
take a one-size-fits-all approach to energy sources and to be more open
about deployment of new technology associated with all energy types.
Different regions in the United States have their own unique
characteristics and natural resources, so where solar power may be a
good source of energy in one part of the country, it is not practical
in other parts. Our energy policy needs to focus on utilizing the
natural resources specific to each region in a responsible and carbon
neutral way to meet the energy demands of the future. Fossil fuels have
been mined and used for a century to greatly improve socioeconomic
conditions for billions of people around the world. If we are open to
new technologies, such as NET Power's Allam-Fetvedt power cycle, to
generate baseload power to the grid in a carbon neutral way, a critical
solution to providing affordable and reliable energy to the grid could
be within reach in the next few years.
In considering these options, it is always important to keep tribal
sovereignty in mind. Too often we see the federal government imposing
requirements on Tribes as it pertains to the energy sector that are
actually detrimental to tribal economic growth. Since at least 1970,
the Executive Branch and Congress have encouraged self-determination by
Indian Tribes with the understanding that Tribes know best how to
expand their economic base while controlling the environmental impact.
We ask that this Committee keep this in mind while looking at the issue
of climate change

2. The United States has been the undisputed leader in carbon
sequestration innovation. It is vital to look at the science and the
facts regarding its viability and the huge global emissions reduction
opportunities with successful deployment both here in the U.S. and
worldwide. According to the experts, based on the science and the
facts, carbon sequestration is safe, proven, and been widely used for
decades. The referenced Department of Energy report \1\ makes several
key points:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Safe Geologic Storage of Captured Carbon Dioxide: Two Decades
of Doe's Carbon Storage R&D Program in Review, April 13, 2020 report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
https://www.netl.doe.gov/sites/default/files/
Safe%20Geologic%20Storage%20of%20Captured%20
Carbon%20Dioxide_April%2015%202020_FINAL.pdf

``The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) has invested more than $1
billion during the past two decades through its Carbon Storage Research
and Development (R&D) Program to develop the technologies and
capabilities for widespread commercial deployment of geologic storage.
This investment has made DOE a leader in this worldwide effort.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Ibid.

``CCUS projects supported by DOE and other organizations around
the world, which in 2019 injected more than 25 million metric tons of
CO
2
, have shown no adverse impacts to human health or the
environment. And no DOE supported project has observed migration of
CO
2
outside of the intended storage reservoir or confining
cap rock.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Ibid.

``The assurances we can make today about the secure storage of
CO
2
in deep geologic reservoirs are based on: (1) a
foundation of nearly five decades of oil and gas industry experience
injecting CO
2
into oil- and gas-filled formations; (2) the
20 years of technology advancements made from R&D programs like DOE's
Carbon Storage Program; (3) field-testing campaigns, such as the
Regional Carbon Sequestration partnerships (RCSPs) that have validated
monitoring tools and strategies and developed best practices; (4)
improved understanding of the physics, chemistry, and mechanics
involved throughout the life of a CCUS project.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Ibid.

Given that the United States Department of Energy has worked on
energy technologies for decades, spanning multiple administrations of
both political parties, do you view them as a qualified expert when it
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
comes carbon capture and sequestration?

The United States is the leader and should be considered the expert
in carbon capture, utilization and storage (CCUS) as the U.S. DOE and
industry have been working together for decades to understand
reservoirs and technology associated with CCUS. CCUS will play a
critical role in reducing carbon emissions associated with human
activity in the earth's atmosphere through either direct air capture or
through deployment of capturing carbon from industrial sources.
Regarding sequestration, there are many known geologic sources of high-
purity carbon dioxide still producing high-purity carbon dioxide for
industrial use today \5\ which have stored this gas for millions of
years and could be used to store anthropogenic sources of carbon
dioxide in the future. Furthermore, injection of carbon dioxide in
underground reservoirs \6\ is a process for which industry has a high
level of competency, given the decades of experience in enhanced oil
recovery. Hydrocarbons have been removed from the earth for over a
century and carbon has been emitted to the atmosphere as a result.
Today, we have a better understanding of the impacts of carbon
emissions, and we should work together to make every effort possible to
minimize carbon emissions associated with human activity including
placing the carbon back into the earth where it originally came from.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Supply, Underground Injection, and Geologic Sequestration of
Carbon Dioxide, as of August 7, 2021 published by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, located at https://
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
www.epa.gov/ghgreporting/supply-underground-injection-and-geologic-
sequestration-carbon-dioxide
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Carbon Dioxide Enhanced Oil Recovery: Untapped Domestic Energy
Supply and Long-Term Carbon Storage Solution, March 2010 report
published by National Energy Technology Laboratory U.S. Department of
Energy, located at
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
https://www.netl.doe.gov/sites/default/files/netl-file/
co2_eor_primer.pdf
Finally, I would like to reiterate that solving our future energy
challenges in a carbon neutral way is complex and we encourage everyone
to keep an open mind and embrace new technology. The United States has
consistently been the land of innovation and technological advancements
for centuries and I am very optimistic that the U.S. will continue to
lead on solving the future energy challenges here and be part of the
solution around the world. We look forward to continuing to progress
projects and ideas forward with industry, academia, and Congress. Thank
you again for the opportunity to testify on this very important and
complex subject. Committee members are welcome to visit our Reservation
if you are ever in the Four Corners Region.

Respectfully submitted,

Melvin J. Baker, Chairman
Southern Ute Indian Tribe

Questions for the Record

Dr. Casey Thornbrugh

Climate Change Program Manager,

United South and Eastern Tribes, Inc.; and

Tribal Climate Science Liaison,

DOI Northeast and Southeast Climate Adaptation Science Centers

the honorable kathy castor
1. Dr. Thornbrugh, would you agree that to fight the climate crisis
and adapt to its unavoidable impacts, all nations around the world must
play their part to reduce carbon pollution and invest in resilient
infrastructure?

Yes, and this includes ensuring that Tribal Nations are included in
broader plans, dialogue, and legislation, as the U.S. seeks to address
the climate crisis. In fulfillment of the trust obligation, the federal
government has an inherent responsibility to ensure the protection of
the natural and cultural resources that support the health and wellness
of Tribal communities, as well as to support Tribal sovereignty and
self-determination. Therefore, it is critical that Tribal Nations have
access to the necessary resources to address the effects of climate
change within our communities.

2. Dr. Thornbrugh, the Build Back Better Act contains incentives
like tax credits for new and used electric vehicles and investments in
electric vehicle charging as well as rebates for residential appliance
and equipment electrification. Would you agree that these types of
investments can help reduce U.S. demand for oil and gas? If other
nations, including in Europe, made similar investments, would that help
reduce global demand for oil and gas?

Yes, though we note that electric vehicles generate their own
environmental issues, particularly with battery lifecycle management;
and vehicle charging stations present concerns, particularly if the
energy source is from a coal-fired power plant. This issue is more
complex and a suite of actions including reduction in oil and gas
demand is needed to avoid unintended consequences. We urge Congress and
the Administration to work nationally and internationally to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions in order to mitigate the impacts from Climate
Change.
the honorable garret graves
1. Clearly from your testimony you are concerned with global
emissions. From a pure scientific standpoint and from a global
emissions perspective, is there any difference between a ton of
CO
2
emitted from China versus a ton of CO
2
from
the U.S?

It is critically important that all nations, including the United
States and China, work to reduce emissions globally in order to
mitigate Climate Change impacts.

2. We know from a 2019 study by the Department of Energy's national
labs that U.S. LNG exports to Europe have a 41% lower emissions profile
than Russia natural gas to Europe. We know from what President Biden's
own Department of Energy said last month, that there isn't a single
scenario where demand for natural gas doesn't go up over the next 30
years.
From the standpoint of global emissions, who would be best to
supply that natural gas--U.S. LNG or Russian gas that comes with at
least 41% higher emissions?

While the United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection
Fund does not have a position on domestic energy production outside of
Indian Country, such as natural gas pipelines, we-in the strongest
possible terms-insist that any expansion of this infrastructure in the
United States requires Tribal consultation and the avoidance of any
impacts to Tribal sovereignty, sacred sites, or public health.
Further, USET/USET SPF member Tribal Nations, and those respective
Tribal lands and energy resources, are located within a large region
that presents diverse geographical environments and opportunities for
both conventional and renewable energy development. Our member Tribal
Nations could benefit from the unlocked potential of those energy
resources and realize energy development goals, through appropriate
Congressional action and investment in Indian Country; and further
actions by the Administration, particularly to promote balanced
geographical representation and inclusion of USET SPF member Tribal
Nations in energy programs.
USET SPF has established its energy priorities, as follows:

Tribal self-determination and control of natural
resources and energy assets, to make conservation and
development decisions to preserve Tribal sovereignty, protect
Tribal assets, and to achieve economic independence, creation
of jobs, and improvement of Tribal members' standard of living.

Tribal capacity building effort involving multiple
federal agencies, universities, and the private sector.

Reform core federal programs, expertise, and funding
to support Tribal energy resource development and market
access.

Remove barriers to the deployment of Tribal energy
resources, such as bureaucratic processes, insufficient access
to financial incentives, and interconnection and transmission
on power grid.
the honorable a. donald mceachin
1. When drafting the Environmental Justice for All Act, it was
critical that Chairman Grijalva and I get feedback from a variety of
stakeholders on the legislation, including from Tribal and Indigenous
leaders.
As new policies are created, and grants are distributed from the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act can you please clarify how you
feel the federal government can best ensure meaningful stakeholder
engagement, including the types of engagement that would be most
helpful?

As the federal government works to implement the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA), it is critical to understand that
Tribal Nations are not merely stakeholders. Our relationship with the
United States is political, and its accordant responsibilities are
unique, separate from, and supersede any responsibilities the federal
government has to other communities. As such, meaningful Tribal
consultation must occur as new policies are created and funding is
distributed. Meaningful Tribal consultation involves seeking guidance
and input from Tribal Nations, and then implementing that guidance in
the administration of IIJA. As the IIJA is implemented, federal trust
and treaty obligations should be paramount. Tribal sovereignty should
be honored fully, especially regarding decisions about climate-friendly
and other development on our homelands. In distributing funds to Tribal
Nations under IIJA, the federal government should focus on the
following:

Rapid, equitable deployment of funds using existing
funding mechanisms, including Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA) contracts and compacts, and
avoiding competitive grants or matching requirements;

Affording Tribal Nations maximum flexibility in the
use of all funding allocated under IIJA; and

Ensuring Tribal Nations are not subject to burdensome
administrative requirements for use of these funds. This
includes application, reporting, audit, or other types of
compliance requirements.

Questions for the Record

Pilar Thomas

Partner, Energy, Environment & Natural Resources Practice Group

Quarles & Brady LLP

the honorable kathy castor
1. Ms. Thomas, can you describe some of the ways the Biden
Administration is working to improve Tribal consultation and strengthen
relationships with Tribal Nations?

On January 26, 2021, President Biden issued a Presidential
Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation to Nation
Relationships.\1\ The Presidential Memorandum requires the federal
agencies (but not the independent agencies) to revisit, review and
revise their tribal consultation policies, and to provide regular
reporting to the Office of Management and Budget on tribal consultation
policies and efforts. In response to this Memorandum, the federal
agencies engaged tribes through consultation to provide input and
feedback on current federal tribal consultation policies, including,
for the first time the Office of Management and Budget.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/
2021/01/26/memorandum-on-tribal-consultation-and-strengthening-nation-
to-nation-relationships/
\2\ https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/tribal-consultation/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, as announced at the White House Tribal Nations
Conference, several executive agency initiatives to promote
consultation and nation to nation relationships include the Joint
Secretarial Order with the USDA and DOI regarding tribal participation
in federal land management decisions \3\ and an Memorandum of
Understanding between multiple federal agencies related to protection
of treaty rights and sacred sites.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/so-
3403-joint-secretarial-order-on-
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
fulfilling-the-trust-responsibility-to-indian-tribes-in-the-
stewardship-of-federal-lands-and-waters.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/mou-interagency-
coordination-and-collaboration-for-the-protection-of-indigenous-sacred-
sites-11-16-2021.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several federal agencies, including Interior, EPA and USDA, have
initiated consultation on major agency actions--such as EPA's review of
regulations related to the Clean Water Act and Clean Air Act;
Interior's implementation of the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs
Act; and USDA tribal food sovereignty and related initiatives. These
efforts are re-invigorating the federal-tribal relationship and
promoting more involvement and collaboration in implementing federal
programs. However, there are still some major gaps in consultation
efforts, especially for the Bi-partisan Infrastructure Bill, including
lack of consultation sessions scheduled for Department of Energy and
Department of Transportation.

2. Ms. Thomas, do you believe that technologies like grid-scale
storage and demand response can help achieve a more flexible grid that
can integrate higher levels of renewable energy as we phase out
unabated fossil fuel-fired electricity generation?

While this is a highly technical technology issue, grid operators
are developing the tools and technologies to address this aspect of
grid management. Grid-scale storage and demand response will only go so
far though. Demand response is especially challenging given the very
diffuse use of power--it is almost irrelevant, for example, in the
residential sector.\5\ It is also more challenging as more distributed
energy resources are deployed through community scale projects, rooftop
solar, and other distribution system level energy generation systems
such as microgrids.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Although technology improvements, such as smart meters,
programmable thermostats and appliances that can communicate with the
utility, are creating increasing opportunities for utility residential
demand side management programs. https://www.utilitydive.com/news/
welcoming-the-next-generation-residential-demand-response-30/551947/
\6\ https://www.woodmac.com/news/opinion/time-resi-demand-response-
shine-summer-2020/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, while demand response is helpful for addressing peak
demand issues, it is not typically used for firming or dispatching
power. In that regard, other clean energy technologies that generate
firm and/or dispatchable power can also provide grid services to create
flexibility and integration support--such as geothermal, waste-to-
energy, and other renewable fuels (like landfill gas).

3. Ms. Thomas, should Congress explore strategies to reduce the
carbon footprint of the manufacturing of climate solutions like wind
and solar energy while supporting the transition to a clean energy
economy?

I'm not entirely clear on the question. I interpret it to mean are
there strategies or mechanisms related to the reduction of the carbon
footprint of the manufacturing of wind turbines or solar panels. If
this is the correct interpretation, then my response is--Yes, Congress
should explore such strategies. For example, President Biden and
members of Congress have promoted the ``on-shoring'' of the clean
energy supply chain. This supply chain includes mining, manufacturing,
and assembling the materials needed for clean energy projects
(batteries, solar panels, wind turbines). While this discussion has
occurred in the context of creating new jobs in the U.S., moving
manufacturing and assembly closer to the location of projects will
necessarily reduce the carbon footprint--through reduced transportation
carbon emissions. One such strategy might be to provide additional
federal incentives to manufacturers that locate on Indian lands--since
those lands are likely to be closer to large utility scale solar and
wind projects.

[all]
