- CARING FOR VETERANS IN CRISIS: ENSURING A COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH SYSTEM APPROACH

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CARING FOR VETERANS IN CRISIS:
ENSURING A COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH
SYSTEM APPROACH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 29, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-52

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-957                     WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 29, 2020

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Mark Takano, Chairman..................................     1
Honorable David P. Roe, Ranking Member...........................     3

WITNESSES

Ms. Renee Oshinski, Deputy Under Secretary for Health for
Operations and Management, Veterans Health Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................     5

Accompanied by:

Dr. David Carroll, Executive Director, Office of Mental
Health and Suicide Prevention, Veterans Health
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Frederick Jackson, Senior Executive Director, Office of
Security and Law Enforcement, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Dr. Julie Kroviak, Deputy Assistant Inspector General for
Healthcare Inspections, VA Office of Inspector General U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................     7

Dr. C. Edward Coffey, Affiliate Professor of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina.....................................     8

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Ms. Renee Oshinski Prepared Statement............................    49
Dr. Julie Kroviak Prepared Statement.............................    57
Dr. C. Edward Coffey Prepared Statement..........................    69

Statements For The Record

American Legion..................................................   133
American Federation of Government Employees......................   134

CARING FOR VETERANS IN CRISIS:
ENSURING A COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH SYSTEM APPROACH

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 29, 2020

Committee on Veterans' Affairs
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Mark Takano (chairman of the
committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Takano, Brownley, Lamb, Levin,
Brindisi, Rose, Pappas, Luria, Lee, Cunningham, Cisneros,
Peterson, Sablan, Allred, Underwood, Roe, Bilirakis, Radewagen,
Bost, Bergman, Banks, Barr, Watkins, Roy, and Steube.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, CHAIRMAN

The Chairman. Good morning. I call this hearing to order. I
am not sure whether a quorum is present, but it does not
matter--so I am informed that a quorum is present.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 4 and House Rule XI, Clause 2,
the chair may postpone for the proceedings today and, without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess at any
time.
This committee's top priority is addressing the public
health crisis of veteran suicide, and this is why the first
Full Committee hearing of 2020 will explore Veterans Health
Administration's (VHA's) adherence to policies on suicide
prevention, care coordination, and medical facility safety and
environment of care.
We will also examine training for VA employees to identify
veterans at risk of suicide, and VA Police's role in
identifying veterans in crisis on VA campuses.
Today's hearing is a crucial step toward a truly
comprehensive approach to reducing veteran suicide by focusing
on the ways VA can provide a safe, functional, and effective
environment for veterans in crisis.
Suicide remains a national crisis. More than 39,000 died by
suicide in 2017 in the United States and, of these, 6,139 were
veterans of the United States Armed Forces.
As Ranking Member Roe astutely noted in a recent interview,
almost as many veterans due by suicide each day in this country
than died in combat casualties or accidents in Afghanistan over
the course of last year. VA estimates that 20 veterans and
servicemembers die by suicide each day. This is simply not
acceptable. VA data indicates that of these 20 veterans and
servicemembers, 20 had received care in the past 2 years from a
VA--excuse me, six had received care in the past 2 years from a
VA health care provider.
Our focus is not only on medical staff directly treating
veterans in crisis, we need to examine and improve how VA as a
whole is working to create comprehensive approaches to reduce
risk and prevent suicides among veterans in its care.
Thousands of employees across VA work hard every day to
provide high-quality, life-saving mental health care to
veterans and to help them access additional supportive
services. VHA is a leader in suicide prevention research and
evaluation, and many of VHA's discoveries have informed better
screening, assessment, treatment, and management for mental
health and suicide prevention for all Americans.
VHA has also established many policies and training
requirements for facility-level leaders, mental health
providers, suicide prevention coordinators, and other staff.
These efforts are commendable and credit must be given to
VA for its work. Yet, since the beginning of 2018, the VA
Inspector General has published at least a dozen reports on
facility security, environment of care, and investigations into
a lack of care coordination at VA facilities.
According to today's testimony, quote, ``The Office of
Inspector General (OIG) found inadequate coordination of care
to be an underlying theme in every one of its recently
conducted reviews,'' end quote. Whether it was within a mental
health treatment team, with non-mental health providers during
the discharge process, or by care providers with patients or
their family, there was an issue with care coordination.
In two tragic instances in the Minneapolis VA Medical
Center, emergency department staff failed to report one
patient's suicidal ideation to the facility's suicide
prevention coordinator. In a different case at this very same
facility, the OIG determined that VA's in-patient treatment
team failed to coordinate with the patient's out-patient
treatment team. Both of these incidents showcase a failure in
care coordination that could have prevented these veterans from
completing suicide.
The rate of suicide among veterans in VA's care has been
steadily increasing over the past decade, despite significant
investments by VA toward better suicide care. VA spent $64.7
billion on mental health services in the last decade, including
almost $9 billion just last year, but we have not moved the
needle to stem the rate of suicide.
We cannot tolerate any number of veteran suicides, let
alone 20 a day. VHA's research discoveries and its policies
must be put into practice in every VA facility for these
policies and treatment protocols to be effective.
I call to mind--I will depart from the script just
slightly, but if we think about the accident rate in aviation
and commercial airlines, it is pretty good. This is what I
think I want this committee and this hearing today to drive at.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and VA have
both promoted the use of an evidence-based public health
approach. It requires VA to define the problem, identify risk
and protective factors, and develop and test prevention
strategies. When those strategies are found to be effective, VA
must ensure that they are widely and systematically adopted.
For this public health approach to work, VA must ensure its
hospitals and clinics adhere to uniform environment-of-care
standards; it must prioritize circumstances for suicide
prevention coordinators at VA hospitals and clinics to
coordinate care for veterans in crisis. All, I underscore all
VA clinicians, along with every other VA employee in every VA
facility must have the training to identify veterans in crisis
and be empowered to act to save veterans' lives. VA already has
dedicated and hard-working staff who believe in the
organization's mission. By incentivizing staff to speak up, we
can help VA move toward a culture of continuous quality
improvement that works to reduce veteran suicide.
As the Office of Inspector General noted at the West Palm
Beach VA, the patient safety manager did the right thing and
reported concerns to leadership about hazards in the in-patient
mental health unit that represented, quote, ``an immediate
threat to life,'' end quote, but the employee's concerns were
dismissed and eventually a veteran died. No employee should be
discouraged from reporting serious concerns about facility
safety and, when employees raise concerns, VA leaders need to
take them seriously.
In another example, at the Chillicothe VA Medical Center in
Ohio, a veteran who was supposed to be at arm's reach from a
facility observer at all times escaped view and jumped from a
window. The OIG determined VA staff did not adhere to the
facility observer policy and the facility leadership failed to
monitor staff compliance. The right policy was in place, but
the policy was not followed.
My hope is that today's hearing will expose what must be
done to ensure uniform adherence to policies, treatment
protocols, and care coordination at VA hospitals and clinics,
and how Congress can work with VHA to enforce these standards.
This is not about holding one single individual accountable;
instead, our approach must be to understand why policies are
not being followed, whether training is adequate and utilized
correctly, and how we can mitigate hazards that represent a
threat to patients in crisis at VA. This crisis is not new, but
our solutions and our behavior must be.
I now recognizing the ranking member, Dr. Roe, for 5
minutes for any opening remarks that he may have.
Dr. Roe.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DAVID P. ROE, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
During today's hearing, we will assess how the Department
of Veterans Affairs coordinates care for at-risk veterans,
examining incidences of suicide in VA medical facility,
including two in-patient suicides at the VA medical facilities
in West Palm Beach, Florida, as the chairman mentioned, and
Minneapolis, Minnesota, that were subject to recent reports by
the VA Inspector General.
My prayers are with those of loved ones of the two veterans
and with the loved ones of each of the 20 of their brothers and
sisters in arms who die by suicide every day in this country.
Every time a life is lost to suicide, it is a tragedy. When
suicide occurs in a hospital, a place where the most vulnerable
go for help, that loss feels particularly acute. VA is a leader
in suicide prevention in many respects, but if the policies and
procedures that VA has in place to screen veterans for suicide
tendencies and ensure their safety while they are receiving VA
care is not consistently applied, the consequences can be
deadly.
Led by Secretary Wilkie, the Trump administration has made
suicide prevention VA's top clinical priority and call for a
broad-based public health approach, in recognition of the fact
that suicide is not solely a mental health problem and that
preventing it will require addressing the numerous health and
economic, relational, and other complex factors that cause an
individual to consider ending their life.
Mr. Chairman, as you were speaking, something occurred to
me. We are involved and policies and procedures are important
in preventing, but we need to move a step back before we get to
that and prevent it before we ever get to those, if you can see
what I mean. We are actually at the point where we should be
preventing a person ever being in the hospital and I think that
is one of the things we need to work on. That is the rationale
behind President Trump's Executive Order that created the
PREVENTS Task Force on March 5th, 2019.
I welcomed Dr. Van Dahlen, the PREVENTS Task Force
Executive Director, to my district last month, which we had six
roundtables and a veterans town hall while she was in Johnson
City, and discussed the various issues that are involved that I
just mentioned and what the other task force members are doing
to break down barriers that prevent at-risk individuals from
getting the help they need and disseminate best practices for
suicide prevention across all levels of government and the
private sector.
Chairman Takano announced earlier this week that the
committee will be adopting President Trump and Secretary
Wilkie's model by tackling the veteran suicide crisis from a
holistic perspective and aligning our various lanes of effort
under a single umbrella goal, preventing veteran suicide. We
have no more important mission and I certainly support that
effort.
I also want to note, Mr. Chairman, as we sit here today,
the Senate Veterans' Affairs Committee is meeting to mark up
the companion to the Improve Act, General Bergman and
Congresswoman Houlahan's suicide prevention bill that we spent
so much time on last fall. Today's hearing will painfully
illustrate once again just why the Improve Act is so necessary
and why it must include an ability for suicidal veterans to
receive some level of clinical care from VA's partners in the
community, because a veteran in crisis, every door should be
opened to having them get the help that they need.
Finally, as we discuss the failures and missed
opportunities in West Palm Beach and Minneapolis, and other
locations detailed in the IG's testimony this morning, I don't
want to underestimate how difficult this work is. Suicide is
endlessly complex and hindsight is always 20/20.
I am grateful to the thousands of VA staff around the
country who do their best every day to serve the veterans who
are struggling the most. Their work is unquestionably life-
saving. I thank them for doing it and encourage them to stay
the course and keep fighting the good fight, just as their
patients did in uniform.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Roe.
This morning we will move on to--we will hear from Dr.
Renee Oshinski, Deputy Under Secretary for Health Operations
and Management at VA. Welcome, Dr. Oshinski. She is accompanied
by Dr. David Carroll, Executive Director of the Office of
Mental Health and Suicide Prevention. Good to see you, Dr.
Carroll. Mr. Frederick Jackson, Senior Executive Director of
the Office of Security and Law Enforcement. Welcome, Mr.
Jackson.
We also have Julie Kroviak, Deputy Assistant Inspector
General for Healthcare Inspections, who offer insights about
gaps and barriers that are plaguing VA's ability to properly
coordinate care for at-risk veterans and abate hazards that
represent a threat to suicidal patients on VA campuses.
Finally, we are also joined by Dr. C. Edward Coffey,
Affiliate Professor of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at
Medical University of South Carolina. He is a leading expert on
achieving system-wide culture change within a health system in
order to reduce suicide deaths.
We will begin with Ms. Oshinski. You are recognized for 5
minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RENEE OSHINSKI

Ms. Oshinski. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Takano,
Ranking Member Roe, and members of the committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to come today to discuss the Department of
Veterans Affairs' policies and procedures related to suicide
risk and the environment in which we care for those veterans
experiencing a mental health crisis.
I am accompanied today by Dr. David Carroll and Mr.
Frederick Jackson.
Suicide is a complex issue with no single cause. It is a
national public health issue that affects people from all walks
of life. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
tells us that deaths by suicide have risen 30 percent across
the Nation.
VA has embarked on a journey to become a High Reliability
Organization, an HRO, to eliminate risk to veterans who receive
care at the VA. This journey is a long-term commitment to our
veterans and to our workforce to continuously improve and drive
to zero harm across VHA, drawing on lessons learned from other
industries, other health systems, and leading VHA facilities.
Learning from Dr. Coffey's work, we translate zero harm to
zero suicides. We have begun a multi-prong strategy that places
veterans at the center of care from the VA, as well as from
State and local governments through our Governor's and Mayor's
Challenges.
Our Suicide Risk Identification Strategy is the most
extensive standardized suicide risk screening and assessment
process in any industry, but we are continuing to research and
refine to make our tools even better.
While we are strengthening our community network and
proactively engaging veterans before crisis, it is imperative
that we equip staff with the training and tools to intervene
when veterans present in a mental health crisis. We have a
network of over 400 suicide prevention coordinators. They
facilitate the implementation of these strategies within their
specific catchment areas.
Unfortunately, there are times when our engagement and care
coordination is not enough. In those cases, we conduct robust
reviews of each case with the goal of learning ways to improve
our care, as we strive to become that High Reliability
Organization that our veterans deserve.
An HRO promotes a just culture. We do not blame
individuals, we generally have to focus on ways that we improve
the systems that support those individuals. One key area has
been the review of our physical infrastructure and
environmental safety, with the focus on reducing hazards that
are normally associated with suicides.
In conjunction with our National Center for Patient Safety,
we developed the Mental Health Environment of Care Checklist.
This tool is used by interdisciplinary safety inspection teams
to assess the environment for hazards and determine actions
that need to be taken to protect our veterans. The rate of
suicide prior to the implementation of the checklist was 4.2
deaths per 100,000 admissions, it is now at less than 1 per
100,000 admissions.
VHA has recently mandated that all medical centers with an
acute mental health unit install over-door alarms. All
facilities are expected to be compliant by the summer of 2020;
however, most medical centers have already finished the
installation. This is an example of high reliability. When
deficiencies are found, VHA has the opportunity to scale
innovative solutions across the enterprise.
Our Emergency Departments (ED) are another high-risk area.
All patients are screened during the visit for suicide and
homicide risk. The ED directive is being revised to ensure that
all EDs have at least one psychiatric intervention room. We are
working toward standardizing our clinical processes in these
EDs. Many sites have made permanent police officers stationed
in emergency departments, others patrol them as needed.
We work with our police force to heighten awareness to
improve surveillance of parking lots and parking structures. We
are installing deterrent devices that inhibit self-inflicted
harm on exposed roofs of parking garages. With increased
rounding, we can reduce opportunities for suicides when VA
Police are alerted and can take actions to stop veterans and
keep them safe from harm.
Recently, in Cincinnati, a VA police officer working a
parking detail observed a female veteran attempting self-harm
on the sixth floor of the garage. After attempts to verbally
de-escalate the situation, two officers and an employee pulled
her to safety.
Collaboration between law enforcement and health care
professionals is crucial when responding to veterans at risk.
Our police officers have over 30 hours of classroom training
specific to de-escalation and conflict management, and continue
to focus on suicide awareness and prevention. Over the course
of 2019, VA Police have intervened to stop veteran self-harm in
many instances, including in Loma Linda, Murphysboro, Detroit,
and Syracuse.
All of us are saddened when any person attempts to take
their life. We appreciate this committee's continued support
and encouragement as we identify challenges, solutions, and
opportunities to apply evidence-based practices that result in
the reduction of death by suicide of our Nation's veterans.
Thank you for the opportunity today. This concludes my
testimony.

[The Prepared Statement Of Renee Oshinski Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Yes. Next is Dr. Julie Kroviak, you are
recognized for 5 minutes for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JULIE KROVIAK

Dr. Kroviak. Thank you. Chairman Takano, Dr. Roe, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on a topic that not only impacts veterans and
their families, but the entire country: Ensuring our Nation's
veterans receive timely access to the highest quality of mental
health in a setting that is comfortable, safe, and respectful
of their privacy and unique experiences.
Prior to joining the OIG in 2014, I had the honor of
serving veterans as their primary care physician for over a
decade at VA. Treating veterans with complex mental health care
needs not only requires sophisticated clinical skills, but also
training and compliance with policies and procedures to guide
seamless coordination of care.
I witnessed inspirational recoveries and successful
reintegration into civilian life, but I, like other health care
providers, also experienced grief and loss when a patient died
by suicide, despite receiving quality mental health care.
The OIG shares this committee and VA's priority to improve
VHA's mental health and suicide prevention capabilities. We
recognize the significant work VA's dedicated mental health
providers and other professionals are doing; however, there are
still considerable challenges.
VHA's effort in suicide prevention, including the Veterans
Crisis Line, have been largely directed at crisis intervention,
but the opportunity to intervene once a person decides on self-
harm is very short, often less than an hour before the actual
attempt. For veterans, it is even more fraught with peril,
because they are very likely to use firearms.
To significantly reduce suicide and improve veterans'
lives, prompt and effective mental health treatment must be
paired with a wide variety of additional approaches. For
example, VA has promoted firearm safety by urging veterans to
secure guns with locks, remove firing pins, and store firearms
where they are not easily accessed.
My written statement discusses numerous reports the OIG
published in recent years, detailing veterans' challenges in
accessing and receiving high-quality mental health care within
VHA. Tragic events such as suicides are the most publicized and
are typically understood to be the result of unrecognized,
untreated, or under-treated mental health disorders. Because of
this, much of our work focuses on the complete health care
journey of those veterans with a wide variety of mental health
diagnoses and treatment needs.
Our reports identified deficiencies in how VHA staff
coordinated care for veterans in mental health crisis, as well
as the quality of the environment where veterans receive that
care.
On the first point, we found breakdowns in communication
between members of the mental health treatment team. We also
found communication failures between mental health and other
clinical providers, community resource contacts, families, and
caregivers. Such gaps in communication and care coordination
weaken effective management and discharge planning, and
ultimately put patients at risk for serious complications and
potentially devastating outcomes.
While policies promoting effective communication may have
been in place, staffing shortages, inconsistent training, and
leadership failures compromised patient management.
We also found risks in the environment where veterans
receive their care and made many recommendations to VHA aimed
at ensuring a safer therapeutic setting by correcting
structural and other hazards that are unique to high-risk
patient care. The recommendations also support staff and
visitor safety.
We take a proactive approach to evaluating the environment
of care and continuously review site-specific allegations
related to cleanliness, safety, and facility maintenance. This
supports VHA's work to maintain a clean and safe, healing,
recovery-oriented environment, and is even more important in
areas often associated with high risks of harm to patients such
as locked mental health units.
Despite VA's efforts, there are significant challenges
ahead. VHA must continue to focus attention on outreach
efforts, providing all stakeholders with evidence-based tools
that not only help identify high-risk veterans, but also
encourage those veterans to engage in the care they need.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy
to answer any questions you or other members of the committee
may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Julie Kroviak Appears In The
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Coffey, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF C. EDWARD COFFEY

Dr. Coffey. Good morning, Chairman Takano, Dr. Roe, and
members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me here today
to participate in this very important conversation about the
public health crisis of suicide in our country.
You requested that I share with you our experiences at a
non-VA health system in implementing a comprehensive suicide
prevention strategy, and in my written comments submitted
earlier I described the work that we began at Henry Ford Health
System about 20 years ago known as ``perfect depression care.''
In my comments this morning, I would like to briefly
describe that model, and then dive into a bit of the detail
around Zero Suicide and how it might apply as a model for other
health systems.
Our adventure began back in 2001 when the Institute of
Medicine published its groundbreaking report, ``Crossing the
Quality Chasm.'' You will recall that that report called for a
sweeping overhaul of America's health care system. It was
described as badly broken and not repairable; it had to be
overhauled and transformed. The report also provided a model
for how we might move forward to create that transformation.
Now, in response to the report, the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation and the Institute for Healthcare Improvement
launched a national collaborative called Pursuing Perfection,
and the goal of that collaborative was to incentivize and
support health care systems to use the Chasm report as a
roadmap to rapid transformation and dramatically better care;
indeed, ideal care. I emphasize the word ``ideal'' here because
they were not looking for better care, that is not going to do
it, and they were not even looking for best care--what does it
mean to be the best in a mediocre industry--they were calling
for ideal care. That was the challenge from the collaborative.
At Henry Ford, we chose to focus our participation in this
collaborative on our depression care system, but we struggled
initially to create a vision for what perfect depression care
might look like. How would we know if the care was perfect and,
more importantly, how would our patients know if our depression
care was perfect? We struggled with this issue for many, many
weeks. We had focus groups involving our patients, their
families, community leaders, our system health care leaders.
And, finally one day, one of our staff spoke up and said,
``Well, maybe if we were doing perfect depression care, nobody
would die from suicide.''
Our room was as quiet as you are now, but that moment
transformed our department, absolutely transformed our
department. We began a conversation wherein we recognized that
this goal might sound unrealistic, might sound impossible,
might be frustrating, might create problems in some scenarios,
but we decided that if zero was not the right number for our
goal, what number could be the right number?
We began an initiative to transform our mental health care
delivery system and, to make a long story short, we achieved a
dramatic and unprecedented reduction in suicide among our
patients, a 75 percent reduction, that was sustained for a
decade in Detroit. This was occurring at a time when the rate
of suicide in the State of Michigan was actually increasing,
just as it was in the rest of the country.
This concept of Zero Suicide has been endorsed now by the
Joint Commission, the CDC; it is embedded in the 2012 National
Strategy, as you probably know; and a number of organizations
and governments across the world now are adopting at least
iterations of this model to try and get a handle on this issue
of suicide.
Just now a word about the model and it is described, or
depicted at least, in this graphic that is being shown and you
have a copy of it in the written report. There are three
components to this model and, starting at the base of the
pyramid, that first component is a radical conviction that
ideal care is possible.
Now, this sounds sort of common sense, but, believe it or
not, there is not a universal belief, at least in mental health
care, that we can prevent all suicides, that belief does not
exist. Maybe we need to look at that and challenge that issue.
If we do not have that conviction, we do not have the energy
needed to do the relentless work of transformation that is so
hard and that requires attention each and every day.
The second element of this model is a roadmap which we call
``pursuing perfection in a just culture.'' The goal here is to
set perfection goals, not incremental goals, which we typically
have done forever in health care.
For example, if your suicide rate is--I am making up a
number--ten and your goal is zero, you commit to cutting that
gap in half in some period of time, in our case it was 12
months. Zero is the goal, where are we today? We are going to
cut that in half over the next period of time and that gap we
will then tackle in the 12 months to cut in half. That is the
concept of pursuing perfection.
Now, this is not possible, as Ms. Oshinski mentioned, if
you do not have a just culture. If you expect people to go up
to the plate and swing for the fence every time, and then turn
around when they strike out and punish them, it is not going to
happen, it is not going to happen. We have to transform our
systems to look at where the defect occurred at the system
level, not at the person level.
We went so far, for example, to take the word ``who'' out
of our process maps for error reviews, we have removed the word
``who'' from the document.
Then, lastly, every member of the team needs to be an
expert in systems engineering. That is really health care
today. Health care is a team sport where we work together to
create systems that reliably produce the best quality care;
indeed, perfect care.
I think the model, while initially sounding audacious, has
application to a number of health care systems, and I think it
is worthy of further consideration and research. Fortunately,
research is underway now, sponsored by both National Institutes
of Health (NIH) and Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA), to look at the essential elements of
this model and how we might make it even more effective.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be here today, and I
am looking forward to our comments.

[The prepared statement of C. Edward Coffey appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Doctor.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
After the release of the VA's OIG report on the veteran
suicide at the VA Medical Center in West Palm Beach, I called
for a VHA-wide stand-down last September. This was to ensure
facilities were adhering to their policies and so the employees
were trained to confidently assist veterans in crisis, and
raised concerns with facility leadership and have those
concerns taken seriously.
In West Palm Beach, we learned that cameras were not
functioning, and the patient safety coordinator's concerns
about facility safety were not taken seriously by facility
leadership.
Ms. Oshinski, are the security cameras functioning in the
in-patient unit at West Palm Beach?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you, Chairman. Yes, I confirmed that
the cameras are working both in the acute mental health unit,
as well as the emergency department.
The Chairman. How about the door alarms?
Ms. Oshinski. Yes.
The Chairman. Thank you. You said in your oral testimony
that door alarms will be installed in all VHA facilities by
summer of 2020, but the VA's written testimony says May 2020--
excuse me, March. When will door alarms be installed in every
VA facility? Can you clear up that discrepancy?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for the opportunity to clear that
up. One of the things that we have done as we are installing
this across the enterprise, what we have found is that we no
longer are able to get the appropriate equipment. The market
could not--does not have the supply that we need in order to
retrofit all our facilities.
For example, places that--I saw an issue briefed just the
other day that talked about we were supposed to be done, the
delivery cannot be made. Instead of being done in March, it has
to be done in May.
We are working very hard to get this done and hoping, you
know--and, again, I do have to say probably hoping we are done
by summer, but it really is dependent on the ability to get the
appropriate equipment.
The Chairman. Again, the door alarms are part of VA's own
standards; is that correct?
Ms. Oshinski. That is correct. We put this on ourselves,
because we believe it fits in exactly with what we are talking
about, zero suicide and zero harm. If you go out to the
community, you are not going to find as many--when we have to
send people out, many of those places will not have over-door
alarms, but we want to be the standard.
The Chairman. This is an example of you know what to do,
but we know that knowing it is not the same as being or doing
it. It is concerning to me that there seems to be so many
facilities without door alarms. How many facilities out of your
150-some-odd facilities need door alarms?
Ms. Oshinski. Every facility with an acute mental health
unit, I am not sure if Dr. Carroll knows how many of those
there are, and we probably have completed, I believe, 80
percent of those now.
If I could share just a story----
The Chairman. Sure.
Ms. Oshinski.--of something that came in on Friday? Is that
there was an incident at Loma Linda, where a resident----
The Chairman. Excuse me, I am----
Ms. Oshinski. Okay.
The Chairman.--I said yes to the story, but I have got
limited time and I have got to get to a question to Dr.
Kroviak.
Dr. Kroviak, why do facilities continue to struggle with
adherence to environment-of-care and care coordination
policies?
Dr. Kroviak. Thank you. As you have described in your
opening comments, the policies are in place, but the actual
work that needs to get done consistently on the front line is
where the problem usually exists and that is what our reports
highlight. Most of the reasons stem from staffing shortages,
inconsistent training, and, ultimately, leadership failures at
the local level to ensure that the policies are consistently
played out.
The Chairman. Staffing shortages, leadership failure, and
inconsistent training.
Ms. Oshinski, why are not facilities following policies,
your own policies?
Ms. Oshinski. I think there is an effort on the part of
individuals to follow policies. As we talk about filling
vacancies, oftentimes new people will come in, we need to
ensure that we train them at that time and that we continue to
retrain. I really believe that is a large part of the issue.
The Chairman. Well, the Government Accountability Office
(GAO) placed VHA on its high-risk list in part due to this
problem. This has got to be a bigger priority. We must ensure
that the six veterans out of the 20 veterans who commit suicide
a day, who commit them at VA facilities or who are connected
somehow in the VA's care--you know, I agree with Dr. Roe, we
need to address the upstream interventions, but we definitely
need to make sure that the public is assured that the VA is a
safe place for a veteran who needs critical emergent care to go
and know that the standards everywhere are at the ideal level.
Dr. Roe, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
On the mandatory suicide prevention training, since 1917,
the last 3 years, all VA employees, both clinical and non-
clinical, are required to undergo mandatory annual training.
The newly hired clinicians must complete a web-based course
entitled, ``Suicide Risk Management Training for Clinicians,''
I want to take that course. If you all can get that, I want to
go through it and see what I think about it after I get
through.
Dr. Coffey, I want to go over a couple of questions that I
would like to have for you. Do you have evidence that the
suicide prevention model that your testimony focuses on has
been able to achieve sustained reductions in suicide in the
health care systems where it is being used?
Dr. Coffey. Well, to State the obvious first, its
implementation has not been wide at this point in time. There
are a small number of organizations, Centerstone in Tennessee
is one, that are reporting results similar to what we saw at
Henry Ford.
Now, remember, ours is a quality improvement initiative, it
is not a controlled experiment. When we talk about evidence, it
is a different level of evidence. We are doing lots of things
at one time to try and quickly improve the systems of care.
It is very hard to say this particular intervention
resulted in the particular outcome. That is the point of the
research that is underway currently with NIH and SAMHSA.
Then others, in addition to Centerstone, there are some
tribes in the U.S. I think SAMHSA has testified to this
committee before about some of the work that is being done
there, and they are also reporting preliminary positive
results.
Mr. Roe. The members here have heard me say this many
times, in the Guard in Tennessee we have a program called Guard
Your Buddy, which has been shown to reduce suicide by almost 70
percent, very similar to what you recognize. Given the
opportunity that significant suicide increases in our country
among our veterans, the supposed effectiveness of the Zero
Suicide model that your testimony references, why is the Zero
Suicide model not more widely known and adopted? Is it just--
and I mentioned to you before we started the committee hearing
about Dr. Van Dahlen, who is working with the Administration
through the VA, and they should be in contact with you.
Dr. Coffey. Well, I do not know the answer to your
question, obviously. I mean, I guess we could do a study and do
a survey and find out what is going on.
From where we sit, a lot of organizations are acknowledging
an aspirational goal of zero suicide, and I wonder whether that
is really--that sort of goal is really sufficient to generate
the traction and the energy that is needed to do this kind of
work. If we say, well, we would really like to get to zero, you
know, if everything works out okay, that drives one set of
behaviors. If we say, nope, we are committed to a nonevent, not
on our watch, not today, then you have a very different set of
behaviors that take place.
I do think there is power in how the goal is conceptualized
and articulated.
Mr. Roe. I agree with you 100 percent on that. I mean, my
goal when a patient came to me who was pregnant was to have a
healthy baby and a healthy mother, that was my goal every
single patient I saw.
I think one of the most distressing statistics I heard
during our roundtable in Tennessee was that the second-leading
cause of death between the ages of 10 and 34 is suicide. That
is an amazing thing. We have seen the rate go up in the
population in general and I think our veterans are mirroring. I
mean, we all are living in the same environment.
When you peel the onion back, you find out it is
relationship difficulties, it is financial difficulties, it
could be substance abuse, which could be caused by those first
two things I mentioned, and that is why I believe we have to
really get back and reconstitute our mental health
infrastructure in this country. We dismantled it in the 1970's
and never really put a place--if you are working in an
emergency room right now, Dr. Coffey, and you know this very
well, if you are down there and you see a patient--and I
applaud the VA for having a place to start the treatment and a
coordinator that you can hand someone off to--if you are in the
civilian sector, you are an ER guy in Union City, Tennessee, I
picked that out, you basically have nowhere to go, and that is
a sad situation in a country as wealthy as we are and as much
money as we are spending.
I think I want to give the VA a shout-out and there are
some--obviously, we are going over some problems today that the
VA had, but all in all I think the VA probably has the
opportunity to be one of the best systems in the country, I
really believe it, because the resources are there.
My time has expired. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Roe. Thank you for mentioning
the dismantling of our infrastructure, mental health
infrastructure in the 1970's, I agree with you.
Mr. Lamb, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamb. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will kind of pick up
where Dr. Roe left off.
Dr. Coffey, could you spell out maybe, what are the
challenges you would see for a large and kind of powerful and
distributed organization like VHA in adopting your model or
beginning to adopt it, how would you recommend that something
like that even gets started if it was something they were
serious about pursuing?
Dr. Coffey. Well, I think they are serious about it and I
think they are beginning to adopt, as you heard, various
elements of the model.
The challenge for any system really begins at the
leadership level, I think--and I am not singling out the VA
here, I am just talking in general----
Mr. Lamb. Right.
Dr. Coffey.--can leaders get behind a quantitative goal of
zero defects? I mean, can a culture stand that, can it
withstand that kind of examination and public statement that we
are not going to have, let me fill in the blank, a medication
error in our organization, we are not going to have a patient
fall in our hospitals, we are not going to have a pregnant
woman have a problem with her delivery. Zero. I think that is
the first step.
Mr. Lamb. Well, and I guess on that, when you talk about
leadership in an organization as large as VA, there are so many
different levels of leadership. Like it would be one thing for
the Secretary to say that at a press conference, it is a whole
other thing for the person who is really in charge on the
ground at an individual health center or even community
outpatient center to be bought into that and supervising it,
you know, on a day-to-day level. In the military they say
``inspect what you expect,'' right? I mean, like the person
would--that is the leader who I am thinking of, the on-the-
ground person.
How does that change get made, how do you get that person
bought in to what you are talking about?
Dr. Coffey. Well, again, I think it is culture building. I
always think back to the movie Apollo 13. That was one of my
favorite movies, but if you remember the story there where the
moon landing had to be canceled and they had to get the capsule
back to Earth and there was no possible way, according to all
the scientists, that this was going to happen. In fact, their
power was going to be 2 days short. It is impossible, it can
not happen. Every individual in NASA at every level
participated in bringing that capsule back to Earth safely.
That participation was driven by, you know, some of the
famous quotes from the movie, ``Houston, what more can we do?
Houston, what more can we do?'' That is Tom Hanks' character
saying that. Of course, on the ground, failure is not an
option----
Mr. Lamb. Yes.
Dr. Coffey.--failure is not an option.
Mr. Lamb. You talked about Department-wide certification in
cognitive behavior. What would it take to achieve that in say
an individual hospital? I guess in terms of like how much
training, time, and resources are we talking about, in your
experience, to achieve something like that?
Dr. Coffey. Right. Well, I will make a point first of all
that, as I mentioned in my report, we end up not getting the
grant. We got a small training grant as part of our
participation, but we were not one of the six finalists who got
a million bucks to do this, but we were so geeked about the
whole thing that we decided to pursue it anyway.
We had zero budget to do this at Henry Ford, we had no
resources. What we had to do, it had to be----
Mr. Lamb. Time is your resource at that point.
Dr. Coffey. It had to be supported by taking something from
somewhere else that was not adding value and investing that
resource here where it did add value.
In the case of department-wide competency in Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy (CBT), we sent key trainers to the Beck
Institute, the birthplace of CBT, and got them formally
certified, and then brought them back and they became the
trainers on the ground for our team locally. There was an
expectation by a certain date that every member who engaged in
the provision of psychotherapy at Henry Ford was going to be
certified by the institute. That is the way we do it.
Mr. Lamb. Do you have any estimate of what that means in
terms of hours, days, weeks?
Dr. Coffey. It is an intensive process----
Mr. Lamb. Yes.
Dr. Coffey.--because the supervision is very intensive.
There are audio tapes of the session, those are sent to
Philadelphia, they are critiqued and coached. Now, the model
may be a little bit different today, I do not know, but it was
intensive. But most of the staff in Georgia----
Mr. Lamb. Thank you, sir. I hate to cut you off. Just one
last question before my time runs out.
Dr. Coffey. Yes.
Mr. Lamb. Dr. Oshinski, I think we had a hearing last year
where Dr. Franklin mentioned that there were 444 suicide
prevention coordinators on board, but an additional 246 were on
the way in the hiring process. Do you have any idea where we
are on those numbers at this point?
Ms. Oshinski. I would have to take that for the record,
unless Dr. Carroll has----
Mr. Lamb. If you would not mind----
Ms. Oshinski. Yes.
Mr. Lamb.--just getting back to us. I think we had 444
active and 246 on the way, if you could just give us an update.
Ms. Oshinski. Yes.
Mr. Lamb. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Bilirakis, you are recognized.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much. I appreciate it, Mr.
Chairman. Thanks for holding this hearing.
Ms. Oshinski, recently the VA committed to proactively
contacting new transitional servicemembers through the Solid
Start Program, and your testimony credits this directly to the
President's 2018 Executive Order focused on mental health for
transitioning servicemembers and veterans post-separation. What
type of suicide screening is being done through this program
and how does VA plan to track its success?
Ms. Oshinski. Thanks for the opportunity to comment. I
would actually like to ask Dr. Carroll, if he would, he has
much more information about the detail of that program to
address the question you raised.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay.
Mr. Carroll. Thank you, sir. We appreciate the question.
Solid Start is a transformative initiative that, with your
support and that of the Administration, VA has undertaken. It
has taken us a while to build this capability, but within the
first year after separation from service we are calling each
transitioning servicemember at least three times.
To the point of your question, the contacts are checking in
with the veteran. They are not clinical contacts, it is not a
clinical interaction with a clinical provider screening them
for suicide, but it is the caring support, it is making sure
that they are connected, that they feel connected, that they
know how to connect to either resources in the VA or the
community. Then, if they need something or they indicate--you
know, if there is a crisis, we will hand off, a warm handoff to
the Crisis Line; if they need some other service from VA, there
will be a handoff to service--but it is really to remind
veterans that they are not alone, that the VA is there for
them, as well as local resources.
Mr. Bilirakis. Let me ask a question, a clarification,
because I know we had language in the MISSION Act. Can a
veteran, can a veteran go to a community health center, a walk-
in clinic, a what have you, to seek private care for mental
health, mental health counseling, what have you, and would the
VA reimburse?
I know there is some language that I have had some
legislation to strengthen that. Where are we on this, because I
think it is so very important. If you can not answer the
question now, please get back to me. You know, has this been
implemented? How easy is it for a veteran, you know, for
convenience purposes too, to go to their local community health
center for mental health treatment?
Ms. Oshinski. I believe after an initial approval it would
be very easy, but I would like to confirm that for you for the
record, to make sure that could someone do it without
authorization.
Mr. Bilirakis. Anyone else? Okay. Well, please get back to
me on this, because I think it is very important that the
patient, again, the veteran have access to these services.
One more question. I just had cataract surgery, so forgive
me, it is tough. Ms. Oshinski, what type of suicide prevention
materials or training is provided to servicemembers as part of
the VA's portion of the Transition Assistance Program?
Ms. Oshinski. Again, I would like to recognize Dr. Carroll
as our expert on these programs.
Mr. Bilirakis. Please, Doctor.
Mr. Carroll. Thank you. Over the last couple of years, the
Transition Assistance Program has been remodeled or redone in
collaboration with Department of Defense (DOD), our DOD
partners, and I think there is an entire day that is focused on
VA services, on VA care. There is a focus on suicide
prevention, how to register for care. In fact, we actually ask
them to complete an application for VA care that can be
activated as soon as they are separated from service. There is
information about suicide prevention and how to reach out for
resources.
What we are also trying to do is to include information for
family members, so family members also have that information as
well. Then these calls that you mentioned earlier, sir, will
remind them of that opportunity going forward.
If I may just circle back to your last question for a
moment. If any veteran ever contacts us, we are going to find
help for them today. If they come in and whether they are
registered with us or not, if someone calls us or walks into
one of our medical centers, we are going to find help for them
today if they need it.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay, that same day?
Mr. Carroll. Yes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay, that is so very important. Time is of
the essence in a lot of cases.
Ms. Oshinski or whoever wants to answer the question,
whoever is qualified to answer this question, you mentioned--
Ms. Oshinski, you mentioned briefly in your testimony about the
Whole Health Program. As a strong advocate for this program and
the use of a public health and whole health wraparound approach
to suicide prevention, I want to ask, what progress is VA
making in implementing findings for evidence-based alternative
therapies that are otherwise outside of VA's traditional mental
health system?
I know that my local VA hospital is doing an outstanding
job with this, the alternative therapies, but I want to see
this nationwide. Can you--whoever is qualified to answer the
question, I appreciate it.
Ms. Oshinski. I can help with that one. Thank you for the
question.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay.
Ms. Oshinski. Whole Health is currently being expanded
across our system. We started out with 18 flagships, each of
the network has been asked to identify two more facilities
within their network to be able to expand, but also to spread
across every single facility in the country.
In the coming year, we will be doing increasing training. I
can tell you right now, people feel exactly the way you do.
They can see, whether or not the evidence-based is all out
there--and I understand we are probably close to being able to
issue a report with research on that, I have not seen it yet,
but I understand it is in process----
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes----
Ms. Oshinski.--that really shows----
Mr. Bilirakis.--we have got to get----
Ms. Oshinski.--that this is something----
Mr. Bilirakis.--yes, we are waiting for it.
Ms. Oshinski.--that makes a difference.
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes.
Ms. Oshinski. Everybody wants to do it, they are doing it
whether they are identified as a flagship or not.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right, very good. Thank you.
I yield back. Thanks for giving me the extra time, Mr.
Chairman----
The Chairman. You are welcome----
Mr. Bilirakis.--I appreciate it.
The Chairman.--Mr. Bilirakis.
Mr. Brindisi, you are recognized.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Oshinski, just in response to Congressman Lamb's
question, I also would like to see the numbers on the suicide
prevention coordinators, because I know in previous testimony
the former National Director talked about a surge in hiring. If
you can get that to our office as well, I would love to see
those numbers.
Ms. Oshinski. Certainly.
Mr. Brindisi. Then my main concern, I represent a very
rural district in upstate New York, and I know you all know the
challenges of serving veterans in rural communities because of
the lack of cell phone service, the lack of Internet coverage,
the transportation and distances to community-based out-patient
clinics or hospitals.
Ms. Oshinski or Dr. Kroviak, can you speak to the VA's
efficiency in reaching veterans who live in rural communities?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for the opportunity to address how
we reach out to veterans in rural communities. I agree, we have
tried to make sure that we have community-based out-patient
clinics whenever we can and that we are expanding our
telehealth network, but, as you said, we also struggle
sometimes with the bandwidth that you may have in more rural
communities.
We are working with a variety of private sectors folks as
well. One of the things I would like to highlight is we are
trying to work with Walmart, because there are Walmarts in very
many rural communities across the country, is there a way that
we can do that. That is one of the areas that we are looking
at.
Dr. Carroll, would you like to add anything in terms of
other alternatives?
Mr. Carroll. One of the things that we have developed
recently is a program called Together With Veterans. It was
developed by our team out in Colorado and it is an evidence-
based program to go into rural communities and to help those
communities recognize and connect and support with their
veterans in their local communities. We have seen promising
results from that and we are spreading that across our system,
in addition to what Ms. Oshinski said about the importance of
telehealth services.
Mr. Brindisi. Dr. Kroviak.
Dr. Kroviak. Yes, if I could add, we are also very much
aware of the challenges associated with providing care to rural
veterans, in particular specialty care. We have developed
several products that are now looking--taking deep dives into
specialty care coordination for rural vets, as well as the
expansion and safety of telehealth.
Mr. Brindisi. What else can we do in Congress to help VA
reach these veterans, any ideas?
Ms. Oshinski. Well, certainly we appreciate the support
that we have from this group and through the funding process. I
mean, we have worked very hard to try to expand bandwidth
sometimes and, as you know, it can be difficult in some of
these more rural areas, so I think the awareness.
One of the things I think is just so important is that
really younger veterans in particular love telehealth and I
think we need to do everything we can to make sure that people
understand just how effective telehealth can be.
Dr. Carroll, anything from your standpoint? Okay.
Mr. Carroll. Thank you.
Mr. Brindisi. Okay. Then another question I have, Ms.
Oshinski, you mentioned in your testimony that suicide
prevention coordinators also do outreach to Guard and Reserve
units, and they come to mind as one population that could be
served by VA mental health services. I have introduced
legislation, it is bipartisan, the Care for Reservists Act,
that would do just that.
If Congress decided to expand critical mental health
services to more populations, what are the challenges you see
in making that work?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for the opportunity to address
that. I do not think it is a secret to talk about the fact that
sometimes the issues of trying to recruit, particularly in
areas where it may be more--where we may have smaller
populations, we can struggle with recruitment. I think that
would be something that we would face. However, obviously, if
the Congress wanted us to expand those services, we would do
whatever we could to make sure that that occurred.
Mr. Brindisi. Do you think that you have staff capacity at
VA's facilities to serve more veterans?
Ms. Oshinski. Well, I think we are serving as many veterans
as we can, we are looking at ways that we can expand that.
Dr. Carroll.
Mr. Carroll. As we continue to expand our mental health
staffing, and we have increased our net mental health staffing
over the last 2 years, the demand also increases. I think, you
know, we are hiring to meet the demand, but as demand
increases, we need to continue to hire.
Support for our training programs is an important
component, because that is a major way that we recruit
providers into our system.
Mr. Brindisi. Okay.
Dr. Kroviak. Thank you for recognizing my angst in wanting
to participate.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you, Doctor.
Dr. Kroviak. I would also really stress the importance of a
staffing model. It is near impossible to staff up to the demand
when you have not really measured exactly what you need and
where you need to spend your dollars in that staffing.
Mr. Brindisi. Thank you all.
The Chairman. All right.
Mr. Brindisi. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Brindisi. Mr. Bost, you are
recognized.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Oshinski, let me ask
this. We know that, first off, that zero number that we are
trying for is very difficult, because so many are not even
coming in contact with VA. The fact that we have them actually
committing suicide at the VA is a huge problem. What is being
done, I know you explained a little bit of it, but when Dr.
Coffey was giving his testimony, he said that it is the mind
set of all thinking and understanding that that zero number is
possible. What is it that we are doing to train our frontline
staff, and make sure that they have that same attitude?
Ms. Oshinski. Thanks for the opportunity to address this. I
think there are several levels of this. First, I think the kind
of training that we do, the same training, making sure that
people understand the very most important thing about
recognizing suicide is the fact that, or preventing it, is
recognizing when someone is having an issue. It is that direct
kind of interaction that each and every one of our employees,
whether they be in a facilities management employee or someone
who is doing grounds maintenance, those folks sometimes are the
ones who first run into people outside the emergency department
or on their way in and will actually bring things to others'
attention.
I think we are beginning to get there, but we need to
continue to do that kind of interaction. I will tell you that
when a veteran commits suicide on a VA campus, or harms himself
on a VA campus, as a network director, I used to go in and
visit the teams, the suicide prevention coordinators and then
some of the teams. The emotions that came out in those
meetings, this is the most difficult thing for any provider, to
lose someone. When you know that VA is there to do something
good for people, and instead, they harm themselves.
It is something that every employee at the VA is on the
alert for.
Mr. Bost. Dr. Kroviak, in your testimony, you actually
talked about a particular case where someone that was a high
risk, the red flag was removed. What are we doing to make sure
the procedure does not go down that path again?
Dr. Kroviak. That was a critical recommendation in the
report you are referencing. In fact, it was the first
recommendation. We follow up on the recommendations with data
from VA to show that the changes have been put in place. We
have not yet closed it. The data that we have been provided has
not supported sustaining that. Until we see enough data to
suggest that it has been implemented, corrected over a course
of time, would we then close that recommendation to say it has
been satisfied.
Mr. Bost. Okay. As I said off the start, the worst thing we
could have is these suicides actually occurring at our
facilities.
Dr. Kroviak. Yes.
Mr. Bost. Manpower, and being informed, and communication
is vitally important. I know that is part of what you are
working on, but you brought up an issue that also the people of
maintenance, it is vitally important.
I know when reading our report, one of the suicides was the
fact that a hallway camera was out. In my particular case with
one of my VAs, which actually does a great job, and that is the
St. Louis VA and Johns Hopkins, we had a person that actually
walked into the waiting room at 4 o'clock in the morning,
actually contacted his nephew, and said what he was going to
do, because he was angry about the service he received from the
VA. Laid down on the bench, committed suicide, and it was an
hour before he was found.
The implementation and the putting in of those proper
cameras and making sure that our staff understands and also
then understanding that our staff needs to be informed for that
zero policy. These are things that this committee is wanting to
push so hard to try to reduce this unbelievable level of
suicide rates. The zero policy for our facilities has got to be
met.
I think you are trying anything, and everything that this
committee can do, let us know. We will continue to have
oversight of this. Thank you for being here today, and with
that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bost. I associate myself with
your sentiment toward the end. I agree that we have to drive a
zero policy at the facility.
Ms. Luria, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Luria. Well, thank you. Thank you all for being here
today to talk about this very important issue of veteran
suicide. I associate myself with my colleagues' comments that
we all focus and want to provide as much help, assistance to
the VA to accomplish their mission as possible in this area.
One of the things that came to my attention in the
testimony that you provided ahead of today's hearing is that 99
out of 140 VHA facility directors reported that they had at
least one severe shortage area in mental healthcare providers.
I wanted to know how that affected our community.
I reached out to the director and the staff at the Hampton
VA in Virginia, and I found out that the vacancy rate at the
Hampton VA for mental health care providers is 35.5 percent.
Whereas, the VHA rate in mental health across the country is 10
percent, roughly. In certain areas, there are zero providers,
so 100 percent vacancy in that specific field or type of
provider.
That made me think, are staffing shortages the reason that
you are not meeting benchmarks that you feel that you are not
necessarily able to provide the care, and the time to the
number of people who might need the care? Just basically, what
impact is this having on our ability to go after this problem?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for that question. Definitely, the
issue of trying to recruit the appropriate staff to staff all
of our mental health units across the country continues to be a
challenge. As Dr. Carroll mentioned, we have made some
tremendous progress in the last few years. However, there are
pockets, and you are mentioning one of those, where we still
have difficulty trying to bring the staff onto the level that
we need to support the demand, because you have a very high
growing area, where we have a lot of veterans who are seeking
care.
It is something that we are working on. Dr. Carroll, you
may have some additional information about that specific site.
Ms. Luria. Well, and also, as you continue to address this
in your response, what can we do about the hiring? I understand
the shortage of mental health care professionals, whether I am
in a jail, a school, the VA, anywhere in our community there is
a shortage. But why is the VA not one of their locations of
choice for employment?
We have both the Hampton VA and we have two military in-
treatment facility hospitals as well, one of which is
Portsmouth Naval Hospital. We are constantly losing providers
between DOD, VA. It takes months to bring someone on board,
even if they are identified. Just at the administrative level
with the hiring process, can we not do something to make that
more efficient? To make it a more attractive place to work? To
be able to provide health care to these veterans?
Ms. Oshinski. Just before I turn it to you, Dr. Carroll, a
couple things just to say. We have an initiative to hire right,
hire fast. We are really trying to do that, and we would target
a particular area like Hampton, because of the vacancy rate.
We are also trying to use all the flexibilities that we
have in terms of, what are the kinds of incentives that we can
offer people.
Ms. Luria. For the hire fast, so I have been to the VA four
times in the last year, and I hear that it takes them months.
They have to re-credential someone. I mean, someone might
already be working for a VA facility in another State. They
might be working for DOD. They are already working as a health
care provider in a Federal health care system. Why do we have
to go back to ground zero and verify every single credential
when there should already be standard record saying that this
person meets the standard to be employed by us?
It is adding months in getting people into a treatment room
where they can treat veterans who need the care. Can we do
anything to streamline the process and just get rid of what
seem like true redundancies?
Ms. Oshinski. We are taking a close look at the
credentialing process and what are the things that we can do to
improve that. You are exactly right. It is challenging and we
do replicate that information. I think the issue is you never
want anything to slip through the cracks. We need to tighten up
our process and make sure, just like everything else, we have
zero defects when we do this as well as anything else.
Dr. Carroll, anything else?
Mr. Carroll. I would just highlight, we have a mental
health sustainability initiative going on currently, where we
are looking at not just bringing on new providers, as we want
to do and we have had success with that, but we are also
looking at retaining our providers. We have a national program
to conduct stay interviews, because want to minimize our losses
and generally speaking, we do fairly well in that regard.
We are also looking at things like open and continuous
recruitment for these critical vacancies that you mention.
Ms. Luria. Well, I will just bring something up about
retention, and I have found that providers like to work at the
VA. They like to provide that care. The environment for
employees at the VA right now is very tense and very stressed,
especially due to the fact that a lot of them feel like they
have no recourse as far as some of the executive orders that
have been passed; the fact that employees are being disciplined
without the ability to repeal those specific actions; the fact
that unions basically that represent them, and represent their
rights, are being kicked out of VA facilities; that time is not
allowed for the people who represent them.
I hear this over and over again from long time VA employees
who want to continue to work there, but they really feel like
their rights are being infringed on. How do you address that
with your workforce to make them feel like they can have fair
representation and fair recourse in employment decisions?
The Chairman. You may answer the question. Go ahead.
Ms. Oshinski. Well, I think one of the things that is very
important to all of us is that people have the opportunity to
be able to respond to, or raise any concerns that they have.
That is why we established the Office of Accountability, so
that there are places for people to go. There are hotlines,
anything, if they are worried about things that happened.
I have to say that my preference is----
Ms. Luria. When you say, ``People,'' is this for employees?
Ms. Oshinski. For staff, I am sorry. Yes, for staff. I
apologize for using that terminology. For any of our employees
to go. I mean, I am hopeful that our leadership is listening
and that one of the ways that we can learn to better ourselves
is by listening to our employees and reacting to what they tell
us to make the environment a better place.
That is the expectation that I would have of anyone who
works in our environment.
Mr. Carroll. Within mental health, we conduct an annual
mental health staff survey every year, and that is part of our
metric in terms of how we look at the experience of care. It is
not just from the veteran's perspective. That, of course, is
the most important thing. We need to find out from our
providers, and we do, whether or not they can schedule
appointments as frequently as they feel that they should,
whether they feel supported by leadership.
We ask that annually and we use that in our oversight
process.
Ms. Luria. I appreciate the feedback on that. I will just
tell you from what I hear, from employees at the VA, in our
region, is they do not necessarily feel that they have that
outlet. We have new leadership. I am very encouraged by our new
director and I know that he is working very hard to improve
that morale, but just as one VA around the country, I just
wanted to make you aware that there is a significant amount of
concern amongst the VA employees.
The Chairman. Ms. Luria. Ms. Luria, we have to move on.
Thank you. I associate myself with your frustration with the
hiring process and climate, but we need to move on.
Ms. Radewagen, you are recognized. By the way, thank you
for that lovely shirt you sent me. Thank you.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Dr. Roe. Thank
you to the panel for appearing today. My question is for Dr.
Coffey. The suicide prevention approach that you highlight in
your testimony centers on achieving ideal health care delivery
and zero incidents of suicide, rates of perfection that I am
sure many would say are impossible, particularly in a health
care system as large and complex as VA. In what ways does your
approach to preventing suicide differ from the suicide
prevention approach occurring in VA right now? Why do you think
your approach is not only possible but preferable for our
Nation's veterans?
Dr. Coffey. Well, I can not answer the question about what
is happening in the VA right now, because I do not know. I am
not privy to the detail of those operations. As I said earlier,
I firmly believe that everyone that works in the VA is
committed to eliminating suicide. I have no question about
that.
Stepping back, in general in health care, we have the same
story. Hardworking people, smart people, dedicated to doing the
right thing. What is getting in the way is terrible, broken
systems. That is the general issue. That was the issue that was
called out 20 years ago in the Kazim (phonetic) report. I am
sad to say that I don't think we are a whole lot further along
today in fixing some of those fundamental systems issues.
I think that is the starting point. We have to step back,
look at these systems, and begin to think about, okay, what
adds value and what does not. If I may just tag on a question
that came earlier, which was a wonderful question, and it was
what could this committee do to help the VA. I thought that was
fabulous. I get goosebumps thinking about it.
My boss at Henry Ford asked me the same thing when we
started our work and when we did not get the grant. I had to
beg for some time. I went back and thought about it. Then I
went back to her and said, ``Help us with the bureaucracy. Let
me bring to you a list of issues that we do not think are
adding value. We could be wrong, and we may not understand it
completely based on your perspective. Let us bring you a list.
If you agree, can we take some of these off the plate? Can we
stop doing things that, in our view, at the front line, do not
add value to the care of the patient?''
That was a blessing from heaven. She stood by that, allowed
us to make those changes. Perhaps there is some opportunity
there for the VA.
I have worked in the VA and I know the challenges that
bureaucracy in such a system. It is all well-intentioned. It is
there to try to make things better, but maybe it is a time to
look at some of that and say, okay, this has outlived its
usefulness. Let us let the sun set and move on to processes
that add more value.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Radewagen. Ms. Brownley, you
are recognized.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wanted to ask,
with the way VHA is set up and organized, the medical centers
have a lot of autonomy. When we are talking about this grave
issue of suicide and solving that, and you are talking about a
lot of different programs, different directives, expectations,
and the like. We know from OIG reports that we have different
medical facilities who may be out of compliance and not
fulfilling all of those requests and requirements.
In an organization as big as VHA is, who has the
accountability? How do you ensure that each one of those
medical facilities are in compliance and who are doing what you
are asking them to do? They even have large controls over their
budgets. How are you ensuring that they are investing in their
facilities to meet some of these goals that we are trying to
attain and reach by actually really reducing the suicide rate?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for that question. One of the ways
that we do that, obviously, you are right. Each individual
medical center operates on its own. We have the network
directors. The Veterans Integrated Service Networks (VISN)
directors are really responsible for ensuring that we reduce
the variation and that we, then, make sure that facilities
across that entire network are complying with what they need to
do in each of these areas.
We have a lot of conference calls. We have a lot of
information that is shared. We have a mental health lead, for
example, in each network, who will visit each of the medical
centers and make sure that the things that are happening there
are consistent with what the policy is across VHA.
We also have things at the national level. Dr. Carroll's
office in mental health also looks at the consistency of what
we are doing across the country.
Ms. Brownley. The next question I have is in direct
opposition to Dr. Coffey's philosophy in terms of a new
approach to all of this. What are the consequences for a
medical center that is not putting their resources where we
want them to put them in relationship to suicide prevention?
Ms. Oshinski. One of the things that I really believe is
that everybody that--the idea of Zero Suicides and that
preventing suicide is the VA's No. 1 priority, I believe, is
shared by every executive across our country.
I think the issues are less with not doing it, but how is
it they prioritize some of those things. That is what the job
of the network and the mental health office is that we need to
make sure they prioritize that.
The consequences, the way I would look at it is
accountability is all about making sure that you have the best
outcomes for your patients. That if that does not happen, that
is something that we will be discussing in our evaluation
process.
Ms. Brownley. Well, with suicide, we have not moved the
dial. We are not getting good outcomes. It is--and, I mean, I
think that is why we are having this hearing and why there is
such a focus on this. It just seems to me that the system, the
way it is built right now, is not working the way we would like
it to. It may be a general patient care, general mental health
care and the like, but with regard to suicide, we are still
dealing with the issues.
I do not have that much more time, and I wanted to ask
another question. I do not think that we can really solve this
problem without understanding where the problems lie. I think
we have, over the last couple of years, we have really started
to break down of the 20, 21 suicides per day, who are those
people and what are the demographics?
I know in the staff report we are saying of that number, it
is about 16.8 are veterans and 6.3 of those have used the VHA
facilities. Do we know, of that population, how many are--who
are women? Who are native veterans? I just visited the Dakotas
the last couple of days, and suicide in tribal lands is
disproportional to the rest of the country.
Do we know who they are, because I believe that we
probably--well, with native veterans, we are not getting the
programs that the VA has that are good programs to the tribal
lands, one. I do believe that there are different ways to
address suicide, depending on who the population is. I have run
out of time, so if----
The Chairman. Witness will answer the question.
Mr. Carroll. Thank you, ma'am. I will try and do this
briefly. The Together With Veterans program that I mentioned a
moment ago will address tribal veterans, and I think that is
one of the focus of that program.
In terms of women veterans, we have the programs that you
know and that you are supporting us on. One of the things that
we saw in our data report between 2016 and 2017, there was no
increase among suicide deaths for women who were engaged in VA
care. Unfortunately, there was no decrease. I think that was a
point that caught our attention. I think we feel that we may be
taking steps in the right direction for women veterans in our
care. We need to see that number, of course, decrease.
In terms of the question that you asked about other
veterans. We know, for example, that of those 11 who die by
suicide everyday, who have not been in recent VA care, at least
two of them have been previously, and we are putting together a
program to help them reengage in VA care. We are also looking
at what we can do more broadly in the population through our
mayors and Governor's challenge.
I am happy to talk more about it with you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. I yield back. Thanks for the extra
time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. You are welcome, Ms. Brownley. Mr. Bergman,
you are recognized. General Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will just get to
the point right away. There is nothing more radical than a
Marine in the fight. Okay? I thank you, Dr. Coffey, for giving
radical a positive definition, because sometimes when we hear
terms that it will pop up either a negative or a positive,
normally when you think of the term radical, it tends to have a
negative connotation on the front end. I applaud you, because
if there is one phrase that we have is that we never leave a
Marine behind, whether it be on the battlefield, or here back
in the States in their personal environment, because we are
looking out for him and making every effort to look out for him
at all times.
This is a question to the panel. The Improve Well-being For
Veterans Act is legislation that I introduced to help the VA
reach out into the community and provide life saving services
to veterans who do not always make it to the VA or are just not
within the VA system.
As originally written, a merit of this legislation was that
we would not only touch the veterans we were not previously
reaching, but we would learn from them, and use metrics and
information gathered, sharing to help the VA and other
communities understand the many complex factors that lead to
suicidal ideations. In your view, what is the value of reaching
veterans in our communities who do not use the VA often or at
all, or maybe were in it and are out of it, as you just
referenced, Doctor? Would you agree that the learning that we
get from these veterans' interactions would assist the VA to
improve the environment of care, and therefore the results, on
its own campuses and VA facilities? Anybody want to make a
comment on that?
Mr. Carroll. Thank you, sir, for the question and for the
opportunity to talk about that. We believe that we do need to
know about veterans in the community. Our commitment in VA
healthcare, and certainly in mental health and suicide
prevention in particular, is to serve all of American veterans.
That is out mission. That is our commitment. It is absolute.
We need to understand there may be veterans who choose not
to receive care or services from VA, and we respect that. We
want to make sure that they are well-connected in their
community. And we have seen models for----
Mr. Bergman. It is okay to have other entities that maybe
are not employees of the VA to actually make those connections?
Mr. Carroll. We partner with external organizations all the
time. Yes.
Mr. Bergman. Anybody else?
Dr. Kroviak. I would just add from the oversight
perspective, we are typically focused on the sick veterans that
are engaged in care, and measuring and monitoring the quality
of care they receive. We do support outreach efforts, and are
targeting products that will hopefully be able to support VA in
their expansion of vet centers, which I think, and we as an
organization think, will be critical in serving those veterans
who have not, for whatever reason, chosen not to engage in
facility care.
Mr. Bergman. Basically, the overall goal is to engage those
veterans, who are not engaging with the VA. In some cases, you
are going to be able to bring them in, because that is going to
be the right answer for them. In other cases, they are going to
be outliers, if you will, through tele-health or whatever it
happens to be. The goal is 100 percent outreach. Whatever we do
to get that is the VA--it is the right answer, because the VA
is the valuable partner. You are the big dog here. You are the
St. Bernard, if you will, in this that is, in the end, going to
have the overall responsibility.
Dr. Carroll and Dr. Coffey. Dr. Coffey, you talked about
the Henry Ford effort. Dr. Carroll, you talked about the
Colorado effort. What I do not know is the timeframe of those
efforts. Has there been any, if you will, after action,
collaborative exchange of data and/or results or lessons
learned between those two efforts?
Dr. Coffey. Not that I have been involved in.
Mr. Carroll. Not those two efforts specifically. I think,
too, we respect and appreciate so much Dr. Coffey's work. In
our suicide prevention strategy that was published last year,
we have tried to incorporate. There are several principles in
Dr. Coffey's work to incorporate those.
Together With Veterans program is relatively new. We have
not been able to crosswalk it yet.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Well, again, I see my time is almost up.
The point is when we look at military operations, we talk about
intelligence sharing. That comes across all spectrums. Think of
you two as entities, all of you as different entities, whatever
that might mean, to share than intelligence, to share that data
collected. Because sometimes the best example of something
being done, we just do not see it.
I will just conclude by an--Dr. Coffey, you said stop doing
things that do not add value. Okay. Jim Collins, good to great,
101. Stop doing the things that no longer add value to your
business model.
I enjoin VA, like any other entity, do everything you can
to stop doing the things that do not add value. Identifying--
break a few China bowls, if you will, in the process, because
there are rice bowls that people love to protect. It is about
the veteran and it is about the outcome. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you, General. Mr. Cisneros, you are
recognized.
Mr. Cisneros. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here today.
Ms. Oshinski, on May 29th of last year, I led a bipartisan
letter with my House Veterans' Affairs Committee (HVAC)
colleagues, Rev. Banks and Rev. Bergman, requesting the VA
elaborate on DOD and VA's responsibilities for carrying out a
warm handover of service members from DOD to VA care.
As you are well aware, the time period after separation
from service is critical period for service members, especially
as it relates to the risk for wellness. This is exactly why I
founded the Military Transition Assistance Pathway Caucus, with
Rep. Bergman, to build a bipartisan coalition of members
engages with the Veteran Service Officers (VSOs), veterans,
service members, and stakeholders to solve and improve.
Although I appreciate the VA's response to our letter
highlighting the president's executive order on veteran
suicide, however, it did not elaborate in detail what is being
done for a warm handover.
I ask you today, what exactly is the VA doing specifically
to this critical period between when a service member leaves
active duty and transfers to the VA to make sure that those
that are suffering from maybe suicidal tendencies while they
were on active duty, get the VA care that they need and it is
done quickly?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you. One of the things that we have
done, and we mentioned a little earlier, but I think it is
certainly worth continuing to talk about is the new solid start
initiative, where we are contacting every service member as
they leave the service, that they are contacted three times
during the year that they return to civilian life.
Each of those, it is really meant to be, as you said, a
warm handoff. Let us find out what is going on in your life. If
there are issues, let us connect you. Again, to make sure that
they understand that VA, and that is all of VA, is there to
support them.
They would also be able to refer them to community
resources. Dr. Carroll, would you like to add anything to that?
Mr. Carroll. I would highlight two other things. One, for
certainly the most critically ill people, that we often will do
a warm handoff between DOD and VA to our trauma centers, our
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) centers. In addition, there is a
program called, ``In Transition,'' that will hand off
individuals who are receiving mental health care within DOD,
directly either to VA or set up a community care appointment
for them, to make sure that those individuals do not fall
through the cracks.
Mr. Cisneros. Right. Where there is also situations where
service members do not want to self-report that they are having
any problems, because it might take them out of status, whether
it be flying or anything else, while on active duty. What is
the VA doing to help identify those individuals, to give them a
comfortable place so they can self-report when they come to the
VA after they leave active duty?
Mr. Carroll. I would highlight our vet center program is a
particular resource for those individuals. It has a completely
separate record system. And at vet centers, many of the
counselors are veterans themselves. They really have an
expertise in dealing with combat veterans. Many individuals,
like the situation you described, find that a welcoming and
good place to go. We work closely with our vet center partners
in the health care.
Mr. Cisneros. I would ask, as Members of Congress, and
members of this committee, how can we help you out to make sure
that you have the ability to go out and contact these veterans,
because most veterans are not going to the VA once they are--I
should say, once they leave active duty, are not going to the
VA initially. How do we create that and make it more welcoming
for them so that they can do this? How can we help in that
process?
Mr. Carroll. Sure. We appreciate your support. We
appreciate opportunities like this hearing and other
opportunities to talk about that. We talked earlier about
support for our education, training, and research programs.
That helps us.
I think to the point of ensuring--using all of the
platforms that you have to inform veterans that VA is there for
them. We are committed to do that. If they contact us, we are
going to find help either in our system or in their community.
We need to change together the conversation in America, that
there is always hope. There is always a way forward for
someone. That no one is ever alone.
To Dr. Coffey's point, zero is the right answer and we are
committed to that. We need to infuse that, not only within our
health care system, but within the population of veterans that
we serve.
Mr. Cisneros. All right. Well, thank you for your answers
today and use us as a resource in how we can help, because this
is an issue that we all need to solve and we need to work on so
that we can get this through and make sure that these veterans
are taken care of. With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Cisneros. Mr. Banks, you are
recognized.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to each of you
for being here today to talk about a very important subject.
It is safe to say that the Suicide Prevention Coordinators
(SPC) are the face of the VA's efforts to combat veteran
suicide. Yet, this committee has found that many SPCs report
being overworked and unable to keep up with any of their
responsibilities. Late last year, President Trump signed into
law a piece of legislation that this committee supported that
required the GAO to review the training, workload, and staffing
at the VA to ensure that our SPCs have the tools and resources
they need to assist veterans in crisis. I look forward to
reviewing those findings in the coming year.
Dr. Kroviak, in your testimony regarding the incident at
the Minneapolis VA, you stated that the ``suicide prevention
coordinator did not collaborate with the inpatient
interdisciplinary treatment team during the admission.'' Is it
possible that the SPC at Minneapolis was too overworked to have
a thorough collaboration with the treatment team?
Dr. Kroviak. It is certainly possible that that is the case
and not just unique to that facility. I would also add that
suicide prevention coordinators are important team members in
serving as the face of suicide prevention, but we can not
disregard the other providers and support staff that are also
critical in combating suicide.
Mr. Banks. Okay. That is fair and I appreciate that
feedback, but are there any enforcement mechanisms that exist
to ensure that staff are informing the SPCs?
Dr. Kroviak. There are policies in place that guide these
coordinators, but I would have to defer to VA in terms of
holding up those policies and recognizing accountability in
those situations.
Mr. Banks. I know we do not want to minimize the efforts of
the SPC.
Dr. Kroviak. Not at all. We cite many short--or in the
reports that we found shortcomings, we are very careful to
assign accountability to those, as well as those that supervise
and run the facility. It is certainly not belittling their
role, but recognizing it as part of an important team.
Mr. Banks. I would prefer you to defer to Dr. Carroll. I
mean, do SPCs have any responsibilities to double check and
make sure that nothing is overlooked? I mean, what are some of
the rules that are governed about how the SPCs operate within
the team structure?
Mr. Carroll. Yes. The SPCs are an important part of our
health care situation. As Dr. Kroviak said, we do not place the
entire responsibility for suicide prevention on these 450
individuals. It has to be a team effort. They are the leader
around suicide prevention, and so they have the responsibility
to communicate with the team, and the team has the
responsibility to communicate with them. It is a team based--
that is one of the strengths of our organization is our team
based structure, both within primary care and mental health.
Mr. Banks. I get it. I do not want to walk away thinking
that either of you are minimizing the SPC. What
responsibilities do they do have? What responsibilities exist
within the team structure to keep them informed to ensure that
they are doing their job?
Mr. Carroll. One of the key responsibilities that the SPC
has, and they have many, but I will highlight this one, because
I think it is relevant, is to ensure that any veteran who has a
high risk flag for suicide on their electronic health record,
to make sure that that flag gets reviewed every 90 days.
I think that is a critical responsibility. That helps us
keep track of individuals who are at highest risk perhaps among
our population. That is a function that they have. They need to
make sure that that staff training takes place. They do have
this outreach responsibility that we talked about as well, to
interact across the system.
Mr. Banks. I want to stay on the same subject. I see heads
nodding, so I wonder if there are others on the panel that want
to weigh in about how the SPCs can--what responsibilities the
team has to informing the SPCs? Anybody else?
Dr. Kroviak. My nod was not specific to that. I would also
want to recognize, the SPCs play a role in management at a
later time in the management of the patients. Recognizing the
care that is required up until the point where they would
intervene.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. I have got 30 seconds left. At the
end of----
Ms. Oshinski. I just would like to also, and Dr. Carroll
talked about the outreach. They do have internal things that
they are doing, but we have been talking about rural health
care. The SPCs, and I am going to speak particularly to General
Bergman's area, I have been up there visiting those folks. They
are out there across the upper peninsula. I think we can not
minimize the fact, they are part of our public health outreach.
That is part of their job.
I think that is going to become more important as we move
to this multi-pronged approach to try and look at how do we get
our word out to those 14 who are not seen in the VA, it is
through those SPCs.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. My time has expired.
The Chairman. Thanks. Mr. Levin, you are recognized.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing on this critically important issue to all
of us.
I have the honor of serving as the chair of the
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, so I want to focus my
questions on that intersection.
Assistant Secretary Oshinski, in your written testimony,
you emphasize the importance of social determinants of health,
which, as you note, include economic factors, such as
employment and housing. The CDC includes strengthening economic
support as one of its seven core strategies for suicide
prevention.
As far as I can tell, none of the goals or objectives in
VA's national strategy for preventing veteran suicide address
economic opportunity specifically. I am concerned that perhaps
you are being too siloed within VHA, so I wanted to ask how you
can work better together; specifically, how can you connect
veterans at VHA with the VBA-provided benefits, such as the
G.I. Bill, vocational training, home loans, and housing
vouchers.
In general, can you address how is VHA going to better
collaborate with VBA on suicide prevention.
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for that opportunity.
I think, again, that Solid Start is the first place that we
are looking at because VBA is really a key driver in making
this happen and they are going to be ensuring that we connect
people right away when they begin to leave the service and
enter civilian life. I think that is certainly one item.
We do understand that the economic factors in a veteran's
life can be a big determinant of what happens in their mental
health status, so we obviously cannot ignore that. I think we
are looking at, you know, making sure that veterans have
housing. We do get involved in helping them with job
placements.
Dr. Carroll, would you like to elaborate on some of those?
Mr. Carroll. If I could mention two things, sir, I think
within our mental health programs are Compensated Work Therapy
program and Supported Employment. We want to help veterans,
particularly those with mental health challenges, find and
sustain, you know, competitive employment in the community.
VA is working with, through our Office of Strategic
Partnership, through our office, working with the Chamber of
Commerce, also looking at what we can do to support employers
to hire veterans and to recognize and support veterans within
their workforce. We are looking beyond just working within our
own organization--certainly, our partnership with VBA is
important--but what we can do with the larger community.
Mr. Levin. Thank you. If there is anything that we can do
on the policy level to help you better collaborate, we would
obviously like to entertain that.
Dr. Kroviak and Dr. Coffey, VHA has set forth several
policies to identify and mitigate suicide risks, but multiple
OIG reports have found that those policies are not being
consistently followed. What can VHA leadership do differently
to promote policy compliance manage facility staff?
Dr. Kroviak. Much of our recommendations are focused on
filling leadership vacancies and other staff vacancies to
promote consistent training and consistent caring out of those
policies.
We have also talked about culture to where we have
identified in several high-profile reports where staff members
will complain, will speak up, will say, This is not right, This
has been consistently not practiced. The culture was such that
after they complained 5 or 6 times, they stopped because there
was no action in place.
Really, supporting, effective leadership responding to
leadership vacancies and staff vacancies, and, again, I point
to a staffing model: understanding what you need so you can
design it to work.
Mr. Levin. One of the local feedback from local veterans is
VA, as whole, is doing a good job, but local VA facilities are
not being held, perhaps, to the metrics or accountability that
is necessary. Looking at ways to address that, I think, is
helpful.
Finally, I want to turn to VA police officers, who I think
are generally doing a great job playing a key role in de-
escalating difficult situations on VA campuses.
Mr. Jackson, how many of the 400 hours of training that VA
police officers receive are specifically focused on suicide
prevention?
Mr. Jackson. Yes, sir. Thirty and a half hours are
definitely focused on suicide prevention and then 24 hours on
doing scenario-based, because we want to evaluate that you are
doing the right things in terms of recognizing, de-escalating,
and identifying.
As Ms. Oshinski mentioned earlier about the saves that the
police have done, that is just a few; it has been quite a few.
Mr. Levin. Mr. Chairman, my last question.
We have heard a bit about security cameras and the issues
there, where in one instance, cameras had not been operational
for 3 years. Who is responsible for maintaining security
cameras on VA premises and what are we doing to fix these
issues in the future?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for the opportunity to mention
that. The facilities director is responsible for making sure
that the equipment on the site works.
I think that it is one of the items that the Office of
Security and Law Enforcement reviews during their reviews,
whether those be yearly, bi-yearly, or every third year. They
will oversee to make sure that we are doing that, but it should
be a facility director responsibility.
Mr. Levin. Is that something we could do a better job of,
though?
Ms. Oshinski. Yes, we certainly can, and I think we are
working on trying to do that. We have started an initiative to
look and make sure that our cameras are operational and that
they are able to be viewed.
Mr. Levin. I look forward to following up with you.
I thank the chairman and I thank the colleagues on both
sides of the aisle. I look forward to working together to
continue to address this crisis in our country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Mr. Watkins, you are recognized.
Mr. Watkins. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to the panel for being here.
This question will be for anybody who would like to
respond. The 22 per day is a raw number. Can someone comment on
what percent that is--I understand there is somewhere in the
neighborhood of 21 million veterans--and how that percent
compares to the general population.
Mr. Carroll. Yes. Thank you, sir. I am happy to talk about
that.
Actually, the daily number that is typically reported is 20
a day and that includes about one active-duty servicemember, 2
or so Guard and Reserve, and then 17 individuals who are
veterans; of those, 6 have been engaged in VA healthcare in the
year or two prior to their death and 2 of the 11 have been
engaged in healthcare at some point, and the other 9, not
engaged with VA. That is how it breaks down.
What we see in terms of the rate in the population, it is
about 31 per 100,000. What we have seen between 2005 and 2017
is there was a significant increase in the American population
rate of suicide. There were somewhere in the neighborhood of 86
deaths per 100,000 among American adults in 2005 and it went up
to 124 in 2017.
During that period of time there was an increase among
veterans, the rate, but I do not recall what it was in 2005. As
I said in 2017, it is 31.
What happened, though, is that the population of veterans
went down. The veterans are about 1.5 times more likely to die
by suicide than individuals in the population.
Mr. Watkins. All right. Forgive me.
Just looking at 2017----
Mr. Carroll. Yep.
Mr. Watkins.--124 per 100,000 at the national level?
Mr. Carroll. Yes, Americans.
Mr. Watkins. Americans, correct.
But veterans, 31 per 100,000?
Mr. Carroll. Correct.
Mr. Watkins. Why is it one and a half more times likely to
kill yourself if you are a veteran? The numbers do not add up.
Mr. Carroll. It has to do with the size of the population.
Mr. Watkins. We are taking the size by taking the
denominator of 100,000.
Mr. Carroll. Yes----
Mr. Watkins. You are----
Mr. Carroll.--the experts to review the statistics with
you, sir, but----
Mr. Watkins. Yes, because it looks to me like it is three
times more likely if you are a citizen, as opposed to a
veteran.
Mr. Carroll. That is--Okay.
Mr. Watkins. Okay. Thirty-one veterans out of 100,000----
Mr. Carroll. Yes. In----
Mr. Watkins.--but 124 citizens out of 100,000.
Mr. Carroll. Uh-huh.
Mr. Watkins. There is a denominator, so there is a percent
there.
Mr. Carroll. Right. Right.
The reality is in 2017, 6,139 veterans died by suicide and
that is the number that we need to get to zero, per Dr. Coffey
and we would agree with that.
Mr. Watkins. I just--I understand.
Mr. Carroll. We would be happy to sit down and walk through
our whole day report if that would be helpful.
Mr. Watkins. Sure. I just want to make sure I know what I
am talking about when I go and look at percentages----
Mr. Carroll. Yes.
Mr. Watkins.--because what you just cited me is it is
roughly three times more likely to kill yourself if you are a
citizen. That is literally what you just cited.
I mean, maybe somebody can pull me aside after this, but 31
out of 100,000----
Mr. Carroll. We will have to go back, and I may have
misspoke, sir----
Mr. Watkins. Okay.
Mr. Carroll.--so, let me--I will own that. I will go back
and look at that, but let me----
Mr. Watkins. All right.
Mr. Carroll. You are right, that does not make sense.
Mr. Watkins. The reason is, as a veteran and as somebody
who has buried friends, I mean I have people approaching me and
saying, Hey, walk me through this 22 per day, and so I am
turning to you and asking you to walk me through it. These
percentages--because I am hearing pushback and what you just
said is consistent with the pushback.
You do not need to scramble to find the answer for me right
now. It is just, I want to----
Mr. Carroll. I apologize to you and the committee if I
misspoke----
Mr. Watkins. That is Okay.
Mr. Carroll.--on that, sir. We are happy to get that
right----
Mr. Watkins. Well, politicians never misspeak, so----
Mr. Carroll. Well----
Mr. Watkins.--do not worry about it. We will get to the
bottom of the numbers. I just eventually want to know what I am
talking about.
Mr. Carroll. Yes. We want to make sure you have that
information and we appreciate your support.
Mr. Watkins. Of course.
Yes. Ms. Oshinski, the death of a patient in a VA facility
is a never event, which means exactly what you think--it should
never happen--but when it does, what sort of internal review of
the systems and procedures take place?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you. We have a root-cause analysis that
takes place, which looks at exactly what happened and what are
the ways--what are the reasons behind that and what are the
things that need to be done to correct it. That is kind of from
the investigation side. If we think there is something more
that needs to be done, an administrative board of investigation
may be chartered; it depends on what we find as we are looking
at the situation as we collect the facts.
However, I think one of the other important things we can
talk about is the work that we do when this happens with the
staff or with veterans who may have interacted with those
individuals. One of the things you find is that veterans
participate in these groups and when we have one veteran who
may lose his life, it affects greatly those individuals who
interact with that veteran. We work on, also, on inventions
with the staff, as well as veterans who worked together with
that individual.
Mr. Watkins. Thanks.
I am out of time. I yield.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Watkins.
Ms. Underwood, you are recognized.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As a public health nurse, I know just how important it is
to advance solutions to the veteran suicide crisis that are
data-driven and that are evidence-based. Identifying strengths
and weaknesses in VA care allows us to focus on those areas
that require the most immediate attention.
One of those areas is mental health and suicide prevention
workforce. I understand that vacancy rates among mental health
clinical staff are critical challenges facing many of our
communities, including some at VA facilities, so, at the
outset, I will say that I know that just in a community-based
setting, this is a problem, okay.
What actions, Ms. Oshinski, is VA taking to retain staff
and fill vacancies in the mental health and suicide-prevention
space?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for that question.
One of the things that we try to do, again, is make sure
that people are very well oriented so that they understand
exactly what--how they are going to interact in that
situation----
Ms. Underwood. Oh, yes, ma'am.
I am sorry. We have limited time, so just, honestly, what
are you doing to fill the vacancies, if you can?
Ms. Oshinski. What are we doing to fill vacancies? We have
open and continuous hiring so that we never close a vacancy. We
continually put that out there so that anytime anybody wants to
apply for a job, they have that opportunity--it does not mean
that a vacancy has to exist--so that we would constantly have
people able to step in, that they would already be qualified
and we could hire them--overhire them--and that is something
that we do on a routine basis when we can do it.
Unfortunately, as you know, often, there is a gap and we do
not have those, but open and continuous is certainly one of the
things that we have done to improve hiring.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. Thank you.
Another area is lethal means training.
Ms. Oshinski. Uh-huh.
Ms. Underwood. Research backs up the life-saving benefits
of creating additional space and barriers between a veteran who
may be experiencing suicidal thoughts or ideations and the
lethal means for them to complete any suicidal action.
It is my understanding that VA has implemented lethal means
training for all VA mental health-care clinicians who interact
directly with the veterans.
Dr. Carroll, is that correct, and can you confirm exactly
which categories of VA staff are currently receiving the lethal
means safety training.
Mr. Carroll. I will have to get back to you about which
categories of employees across the board, but, yes, all mental
health providers would be required to receive that training.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. In that response, can you please
outline, like, clinical and if there is any non-clinical staff
that are receiving that training----
Mr. Carroll. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Underwood.--and whether it is voluntarily offered or a
requirement----
Mr. Carroll. Yes.
Ms. Underwood.--and sort of some of the details around that
training would be very helpful.
Can you also tell us more about the training that the VA
has developed, like, how often does staff have to receive it--
things like that.
Mr. Carroll. Yes, the lethal means training is not
currently an annual requirement, but I think the frequency of
training, we will get back in our response to you.
Ms. Underwood. Okay.
Mr. Carroll. We have also developed a lethal means training
that is available widely in the community in partnership with
the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention----
Ms. Underwood. Uh-huh.
Mr. Carroll.--as well as the National Shooting Sports
Foundation.
Ms. Underwood. Then, to develop that training, was that
something internal to VA or did you work with outside experts?
Mr. Carroll. We worked with outside experts.
Ms. Underwood. Was it just the Sports Foundation or others?
Mr. Carroll. The American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. Then what is your understanding of the
lethal means safety training that contractors receive and would
you say that it is equivalent to what the staff receives?
Mr. Carroll. I would like to take that for the record----
Ms. Underwood. Okay.
Mr. Carroll.--so we can make sure we get you the correct
information.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you.
In some instances, some of the veterans in crisis no longer
require inpatient care supervision by the medical staff at the
VHA centers. This requires a handoff to another responsible
party--it might be the veteran's family or other members of
that veteran's support care network--so, Dr. Carroll, what
resources are available to families and the support networks
for the veterans that are at risk for suicide and are they able
to coordinate with the veteran's clinicians? Are they able to
access trainings or any other educational resources provided by
the VA?
Mr. Carroll. Certainly, family members are part of the team
that cares for veterans and we respect veterans' wishes in
terms of having family members engaged in their care----
Ms. Underwood. Uh-huh.
Mr. Carroll.--but to the extent that they are a support of
that, we welcome them to our--into the care process. We also
have resources available to family members, just like they are
to veterans, such as the Veterans Crisis Line. We also have a
program called Coaching Into Care, which is a specific resource
for families to call, in particular, if their veteran may be
hesitant or reluctant. It will help----
Ms. Underwood. Right.
Mr. Carroll.--the family kind of understand what some of
the resources are and how they can maybe help that person
toward getting into care.
Ms. Underwood. Well, I appreciate that, but that is on the
front end. I am talking about after someone has already
received care----
Mr. Carroll. Oh, Okay.
Ms. Underwood.--at the VA, they have completed an inpatient
stay and they need to be discharged. There needs be some kind
of handoff----
Mr. Carroll. Yes.
Ms. Underwood.--to, likely, a community provider.
What we are seeking to understand is the type of
coordination that is offered in that handoff and information
that is being shared to both, family and other clinicians in
the community or support networks, of which there are plenty--
--
Mr. Carroll. Right.
Ms. Underwood.--in many communities around our country.
Can you speak a little bit about that--I know I am out of
time--so, maybe you can take that for the record if the
chairman would allow him to answer?
The Chairman. Okay.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. If you would answer?
Mr. Carroll. Yes, so families--there should be a warm
handoff when someone leaves an inpatient unit to make sure that
they have an appointment, you know, for follow up and they
understand, and in many cases, the provider, if it is within
our facility, may come on to the unit and may see that patient
already or have an existing relationship, and the family
members should be involved. If they are going to the community,
the community provider needs to acknowledge that they have an
appointment, and then we would need to follow up to make sure
that that handoff actually occurred.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. Then for the record, we will probably
submit a question, because I think I heard you say that the
community clinician is allowed in before that handoff occurs to
the VA facility, so I just want to really drill down on that,
along with the other questions that we had.
Thank you so much to our witnesses for being here, I
appreciate it.
Mr. Carroll. Thank you.
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Underwood; as always, you are
very prepared and I admire your questioning.
Mr. Barr, you are recognized.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate you
holding this hearing on this very important topic.
I appreciate all of our witnesses for your work on
preventing veteran suicide, which is just an absolute tragedy
in our country. As we all agree, it is essential that the VA
take every step possible to identify and address suicidal risk
factors for veterans, especially in the care of the VA.
Before getting to my questioning, Mr. Chairman, I do want
to raise a concern. On December 12th of last year, I sent a
letter to you requesting a field hearing in Lexington in our
district on the topic of equine-assisted therapy; a topic that
you know I have been passionate about and advocating for
Congress since--and this has received bipartisan support in
this committee. Since then, though, my office has not received
a response on this and our office was told last Friday to be
expecting a call from your staff regarding the request, and
despite multiple emails and calls, we have not received an
answer. Ranking Member Roe has replied in support of the
hearing, but we are awaiting your support.
At the VA Medical Center in our district, the veterans
using equine therapy at the VA are in the Mental Health
Residential Rehabilitation Treatment Program and I know, Mr.
Chairman, you have equine-assisted therapy facilities in your
own district that serve veterans.
I do think a field hearing on this therapy is in line with
our suicide-prevention goals in this committee and I would just
ask, Mr. Chairman--and I will yield to you--can we get a
commitment that we will get an answer on that.
The Chairman. Mr. Barr, field hearings, in terms of our
committee travel budget and our staffing, have been restricted
to the chairman of committees and the ranking member. We have
had--we usually have a reciprocal agreement among the chairman
and the ranking member on top, if they want to choose. I am
going to have to adhere to that tradition and precedent;
however, as--so, I cannot support a field hearing.
I am interested in equine therapy, and I will look at my
schedule and I will look at--you know, short of a field
hearing, I can, perhaps, work with you on a visit.
Mr. Barr. Well, I know you are, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
that. I know Chairwoman Brownley is, as well, and I appreciate
both of you all expressing interest in working with me on that,
whether we have a field hearing or not.
Ms. Oshinski, I would like to welcome you and your
colleagues this morning, and, again, thank you for your work to
counter veteran suicide.
I am heartened to hear that since 2017, all VHA employees
are getting training both, clinical and non-clinical, mandatory
annual suicide-prevention training. I think it is important
that we are giving veterans every opportunity to talk about
suicidal ideations and get the help that they need.
I have heard, however, from veterans in my district that
veterans are more hesitant to talk to staff at the VA because
of a lack of shared experience if those staff are not veterans,
themselves, and so my question is, would you or any of your
colleagues see the benefit of a peer-support program enfolded
within the VA where veterans can process their experiences with
other veterans?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you for that question.
About a third of our employees currently are veterans, so I
think there is some possibility there, but we certainly
recognize and are beginning to incorporate more and more peers
within our treatment areas. I think, in particular, in mental
health, we have made a huge effort there, as well as in that
whole health initiative where we have peer-led groups for folks
who come and are veterans who want to participate in some of
those areas.
Dr. Carroll, would you like to expound on what we are doing
with peers in mental health.
Mr. Carroll. Sure. Within mental health we have over 1,100
peer-support specialists. These are veterans with the lived
experience of mental health experience, themselves, as well as
being certified, and we are also incorporating them into our
primary care----
Mr. Barr. Well, that is great, and the more the better of
that; that is the feedback from folks in the Sixth District
Veterans Coalition.
Dr. Kroviak, kind of an overview, as the Inspector
General's Office--overview--you know, I read about this
terrible tragedy at West Palm Beach--are we getting better
overall or are we getting worse? What is the trend line?
Dr. Kroviak. Oversight gives you an incredible perspective
in terms of how care is being delivered and the consistency
with which policies are being carried out.
I think what our work highlights, as it did in West Palm,
is that there are consistency issues with staff carrying out
relatively understandable policies and procedures. We fault
much of that or hold accountable, leadership in those
situations--the multiple layers: the service line managers, the
facility directors, up through the VISNs.
Looking at leadership vacancies, instability of leadership
and other staff vacancies; it is ripe for issues like we report
on.
Mr. Barr. Well, my time has expired.
Ms. Oshinski, I did just want to commend my friend Mr.
Levin from California bringing up the VBA and interaction. Some
of my veterans who are in difficult situations, they--their
frustrations and their vulnerabilities are compounded by the
difficulties that they have with their interactions with the
VBA. I think we need to watch those veterans, particularly,
that are having trouble interacting with the VBA. Thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Barr.
Mrs. Lee, you are recognized.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Chairman, and thanks for your
leadership on this incredibly important topic, and thank you
all for being here.
As I have sat here and listened to all of your testimony
and the questions, Dr. Coffey, I have one question for you. The
Henry Ford Health System--how many hospitals, patients did that
encompass?
Dr. Coffey. I can not give you the number of patients. It
is a very, very large, vertically integrated healthcare system
in the Midwest. It owns and operates its own Health Maintenance
Organization (HMO), which is sort of the test tube in which we
did our measurement for the rates of suicide, but--and that was
about a half a million people--but the system----
Mrs. Lee. Half a million people, population?
Dr. Coffey. In that membership in the HMO----
Mrs. Lee. HMO, Okay.
Dr. Coffey.--at one time. The system serves many, many more
individuals who are not members of the HMO, so----
Mrs. Lee. Okay. Yes, I just--my question is really around
sort of the complexity of the VA and the medical centers. We
have 170 medical centers, 1,400 community-based clinics serving
9 million vets, and I certainly love the radical idea of
perfect--a goal of perfect care, and I think that is certainly
a goal that we should have when we are talking about men and
women who have served this country to make sure that we are
getting to a point of zero suicides a day. I certainly believe
that that should be the goal.
My question is, as I sit here and listen to all of our
members ask questions on oversight--we have the OIG--clearly,
we hear our constituents with their frustration, whether it is
with the VBA, the VHA, et cetera, and my question to you is
when you talk about your roadmap, I imagine you were invited
here because we are intrigued by this concept and are hoping
that, potentially, we can implement this concept within the VA,
especially as it pertains to suicides.
My question is, really, when you think about your roadmap,
to me, the most part of it is your Just Culture and making sure
you are asking why and how, instead of who?
Dr. Coffey. Yes.
Mrs. Lee. The question I have to you is based on just the
general concept of how the VA is run, how we provided oversight
as Members of Congress, do you think that is possible?
Dr. Coffey. Absolutely.
Mrs. Lee. Okay.
Dr. Coffey. Of course it is, absolutely.
Mrs. Lee. I am glad to hear that. Now, my next question
is--you know, basically, we have 6 veterans a day who are in
care of the VA who commit suicide. When you talk about a
roadmap--when we talk--I feel like this is such an overwhelming
problem for us, because we are not only dealing with the 6 in
our care, we are dealing with the 10 who are not in our care,
and we are looking at the handoff between the DoD and us and
then those men and women who we failed at the handoff who are
now in the population who are counting for that, as well.
I guess my question is, if you were to establish a roadmap,
would your recommendation be to focus first on the 6 in our
care and then if we can get to a 75 percent reduction or a 100
percent reduction, then look at the how do we get those 16 into
our care----
Dr. Coffey. Sure.
Mrs. Lee.--and, you know, I am just trying to wrap my head
around a roadmap, because I sat here today and listened to the
suicide-prevention strategy, the mental health sustainability
initiative, the Solid Start. I mean, it is just so--I feel like
we continue to pile on and on and on initiatives and yet,
people who are running these facilities and people who are
providing the care, and then the culture of when we ask who and
the accountability and what we are doing about that, I just
feel like we are on a hamster wheel here.
If we are, in fact, going to adopt a zero-tolerance, you
know, a perfect-care policy, I would like to see us look at how
we are putting that roadmap into place. You know, I am just
more of a, what steps do we need to take to get to where we
need to be going?
I think my question, I guess for Ms. Oshinski would be,
what is it that this body can do to help promote the type of
culture that would be needed to implement this type of perfect-
care scenario?
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you. It is a challenge, and I agree
with you, we are trying to do very many things.
I think what we heard today about supporting the Just
Culture, that this is not about an individual failure; this is
about how we need to change and work the system. As I said
before, I can assure you, in terms of accountability, any
provider or any person who has any interaction with a veteran
who harms himself is forever remembering what happened.
I think this committee helping to spread that word that we
need to make sure that we have a Just Culture, and that when we
fix things, we are fixing things so that individuals are not
the issue; the issue is, how do we make the system work for the
betterment of the most number of veterans that we can?
I think by having this hearing, this is exactly what we
need.
Mrs. Lee. Okay. Any recommendations, Dr. Coffey?
I am sorry, I am over my time.
Dr. Coffey. Well, no. I feel you and I agree with all that
you have said about complexity.
I can't specifically advise VA on this matter, but as the
general strategy and what I would recommend is, where is the
low-hanging fruit? Where is the biggest opportunity?
You know, I tell my team, There are a thousand things we
could do this year. There are a hundred things we need to do
this year. There are three things that we are going to be able
to do this year, and our job as leaders is to make sure that we
have identified the correct three things. You just go through
your priority setting at that point and then go from there.
But I do think there is a balance between where is the low-
hanging fruit--some quick wins--and then where is the big
problem that we can begin to sort of chip away at.
Mrs. Lee. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Lee.
The Just Culture, that term, I think is very important. I
want to mention it in light of the fact that we have some
issues with the VA's Office of Whistleblower Protection. Making
sure whistleblowers are protected is definitely a part of
making sure that we have a Just Culture and it is about the
culture.
Before we wrap this up, Dr. Roe--and I will also ask him to
ask questions along the line if I do not get it completely
answered--but Ms. Oshinski, to the extent possible--and I am
throwing a curve ball at you because it is a--but I have to
tell you that 213 passengers who were evacuated from Wuhan
will--have already landed in the heart of my congressional
district.
I did appreciate my chat last night--I had a briefing with
the under secretary at U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) and an individual at the CDC--but here is what I
think is of concern for this committee in this jurisdiction. In
light of a grave public health concern, and I would say even
threat, what plans are the VA--have the VA begun a planning
process for taking care of our veterans?
As you know, we have a fourth mission at the VA, which is
also disaster preparedness and operating the emergency caches.
I want to know your thinking in terms of what sort of planning
is starting to occur already with our primary role of providing
healthcare to veterans and then we also have a community
responsibility through our fourth mission.
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you. Actually, as I left for this
meeting, I had to leave a planning process for how we are
dealing with the coronavirus; however, I will tell you that we
have been monitoring this on open-source, as well as in
collaboration with HHS, since the initial reports began from
China.
We have been identifying what are the requirements that we
need to have in terms of laboratory testing as these cases
present themselves. We have widely shared and had a conference
call yesterday with chiefs of staff across the networks about
how do we proactively deal with--what are things you need to
make sure all the providers across your site know.
We shared last night making sure that all the modules from
the CDC in regards to education and how we train people were
distributed to all the medical centers all across the country.
We are likely going to--as things get closer, we will be
giving--we are giving out more information and that was part of
the meeting that I left today--what do we do, as you have said,
when we have, now, people who are coming back from that part of
the country?
Some of them may be providers. Some may be people who are
within our system. We need to make sure that we are giving out
the appropriate guidance.
We have--like I said, we are collaborating daily with HHS
to find out what is going on and making sure that we are
following everything that they are putting out and telling that
to our folks. I think we are being very proactive. I would
likely see an incident command being set up if we see a more
significant spread.
The Chairman. Well, as you know, we have numerous veterans
in the Philippines, American veterans that utilize the Foreign
Medical Program, and we also operate a clinic attached to the
embassy there. We also, in the region, of course, have veterans
on Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, so closer in
proximity to the epicenter of this epidemic.
Are you plans also taking account of our exposures there?
Ms. Oshinski. Yes, thank you.
We are--actually, we have been monitoring the Philippines
very closely recently with the volcanic activities on that
island and in our morning meeting, we have been looking at that
situation on a daily basis for the last 2 weeks. We do continue
to have monitoring with them.
The difficulty there with the change in time zones, but we
have daily interaction with them about where we stand both, on
the environmental situation there, as well as, what is
happening with the coronavirus.
The Chairman. Dr. Roe, do you have anything that you want
to ask?
Mr. Roe. Yes, we were--I mentioned this to the chairman
during this that I hoped the VA--because we have already had in
our local community, a shortage of gowns and that occurred
before the coronavirus outbreak. We had to delay some elective
surgery because of just sterilized paper gowns, a shortage of
those already.
This reminded me of a couple of things that occurred that
was sort of funny. There was a flight from Hong Kong or
somewhere when the bird flu was going on--maybe it was Ebola--I
can not remember which of the outbreaks it was--but this guy
sitting in the airplane said, Well, I think I have this. What
the airline did with this highly contagious disease is kept him
on the airplane, but let all the other vectors go that had been
exposed to it, which could have exposed the whole country to
this problem. I think educating the public about this is
extremely important and then being prepared for this, if it
does.
What I always did when I went into the operating room was
prepared for the worst disaster that I could think of, you
know, a train wreck, and hope I went on a train ride, and I
think that is what we need to do in this situation.
Ms. Oshinski. Thank you. You know, one of the things that
we are doing is we are pulling out the things that we had put
in place when the last pandemic flu outbreak came around and
are looking at what we can quickly put into place; again, we
have the procedures and processes from the last time around and
I think we can quickly implement the things that we need to do.
Mr. Roe. This one is a little bit confusing because we do
not know how it spread, quite frankly, yet. We do not have
rapid turnaround testing. The CDC has got a nice test, but it
will take a couple of days to get the results back. That is--
those are the things that we need to beef up.
Can I just finish my statement and then I will turn it over
to you?
The Chairman. Go ahead, sir. Go ahead.
Mr. Roe. Dr. Coffey, I wanted to compliment you, once
again, on broken systems. They are a deterrent to us providing
quality of care, and also what does not bring value.
I remember as a young doctor, I learned how to do a
laparoscopy when I was in the Army and I came to Johnson City,
Tennessee, and I was ready to do my first laparoscopic exam and
I went in to see this patient before she went in and she had
been shaved from here to her knees--I mean, there was not a
hair--and I said, Well, why did we do that?
They said, Well, that is the way we have always done it.
I am afraid in healthcare that is a lot of what we do
because of how we have always done something and never ask
ourselves: Does this bring any value? Does this added step
improve quality of care, outcomes, all that?
We need to step back and look at the whole system--I could
not agree with you more on that.
I think the thing, also, that has disturbed me so much is
that suicide is a national tragedy. It is not just the VA; it
is a national tragedy for us. We lost--when you hear the
number--50,000 people died of self-inflicted--either by--
whatever method they chose to utilize to end their life--that
is bigger than all but two towns in my whole district. I do not
have a town, but two, that are that large, and I think about
that when I drive through them, about how many people in
America have done this.
Prostate cancer--31,000 people died of it. We have spent,
you know, billions of dollars trying to cure that.
Breast cancer--42,000, same thing.
Colorectal cancer--less than the number of suicides.
It is a national tragedy and it is going to take--not at
the thirty-thousand-foot level where we are--but I think you
are going to have to solve this at the individual and the
local, grassroots level, just like you did, Dr. Coffey, like
the VA is trying to do.
I do believe the public health approach--when Dr. Vandell
and I were in Johnson City we remembered--you remember the old
thing, Smokey Bear: Only you can prevent forest fires; we
taught everybody how to cough; ``Friends Don't Let Friends
Drive Drunk''--I mean, all those things that are catchy, but we
need to do that for suicide so that you can look after your
neighbor and your friend if they are having problems. That is
where we are really going to have to really reduce the level.
All these things we are doing are good, but it has got to be
more organic than that.
I, personally, am agnostic about where someone gets care.
When they are extremists and in trouble, I just want them to
get the best care they can get wherever it may be, and I think
you all feel the same way.
We mentioned facilities. I visited the new--of all the
bumbles and stumbles that it had--out in Denver. They have a
great inpatient facility there for psychiatric patients that
really look at how to prevent.
I think what the VA should do is go to those places that
have the best practices. Instead of trying to reinvent the
wheel, take those best practices to each facility--here, this
is what actually works; do this--and then hold people
accountable, as I think many of our colleagues have asked.
Then I do applaud the VA for trying to contact--Dr.
Carroll, you mentioned this--that is amazing when you put a
touch on 3 veterans who leave every day. I know when I left the
military, I just left the military; there was not any touch,
there was not anything. I applaud the VA for that, but also, I
will mention that patients share some responsibility to reach
out to you.
The VA can not do everything. You have to have the patient
reach out and then we have to have rapid access to care that
they need. I think that is one of the things that when the
patient does reach out that we do not just blow them off--here,
call 9-1-1 or call the suicide hotline--and leave them hanging.
I applaud, and I want to thank--the last person I talked to
when I left was a fellow who was painting my house inside when
I left and he said, Doc, I just want to tell you, I really get
great care at the VA.
I hear that a lot. Through all of its misgivings, I hear
that a lot, and I want to thank you all for that and everything
that you are trying to do and all the panel members for being
here, because I know you are all committed to the same thing
that we are.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Roe.
Ms. Oshinski, just before I launch into my closing
statement, Dr. Roe reminded me when he said something about the
shortage of paper gowns, one of the reasons why there was a
decision to evacuate Americans and other nationals in Wuhan was
an understanding that the medical system was highly stressed
and that if these individuals did get sick, they would be
facing an overwhelmed system.
This overwhelm is part of what I am concerned about, the
ripple effect. The beyond the shortage of these gowns, my
understanding is that China produces a huge share of our
medicines and that the production facilities are not far from
Wuhan, and the VA, as we know, is a major purchaser, a large
purchaser of these medications and it would be helpful to know
whether there is a concern of the VA leadership about our
inventory of important medications, you know, in the planning
process--if you could get back to the committee with some
assessment of where we stand with that.
Ms. Oshinski. Yes, Congressman. I will do that.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Again, I would like to thank----
Mr. Roe. Mr. Chairman, I just referred to my friend Dr.
Google and it said the FDA estimates that 13 percent of the
world's Application Programming Interface (API) production
facilities are in China, compared to 28 percent in the United
States. It is a huge percentage.
The Chairman. It is a huge percentage.
Mr. Roe. Yes.
The Chairman. I would like to thank the witnesses for their
appearances today and their testimony.
The crisis of veteran suicide is not new, but our solutions
must be, and that is why I introduced the Veterans' Acute
Crisis Care for Emergent Suicide Symptoms Act, or Veterans'
ACCESS Act, that will mandate VA cover the costs of emergency
mental health care for all veterans, regardless of their
eligibility for VA history or level of service connection.
No veteran experiencing a mental health crisis should be
deterred from seeking critical treatment because they fear a
medical bill. By removing this significant Bayer to care, my
hope is that veterans can now focus on getting the help they
need. I look forward to working with all my colleagues, the
VSOs, and VA, to make this hope a reality for our veterans.
All members will have 5 legislative days to revise and
extend their remarks and include extraneous material.
Again, I thank you for appearing before us today, and this
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:25 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Renee Oshinski

Good afternoon Chairman Takano, Ranking Member Roe, and Members of
the Committee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the critical
work VA is undertaking to prevent suicide among our Nation's Veterans.
I am pleased to be in attendance with Dr. David Carroll, Executive
Director, Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention, and Frederick
Jackson, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Office of Security and Law
Enforcement.

Introduction

Suicide is a complex issue with no single cause. It is a national
public health issue that affects people from all walks of life, not
just Veterans. Suicide is often the result of a multifaceted
interaction of risk and protective factors at the individual,
community, and societal levels. All of us at VA are saddened by suicide
among Veterans, and we are committed to ensuring the safety of our
Veterans, especially when they are in crisis. Losing one Veteran to
suicide shatters his or her family, loved ones, and caregivers.
Veterans who are at risk or reach out for help must receive assistance
when and where they need it in terms they value.
Thus, VA has made suicide prevention our top clinical priority and
is implementing a comprehensive public health approach to reach all
Veterans--including those who do not receive VA benefits or health
services.
These efforts are guided by the National Strategy for Preventing
Veteran Suicide. This 10-year strategy, published in June 2018,
provides a framework for identifying priorities, organizing efforts,
and focusing national attention and community resources to prevent
suicide among Veterans through a broad public health approach with an
emphasis on comprehensive, community-based engagement. This approach is
grounded in four key focus areas as follows:

Primary prevention that focuses on preventing suicidal
behavior before it occurs;

Whole Health offerings that consider factors beyond
mental health, such as physical health, social connectedness, and life
events;

Application of data and research that emphasizes
evidence-based approaches that can be tailored to fit the needs of
Veterans in local communities; and

Collaboration that educates and empowers diverse
communities to participate in suicide prevention efforts through
coordination.

Through the National Strategy, we are implementing broad,
community-based prevention initiatives and clinical intervention driven
by data to connect Veterans in and outside our system with care and
support at both the national and local facility levels.

Clinical Intervention Strategies:

Care Coordination Across the Continuum of Services

VA provides a full continuum of care from crisis intervention
services, screening, same day access to mental health care, outpatient,
residential, and inpatient mental health services across the country. A
2019 RAND study
i
shows that VA is providing high-quality
mental health care and that this care can improve recovery rates and is
cost-effective. Points of access to care span VA Medical Centers
(VAMC), community-based outpatient clinics (CBOC), Vet Centers, mobile
Vet Centers, the Veterans Crisis Line (VCL), and through the network of
Suicide Prevention Coordinators (SPC) and team members available at all
VAMCs. Veterans and their family members can connect with support
through in-person appointments at local VA facilities, telehealth
sessions, and online resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

i
High-Quality Mental Health Care for Veterans: What It
Means and Why It Matters. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2019.
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/RB10088.html.

VA-Department of Defense (DoD) Collaboration for Suicide Prevention
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Care Coordination Among Servicemembers in Transition

VA collaborates closely with DoD to provide a single system of
lifetime services for the men and women who volunteer to serve in the
Armed Forces. Our partnership with DoD and the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) is exemplified by the successful implementation of
Executive Order (EO) 13822, Supporting Our Veterans During Their
Transition from Uniformed Service to Civilian Life. EO 13822 was signed
by President Trump on January 9, 2018, and focused on transitioning
Servicemembers (TSM) and Veterans in the first 12 months after
separation from service, a critical period marked by a high risk for
suicide.
The EO mandated the creation of a Joint Action Plan by DoD, DHS,
and VA that provides TSMs and Veterans with seamless access to mental
health treatment and suicide prevention resources in the year following
discharge, separation, or retirement. VA provides several outreach
programs and services that facilitate enrollment of Veterans who may be
at risk for mental health needs, to include VA Liaisons stationed at 21
military medical treatment facilities as well as multiple outreach
programs to support engagment in mental health services at VA or in the
community. Some of our early data collection efforts point toward an
increase in TSM and Veteran awareness and knowledge about mental health
resources, increased facilitated health care enrollment, and increased
engagement with peers and community resources through the Transition
Assistance Program (TAP) and Whole Health offerings. TAP curriculum
additions and facilitated enrollment have shown that in the third
quarter of Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, 86 percent of 11,226 TSM respondents
on the TAP exit survey reported being informed about mental health
services.
VA and DoD are committed to delivering compassionate support and
care, whenever and wherever a Servicemember or Veteran needs it. This
includes collaborating to implement programs that facilitate enrollment
and transition to VA health care; increasing availability and access to
mental health resources; and decreasing negative perceptions of mental
health problems and treatment for Servicemembers, Veterans, and
providers. The most recent coordinated effort under EO 13822 began in
December 2019, when VA launched the Solid Start call center, which
proactively contacts all newly separated Servicemembers at least three
times during their first year of transition from the military.
Although EO 13822 was established to assist in preventing suicide
in the first-year post-transition, the completed and ongoing work of
the EO effects suicide prevention efforts in the years following a
Servicemember's transition. These efforts are demonstrated through
increased coordinated outreach, improving monitoring, and increasing
access to care beyond the first year. VA is working diligently to
promote wellness, increase protection, reduce mental health risks, and
promote effective treatment and recovery as part of a holistic approach
to suicide prevention.

Care Coordination for Veterans at Risk of Suicide Across the Continuum
of Care: The Role of Suicide Prevention Coordinators

Within the VA system, there is currently a network of over 400
SPCs. Overall, SPCs facilitate the implementation of suicide prevention
strategies within their respective VAMCs and catchment areas to ensure
that all appropriate measures are being taken to prevent suicide in the
Veteran population, particularly Veterans identified to be at high risk
for suicidal behavior. As an integral part of Veterans' care teams
implementing VA suicide prevention programs, SPCs are experts on
suicide prevention best practices. SPCs work closely with other
providers to ensure that Veterans living with mental health conditions
and experiencing difficult life events receive specialized care and
support for their suicide risk.
SPCs also plan, develop, implement, and evaluate their facility's
Suicide Prevention Program to ensure continual quality improvement and
excellence in customer service. This work affects a wide range of
agency activities and operations and directly affects the health and
well-being of the Veterans served and relationships with community
organizations and stakeholders.
An essential role of SPCs is to participate in outreach activities
in local communities to increase awareness of suicide prevention and
the resources available in the local community (a minimum of five
events per month with increased efforts during September's Suicide
Prevention month). These outreach activities include: (1) community
suicide prevention trainings and other educational programs; (2)
exhibits and material distribution to a wide variety of organizations
and populations; (3) meetings with State and local suicide prevention
groups, collaborations with Vet Centers, local Veterans of Foreign Wars
(VFW) and American Legion branches; and (4) suicide prevention work
with Active Duty/Guard/Reserve units, college campuses, and American
Indian/Alaska Native groups.

Suicide Prevention Crisis Services and Follow-up Care Coordination: VCL
and Emergency Department

Established in 2007, VCL provides confidential support to Veterans
in crisis. Veterans, as well as their family and friends, can call,
text, or chat online with a caring, qualified responder, regardless of
eligibility or enrollment for VA care. VA is dedicated to providing
free and confidential crisis support to Veterans 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week. VA has streamlined and standardized how crisis calls from other
locations within VA reach VCL, including full implementation of the
automatic transfer function that directly connects Veterans who call
their local VAMC to VCL by pressing a single digit (7) during the
initial automated phone greeting. SPCs also assist in coordination of
follow-up referrals for Veterans after they call the VCL by assisting
Veterans with accessing VHA care and assisting with evaluation,
treatment, and or referrals to community-based care for those who
decline VA services or are ineligible for services.
Veterans in crisis not only present to the VCL but also present in
VA emergency departments (ED). Suicide Prevention in Emergency
Departments (SPED) is an evidence-based strategy currently being
deployed in VA. Veterans presenting to the ED, or for VA urgent care,
who have been assessed as at risk of suicide, but are safe to be
discharged home, receive suicide safety planning intervention prior to
discharge and follow-up outreach to facilitate engagement in outpatient
mental health care. Safety planning interventions (SPI) in EDs provide
safety planning and lethal means counseling prior to discharge and
follow-up contact after discharge with the Veteran to offer support
until he/she has connected with outpatient mental health providers.
Implementing an SPI and follow-up phone call for patients who visited
participating VA EDs for suicide-related concerns reduces suicidal
behaviors by almost half (45 percent) in the 6 months following the ED
visit.
ii
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii
Stanley, Brown, Brenner, Galfalvy, Currier, Knox,
Chaudhury, Bush, and Green 2018. Comparison of the Safety Planning
Intervention With Follow-up vs Usual Care of Suicidal Patients Treated
in the Emergency Department. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 75(9):894-900. Published online July 11, 2018.

Suicide Risk Identification Process: Screening to Enhance Access to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Treatment and Care Coordination

In addition to providing suicide prevention services during the
time of crisis, VA provides proactive methods for identifying
individuals at high risk for suicide. VA has implemented a standardized
suicide risk screening and assessment process, providing Veterans with
a high standard in preventive care. This process, known as the Suicide
Risk Identification Strategy (Suicide Risk ID), was introduced in May
2018. The Suicide Risk ID is for all Veterans receiving VA care. The
strategy is comprised of three components and implements population-
based mental health screening for those with unrecognized risk
(universal screening), for those who may be at risk (selected
screening), and for those at elevated risk (indicated screening). The
components include standardized primary and secondary screens specific
to risk of suicide and a comprehensive suicide risk evaluation for
Veterans with a positive secondary screen. Screenings occur at every ED
and urgent care visit across VA. For Veterans presenting for other VHA
services, VA has setting-specific guidance for screening and
assessment.
The Suicide Risk ID integrates the recently published (2019) VA/DoD
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Assessment and Management of
Patients at Risk for Suicide (CPG). CPG is an update to the 2013
guideline and outlines five recommendations on screening and
evaluation; the Suicide Risk ID uses part of the CPG's recommendations,
including comprehensive screening, specifically:

The use of a validated screening tool for universal
screening to identify individuals at risk for suicide-related behavior;

The use of the Patient Health Questionnaire-item 9, and

An assessment of risk factors as part of a comprehensive
evaluation of suicide risk.

From October 1, 2018, through December 4, 2019, more than 4.1
million Veterans have received a standardized risk screening.

Same Day Access: Getting to Care when Care is Needed

A critical part of suicide prevention is ensuring same day access
to mental health services. VA launched the My VA Access Initiative in
2016. This initiative provides same day access to primary care and
mental health services. In mental health care clinics, the number of
same-day scheduled appointments increased from 796,242 in Fiscal Year
2017 to 824,276 in Fiscal Year 2018. The percentage of new patients
with same-day appointments increased from 29.5 percent (FY 2017) to
33.2 percent (FY 2018).

Suicide Prevention in Primary Care: Reaching Veterans through Early
Identification

VA's Primary Care Mental Health Integration (PCMHI) is an
initiative that provides collaborative care with embedded mental health
providers within primary care clinics and collaborative care
management. Through PCMHI, primary care providers are critical partners
in VA suicide prevention strategies. The PCMHI model provides open
access to Veterans, as well as mental health consultative advice to
Primary Care staff, assessment, and brief interventions in a stepped
approach within the Veteran's local health care clinic. Early
identification, accurate diagnosis, and effective treatment of mental
health conditions improves the chances for recovery.
As a result, VA primary care providers screen Veterans for
depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), problematic alcohol
use, and difficulties related to military sexual trauma. It also
provides an opportunity to deliver mental health services to those who
may otherwise not seek them and identify, prevent, and treat mental
health conditions at the earliest opportunity. Making mental health
care a routine part of primary care helps reduce stigma and provides
the right intensity of care to the Veteran as quickly as possible.

Suicide Prevention and Care Coordination through Outpatient Mental
Health Services

Each Veteran receiving ongoing VA specialty mental health care is
assigned a Mental Health Treatment Coordinator (MHTC) who ensures
continuity of care and provides the Veteran with a consistent and
reliable point of contact, especially during times of care transitions.
The MHTC serves as a clinical resource for the Veteran and staff,
generally as part of the Veteran's assigned mental health care team.
In addition, VA facilities throughout the country are utilizing
teams to promote Veteran-centered, coordinated care to support
recovery. One model for this team-based care is the Behavioral Health
Interdisciplinary Program (BHIP), which coordinates collaborative,
evidence-based, Veteran-centered care by an interdisciplinary team of
providers and clerical staff in outpatient mental health clinics at all
VAMCs. BHIP is guided by the evidence-based Collaborative Care Model,
which focuses on six core elements: providing organizational and
leadership support, anticipating care needs through process redesign,
enhancing Veteran self-management skills, offering decision support for
providers, managing clinical information about Veterans, and accessing
support for Veterans in the community. Through its emphasis on team
building, communication, and coordination, BHIP is demonstrating a
meaningful, positive impact on patient care and teamwork--including
improved staff relationships, job satisfaction, and Veteran access to
care. Early data show that, compared to non-BHIP patients, patients who
had depression, PTSD, and serious mental illness, who were seen by BHIP
teams, were more likely to engage in three treatments over 6 weeks.

Suicide Prevention and Care Coordination Related to Inpatient and
Residential Services

VA's most intensive services for mental health and suicide
prevention are delivered through residential treatment and inpatient
mental health programs, either the Mental Health Residential
Rehabilitation Treatment Programs (MH RRTP) or the Domiciliary Care
Program, which is VA's oldest program--established in 1865, at the
National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers. Today, MH RRTPs provide
intensive specialty treatment for mental health and Substance Use
Disorders, as well as for co-occurring medical needs, homelessness, and
unemployment. MH RRTPs are staffed 24 hours a day, 7 days per week, and
provide access to both professional and peer support services. MH RRTPs
identify and address Veterans' goals for rehabilitation, recovery,
health maintenance, quality of life, and community integration. VA
provides inpatient mental health care for Veterans at risk of harming
themselves or others, or who require hospitalization to stabilize their
condition and to facilitate recovery. Nationwide, 113 VA facilities
offer acute inpatient psychiatry programs, and in Fiscal Year 2018,
those programs served approximately 57,000 Veterans.
VA has several policies and guidance that require care
coordination, and a clinical care team member follows up or provides
caring communications across all VA medical facilities for Veterans
after an inpatient mental health stay or hospitalization for suicide
related concerns. According to VHA policies for post-discharge follow-
up and enhanced care for patients at high risk of suicide, the type and
frequency of the contact varies depending on inpatient stay setting
(residential vs. inpatient mental health), type of discharge (regular
or against medical advice), and the severity of suicide risk
presentation. Follow-up contact may include phone calls, letters, and
clinical visits and can be as soon as 24 hours or 7 days post-
discharge, with potential subsequent clinical contacts weekly for the
next 30 days or longer.

Mental Health Safety and Environment of Care on VA Campuses

Providing a safe environment of care is a critical part of suicide
prevention. In a 2018 study, Williams and Schmaltz completed a study of
Joint Commission Accredited Hospitals who voluntarily reported 505
suicide deaths to The Joint Commission between 2010 and 2016, including
VHA. The data in The Joint Commission's possession may not reflect the
actual occurrence of suicides in all U.S. hospitals; however, data
collected included inpatient suicides, suicides in emergency
departments, suicides that occurred post-discharge, and suicides in
which the victim may not have been directly receiving treatment at the
hospital. Based on this report, VA has been able to reduce the number
of in-hospital suicides from 4.2 per 100,000 admissions to 0.74 per
100,000 admissions on mental health units, an 82.4-percent reduction,
suggesting that well-designed quality improvement and safety
initiatives can lead to a reduction in the occurrence of these tragic
events.
iii
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii
Williams SC, Schmaltz SP, Castro GM, Baker DW, 2018.
Incidence and Method of Suicide in Hospitals in the United States.
https://www.jointcommissionjournal.com/article/S1553-7250(18)30253-8/
fulltext.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One example of VA's safety initiatives is the requirement that each
VAMC review its inpatient mental health units' environment every 6
months by using the Mental Health Environment of Care Checklist. To
perform this task, facilities are expected to create Interdisciplinary
Safety Inspection Teams (ISIT). ISITs are expected to provide their
subject matter expertise on the environmental risks that facilities may
face regarding suicide. ISITs use a risk assessment matrix to help
determine the actions that need to be taken to improve facilities'
mental health environments in accordance with Joint Commission
Standards. In May 2019, VHA mandated that all VAMCs with an acute
mental health unit install door top alarms. Door top alarms installed
on swinging corridor doors of patient rooms in VA mental health
inpatient units have proven to be effective in providing timely
notification to staff and preventing completion of suicide attempts. As
of August 2019, approximately 50 percent of VHA inpatient mental health
facilities reported having door top alarms installed. Projects are
underway to install door top alarms on the remainder of the inpatient
mental health units, with a targeted completion date of March 1, 2020.
As part of its efforts to ensure all facilities are safe for both
Veterans and employees, VA also requires all MH RRTPs to ``stand down''
or suspend clinical operations for 1 day each year to focus on safety,
security, and quality of care. MH RRTP clinicians are required to
undergo documented annual competency reviews for assessing risk for
suicide. MH RRTPs are required to complete Annual Safety and Security
Assessments of their environments before each Stand Down. SPCs are
required to participate in both the Stand Down and the pre-Stand Down
assessment of facility environments to assist with addressing suicide
prevention content.

Responding to On-Campus Suicidal Behavior

VHA policy requires that all VHA employees must complete their
required suicide risk and intervention training module (either Suicide
Risk Management Training for Clinicians or Signs, Ask, Validate, and
Encourage and Expedite (S.A.V.E.) training for non-clinicians) and, for
providers/clinicians, pass the post-module test within 90 days of
entering their position. VHA has also developed a Suicide Risk
Management Training for registered nurses that may be assigned annually
as an alternative training option to Suicide Risk Management Training
for Clinicians, understanding that the roles may be different in some
cases. Local facilities may assign training to appropriate staff and
track this training through the Talent Management System. VA supports
employees as well as external community providers by providing the VA
Suicide Risk Management Consultation Program to consult on a specific
case or talk about suicide risk management strategies more generally.
VA Police Officers receive specialized training at the VA Law
Enforcement Training Center (LETC). LETC is accredited by the Federal
Law Enforcement Training Accreditation Board, which emphasizes the use
of non-physical techniques and is recognized as meeting the highest
standards in Federal law enforcement training. All VA Police Officers
go through a 10-week basic course at LETC. They receive 30 hours of
training specific to de-escalation and conflict management, with a
special focus on suicide awareness and prevention. Officers also
complete nearly 24 hours of de-escalation training in which they learn
skills to affect positive outcomes in real-life scenarios.
Collaboration between law enforcement and health care professionals
is crucial when responding to violent incidents, police calls for
service in the field, or Veterans in suicidal crisis. VA Police and all
VA employees work every day to recognize Veterans who may be in crisis
and expedite getting them the help they need. Their diligence and
specialized training have saved lives across the country on VA campuses
when they have interrupted or responded quickly to Veterans in suicidal
crisis. VA began tracking on-campus suicidal behavior in October 2017;
as of January 2020, there have been a total of 566 incidents of
suicidal attempts, of which 49 were suicide deaths.

Community Prevention Strategies

Communication Strategies

Preventing suicide among all of the Nation's 20 million Veterans
cannot be the sole responsibility of VA; it requires a nation-wide
effort. Suicide prevention requires a combination of programming and
the implementation of strategies and initiatives at the universal,
selective, and indicated levels. This ``All-Some-Few'' strategic
framework allows VA to design effective programs and interventions
appropriate for each group's level of risk. Not all Veterans at risk
for suicide will present with a mental health diagnosis, and the
strategies below employ a variety of tactics to reach all Veterans,
which may include:

Universal strategies that aim to reach all Veterans in
the United States. These include public awareness and education
campaigns about the availability of mental health and suicide
prevention resources for Veterans, promoting responsible coverage of
suicide by the news media, and creating barriers or limiting access to
hotspots for suicide, such as bridges and train tracks;

Selective strategies are intended for some Veterans who
fall into subgroups that may be at increased risk for suicidal
behaviors. These include outreach targeted to women Veterans or
Veterans with substance use disorders, gatekeeper training for
intermediaries who may be able to identify Veterans at high-risk, and
programs for Veterans who have recently transitioned from military
service; and

Indicated strategies designed for the relatively few
individual Veterans identified as having a high risk for suicidal
behaviors, including some who have made a suicide attempt.

Guided by this framework and the National Strategy, VA is creating
and executing a targeted communications strategy to reach a wide
variety of audiences. VA uses an integrated mix of outreach and
communications strategies to reach audiences. VA relies on proven
tactics to achieve broad exposure and outreach while also connecting
with hard-to-reach targeted populations. Our target audiences include,
but are not limited to, women Veterans; male Veterans age 18-34; former
Servicemembers; men age 55 and older; Veterans' loved ones, friends,
and family; organizations that regularly interact with Veterans where
they live and thrive; and the media and entertainment industry, who
have the ability to shape the public's understanding of suicide,
promote help-seeking behaviors, and reduce suicide contagion among
vulnerable individuals.
VA proactively engages others to help share our messages and
content, including Public Service Announcements (PSA) and educational
videos. For example, in collaboration with Johnson & Johnson, VA
released through social media a PSA titled ``No Veteran Left Behind,''
featuring Tom Hanks. VA continues to use the #BeThere Campaign to raise
awareness about mental health and suicide prevention and educate
Veterans, their families, and communities about the suicide prevention
resources available to them. During Suicide Prevention Month 2019, VA's
#BeThere campaign reminded audiences that everyone has a role to play
in preventing Veteran suicide. It also emphasized that even small
actions of support can make a big difference for someone going through
a challenging time and can ultimately help save a life. Through
shareable content and graphics, VA reached over 200 entities through a
news bulletin and quarterly newsletter emails. In collaboration with
Twitter, a custom icon--an orange awareness ribbon--was linked to the
#BeThere hashtag in tweets. This positioned Veterans as part of the
global Twitter conversation about Suicide Prevention Month. Veteran-
specific posts that used the #BeThere hashtag had almost 84 million
potential impressions.
We are leveraging new technologies and working with others on
social media events while continuing our digital outreach through
online advertising. VA also utilizes its Make the Connection resource
(www.MakeTheConnection.net) to highlight Veterans' true and inspiring
stories of mental health recovery, connecting Veterans and their family
members with local VA and community mental health resources. Over 600
videos from Veterans of all eras, genders, and backgrounds are at the
heart of the Make the Connection campaign. The resource was founded to
encourage Veterans and their families to seek mental health services
(if necessary), educate Veterans and their families about the signs and
symptoms of mental health issues, and promote help-seeking behavior in
Veterans and the general public. Finally, VA continues to rely on
Veterans Service Organizations, non-profit organizations, and private
companies to help us spread the word through their person-to-person and
online networks.

Working with Communities

VA is working with Federal partners, as well as State and local
governments, to implement the National Strategy to reach all Veterans
through community prevention. Community Prevention focuses on
``upstream strategies'' to address social determinants of health
outside the VHA health care system to promote early awareness and
prevention prior to times of crisis, while also expanding collaboration
and coordination of services across all Veterans, families, non-VHA
health care systems, other community partners, and VA. In March 2018,
VA, in collaboration with the Department of Health and Human Services,
introduced the Mayor's Challenge with a community-level focus, and in
2019, debuted the Governor's Challenge to take those efforts in Veteran
suicide prevention to the State level. The Mayor's and Governor's
Challenges promote VA's suicide prevention efforts by working with 7
Governors (from Arizona, Colorado, Kansas, Montana, New Hampshire,
Texas, and Virginia) and 24 local governments; locations were chosen
based on Veteran population data, suicide prevalence rates, and
capacity of the city or State to develop plans to prevent Veteran
suicide, again with a focus on all Veterans at risk of suicide, not
just those who engage with VA. We will be expanding to 28 additional
states in Fiscal Year 2020 with a goal of engaging all 50 states and
the territories by the end of Fiscal Year 2022.
In addition to the Challenges, VA is developing models of
community-based approaches for suicide prevention, including a pilot in
Veterans Integrated Service Network 23, focused on community coalition-
building and ``Together with Veterans,'' a VA program focused on
community coalition-building specifically in rural settings. The goal
of ``Together with Veterans'' is to build and sustain local capacity to
implement multiple coordinated suicide prevention strategies, following
a science-based implementation toolkit. As part of these strategies,
technical assistance is available to provide data reporting,
evaluation, and consultation in support of local communities
implementation of strategic plans to address Veteran suicide.
In addition to the proactive work by VA Police on campus, VA Police
are actively involved in training other first responders in the
community in life saving strategies. The VA National First Responder
Outreach and Training Program is an innovative, common-sense, and cost-
effective public health approach that addresses the Veteran community,
spefically prioritizing Veteran suicide. At its foundation, the program
utilizes community outreach engagements to facilitate collaboration
with emergency first responders at the local, State, and Federal
levels. To date, this program has trained over 3,500 community
emergency first responders across the country. The feedback from the
first responder community has been resoundingly positive, noting that
the information is relevant and presented in a way that has direct
practical application.

Partnerships with Organizations for Suicide Prevention

The National Strategy is a call to action to every community,
organization, and system interested in preventing Veteran suicide to
help do this work where we cannot. For this reason, VA is leveraging a
network of more than 60 partners in the public, private, and non-profit
sectors to help us reach Veterans, and our network is growing weekly.
For example, VA and PsychArmor Institute have a non-monetary
partnership focused on creating online educational content that
advances health initiatives to better serve Veterans. Our partnership
with PsychArmor Institute resulted in the development of the free,
online S.A.V.E. training course that enables those who interact with
Veterans to identify signs that might indicate a Veteran is in crisis
and how to safely respond to and support a Veteran to facilitate care
and intervention. Since its launch in May 2018, S.A.V.E. training has
been viewed more than 18,000 times through PsychArmor's internal and
social media system and 385 times on PsychArmor's YouTube channel.

VA and DoD Veteran Suicide Data Tracking and Reporting

While implementing both clinical and community strategies for
suicide prevention, VA aims to provide the most accurate report on the
status of Veteran suicide in the Nation. Each year, VA and DoD produce
separate annual reports on Veteran and current Servicemember suicide
mortality, respectively. VA and DoD partner in preventing suicide for
all current and former Servicemembers, but do not use the same data
sources for suicide surveillance reporting, with VA reporting on
Veterans and former Servicemembers, and DoD reporting on current
Servicemembers. This allows VA's report to focus on former
Servicemembers who most closely meet the official definition of Veteran
status that is used by VA and other Federal agencies. For this report,
a Veteran is defined as someone who had been activated for Federal
military service and was not currently serving. In addition, the report
includes information in a separate section on suicide among former
National Guard or Reserve members who were never federally activated.
For VA suicide surveillance reporting, VA and DoD partner to submit
a search list of all identified current and former Servicemembers to
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) National Death
Index (NDI) each fall. After processing, which can take several months,
NDI returns all potentially matching mortality information.
Additionally, internal processing and coordination occurs between VA
and DoD to identify Veteran and Servicemember deaths, finalize
mortality information, conduct statistical analyses, and interpret
results.
Due to the different data sources, DoD data on mortality among
current Servicemembers are available in a timelier fashion. DoD uses
the Armed Forces Medical Examiner System (AFMES) as its data source for
current active duty Servicemember suicide mortality information. A data
source similar to AFMES is not available to VA. VA relies on national
reporting to identify dates and causes of death per State death
certificates, through NDI, which are reported up through local medical
examiners and coroners to respective states and territories.

VA 2019 National Veteran Suicide Prevention Annual Report

The 2019 National Veteran Suicide Prevention Annual Report is VA's
most recent analysis of Veteran suicide data from 2005 to 2017. It
reflects the most current national data available through CDC's 2017
NDI.
One of the key ways in which this year's report is different is
that it sets Veteran suicide in the broader context of suicide deaths
in America and the complex cultural context of suicide. From the
report, we know the average number of suicides per day among U.S.
adults rose from 86.6 in 2005 to 124.4 in 2017. These numbers included
15.9 Veteran suicides per day in 2005 and 16.8 in 2017. The report
highlights suicide as a national problem affecting Veterans and non-
Veterans, and VA calls upon all Americans to come together to take
actions to prevent suicide.
The data presented in the report are an integral part of VA's
comprehensive public health strategy and enables VA to use tailored
suicide prevention initiatives to reach various Veteran populations.
The report includes a section on key initiatives that have been
developed since 2017 to reach all Veterans. The report is designed for
action based upon a stratification with the public health
classification of universal (all), selective (some), and indicated
(few) population framework as noted in the National Strategy.
When we look at our data, there are indicators that trends among
Veterans in VA care that offer anchors of hope upon which we can
continue to build. For example, suicide rates among Veterans in recent
VHA care (Veterans who had a VHA health encounter in the calendar year
of interest or in the prior calendar year) with a diagnosis of
depression have decreased from 70.2 per 100,000 in 2005 to 63.4 per
100,000 in 2017. After adjusting for age and sex, between 2016 and
2017, the suicide rate among Veterans in recent VHA care increased by
1.3 percent while increasing by 11.8 percent among Veterans who did not
use VHA care. We have seen a notable increase in women Veterans coming
to us for care. Women are the fastest-growing Veteran group, comprising
about 9 percent of the U.S. Veteran population, and that number is
expected to rise to 15 percent by 2035. Although women Veteran suicide
counts and rates decreased from 2015 to 2016 and did not increase for
women Veterans in VHA care between 2016 and 2017, women Veterans are
still more likely to die by suicide than non-Veteran women. These data
underscore the importance of our programs for this population. VA is
working to tailor services to meet their unique needs and has put a
national network of Women's Mental Health Champions in place to share
information, facilitate consultations, and develop local resources in
support of gender-sensitive mental health care. Efforts are already
underway to better understand this population and other groups that are
at elevated risk, such as never federally activated Guard and Reserve
members, recently separated Veterans, and former Servicemembers with
Other Than Honorable (OTH) discharges.
We need to consider the social determinants of health, defined
broadly as well-being (economic disparities, homelessness, and social
isolation), and how these issues, may create a context that markedly
increases someone's risk of suicide. Veterans who are employed, have a
stable place to live, and are affiliated with a community of Veterans
and others for support are more likely to be optimistic about their
future. While there is still much to learn, there are some things that
we know for sure: suicide is preventable, treatment works, and there is
hope.

Update Progress and Challenges Toward Addressing VA OIG Recommendations

In collaboration with the Office of Security and Law Enforcement, a
staffing model was developed. The new staffing model is currently under
review. In addition, VHA has modernized the position descriptions for
all of the Police Chiefs in the field. This is part of a larger
workforce modernization effort underway for the VA Police force. This
was a major accomplishment as it helps ensure our Police Chiefs are
paid equitably. VA is in the process of continuing to develop
modernized positions for all of our law enforcement professionals. The
intent of the modernized positions is to create uniformity in the way
work is distributed and carried out, thereby raising the technical
standard of each position to ensure the best services are provided to
our Veterans.

Conclusion

On March 5, 2019, EO 13861, National Roadmap to Empower Veterans
and End Suicide, was signed to improve the quality of life of our
Nation's Veterans and develop a national public health roadmap to lower
the Veteran suicide rate. EO 13861 mandated the establishment of the
Veteran Wellness, Empowerment, and Suicide Prevention Task Force to
develop the President's Roadmap to Empower Veterans and End a National
Tragedy of Suicide and the development of a legislative proposal to
establish a program for making grants to local communities to enable
them to increase their capacity to collaborate with each other to
integrate service delivery to Veterans and to coordinate resources for
Veterans. The focus of these efforts is to provide Veterans at risk of
suicide support services, such as employment, health, housing,
education, social connection, and to develop a national research
strategy for the prevention of Veteran suicide.
This EO implementation will further VA's efforts to collaborate
with partners and communities nationwide to use the best available
information and practices to support all Veterans, whether or not they
are engaging with VA. This EO, in addition to VA's National Strategy,
further advances the public health approach to suicide prevention by
leveraging synergies and clearly identifying best practices across the
Federal Government that can be used to save Veterans' lives.
VA's goal is to meet Veterans where they live, work, and thrive to
ensure they can achieve their goals, teaching them skills, connecting
them to resources, and providing the care they need along the way.
Through open access, community-based and mobile Vet Centers, app-based
care, tele-mental health, more than 400 Suicide Prevention
Coordinators, and more, VA is providing care to Veterans when and how
they need it. We want to empower and energize communities to do the
same for Veterans who do not use VA services. We are committed to
advancing our outreach, prevention, empowerment, and treatment efforts,
to further restore the trust of our Veterans every day and continue to
improve access to care. Our objective is to give our Nation's Veterans
the top-quality experience and care they have earned and deserve. We
appreciate this Committee's continued support and encouragement as we
identify challenges and create innovative solutions to address the
needs of Veterans.
This concludes my testimony. I am prepared to answer any questions
you may have.
Thank you.
______

Prepared Statement of Julie Kroviak

Chairman Takano, Ranking Member Roe, and members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Office of Inspector
General's (OIG's) oversight of the mental health care and services
provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) at Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) facilities. The mission of the OIG is to oversee
the efficiency and effectiveness of VA's programs and operations
through independent audits, inspections, evaluations, reviews, and
investigations. For many years, the OIG has conducted reviews and
inspections that have identified concerns with veterans' access to
quality health care, including mental health care, provided at VHA
facilities. Recent reports have identified ongoing concerns with the
timeliness and delivery of quality mental health care, the challenges
associated with the coordination of that care, the proactive measures
that could reduce suicides, and the physical environment in which
veterans receive mental health care.
Although veterans are a tremendously diverse community, they have a
culture, set of experiences, and sense of duty associated with military
service that can differ dramatically from civilians. Some veteran
experiences can contribute to and challenge the management of often
complex mental health needs. According to research, veterans experience
mental health and substance abuse disorders, posttraumatic stress, and
traumatic brain injury at rates disproportionately high when compared
to their civilian counterparts.\1\ This underscores the magnitude of
responsibility VHA assumes in supporting the needs of this population.
Responding effectively to their needs requires a holistic approach
focused on each veteran's successful reintegration into civilian life.
A truly integrated approach, while veteran-centric in design, can be
effective only if families, caregivers, healthcare providers, and
communities work together to support veterans' whole health. Perhaps
most urgent is the need to mitigate the risk of suicide. VHA must
continue to focus attention on outreach efforts that educate and
provide all stakeholders with evidence-based tools that not only help
identify high-risk veterans, but also encourage those veterans to
engage in the care they need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Terri Tanielian et al., ``Invisible Wounds: Mental Health and
Cognitive Care Needs of America's Returning Veterans,'' (Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Corporation, 2008), https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/
RB9336.html; National Alliance on Mental Illness, ``You Are Not
Alone,'' https://nami.org/mhstats, accessed on January 27, 2020.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VHA has implemented several initiatives aimed at reducing the
stigma surrounding mental health conditions, providing access to mental
health services, and promoting public awareness of suicide. The focus
on suicide prevention has included appointing a National Suicide
Prevention Coordinator, establishing the Veterans Crisis Line,
developing a patient record system to identify high-risk patients, and
creating suicide prevention programs in each facility. In addition, VHA
expanded facility suicide prevention coordinator roles, requiring them
to participate in community outreach activities.
VHA's efforts in suicide prevention, including the Veterans Crisis
Line, have been largely directed at crisis intervention. According to
the medical literature, the opportunity for intervention between the
decision to complete suicide and the attempt itself is extremely
narrow, as short as 1 hour in over 70 percent of all suicide
attempts.\2\ Additionally, 69 percent of veteran suicide deaths are by
the more likely lethal means of firearms, compared to 48 percent of
civilian suicide deaths.\3\ To significantly reduce suicide and improve
the lives of veterans, prompt and effective behavioral health treatment
must be paired with a wide range of additional approaches. For example,
VA has promoted firearm safety by urging veterans to secure guns with
locks, removing firing pins, or storing firearms where they are not
easily and quickly accessed. The VA Suicide Prevention Program's Acting
Director was recently quoted as saying, ``The safety measures can slow
a person's ability to follow through on suicidal thoughts and preempt
an irrevocable choice.'' \4\ It is being presented as just one element
of a plan, in the hope that clinicians can include this topic as an
aspect of self-care. Lethal-means safety counseling offers clinicians
an evidence-based opportunity to erect a barrier to suicidal
impulsivity. VHA has several current projects that address lethal-means
safety, but each project requires additional resources to develop their
concepts and evaluate effectiveness in the veteran community. VHA must
take every opportunity--from the time of a servicemembers' transition
to the community and throughout the veterans' life--to identify and
address behavioral health conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ E.A. Deisenhammer et al., ``The Duration of the Suicidal
Process: How Much Time Is Left for Intervention Between Consideration
and Accomplishment of a Suicide Attempt?'' Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 70(1), 19-24.
\3\ Department of Veterans Affairs, ``VA National Suicide Data
Report 2005-2016,'' VA Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention,
September 2018.
\4\ Martin Kuz, ``Can Veterans Lead the Way on Preventing
Suicide,'' Christian Science Monitor, December 31, 2019, https://
www.csmonitor.com/USA/Military/2019/1231/Can-veterans-lead-the-way-on-
preventing-suicide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite VHA's recent efforts, there are significant challenges
ahead. The OIG has published numerous reports in recent years that
detail veterans' experiences with obstacles accessing and receiving
high-quality mental health care within VHA. Tragic events such as
suicides are the most publicized and typically understood to be the
result of unrecognized, untreated, or undertreated mental health
disorders. The OIG's focus, however, has also included the timely care
and management of the wide variety of mental health needs for which
veterans seek care. Report recommendations are meant to assist VHA in
its efforts to be responsive at all levels to addressing the complex
mental health care needs of veterans. The goal, ultimately, is to
improve veterans' quality of life (as well as the lives of their
families and caregivers) and to reduce the rate of veteran suicide.
Recognizing the importance of suicide prevention as VA's--and this
Committee's--top clinical priority, the OIG has focused significant
resources on conducting oversight of VHA's mental health treatment
programs and other suicide prevention efforts.\5\ This statement
focuses on some of the more recent OIG reviews highlighting
opportunities where VHA can strengthen its efforts to improve the
quality and coordination of care as well as the environment in which
veterans receive that care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Department of Veterans Affairs, ``The VA is Making Real
Progress on Suicide Prevention for Veterans,'' January 14, 2019,
https://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel/includes/viewPDF.cfm?id=5177; House
Veterans Affairs Committee, ``Chairman Takano Announces New Compromise
on Legislation to Address Veteran Suicide,'' December 3, 2019, https:/
veterans.house.gov/news/press-releases/_chairman-takano-announces-new-
compromise-on-legislation-to-address-veteran-suicide.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DEFICIENCIES IN VHA MENTAL HEALTH COORDINATION OF CARE

The OIG has reviewed a number of reported suicides and mental
healthcare-related concerns that occurred on VA campuses. These
involved veterans who were receiving, seeking, or may have needed
mental health care from VHA providers. These reviews found deficiencies
in care delivery that resulted in negative outcomes for patients
experiencing a mental health crisis. The OIG's findings in this area
can be categorized as deficiencies in coordination of care in the
following contexts:

Within a mental health treatment team

With non-mental health providers

During the discharge process

By care providers with the patients or their family/
surrogate

The OIG found inadequate coordination of care to be an underlying
theme in every one of its recently conducted reviews. Relevant examples
from these reports are discussed below.

Coordination of Care Within a Mental Health Treatment Team

Typically, a mental health treatment team is multidisciplinary and
may involve a psychiatrist, a psychologist, mental health nurses,
mental health social workers, mental health clinical pharmacists, and
suicide prevention coordinators. Coordination within the team is vital
to provide the patient with synchronized and complementary services.
Failures in communication could result in conflicting information or
gaps in care that may result in harm to the patient. The following
reports involve deficiencies in coordination of care within a mental
health team.

Alleged Deficiencies in Mental Health Care Prior to a Death by Suicide
at the VA San Diego Healthcare System

The OIG conducted a healthcare inspection in response to
allegations that staff failed to provide mental health care to a
patient who subsequently died by suicide.\6\ The OIG did not
substantiate that the system failed to provide mental health care when
the patient sought help. However, the OIG team found deficits in the
decisionmaking process to deactivate a patient's High Risk for Suicide
Patient Record Flag (PRF).\7\ The assigned suicide prevention
coordinator chose to deactivate the patient's PRF in spring 2018
without consulting the treatment team. In addition, the patient did not
have any scheduled future appointments and had not been engaged in any
mental health services for more than 2 months. VHA does not have
clearly delineated requirements for the decisionmaking process to
deactivate the High Risk for Suicide PRF; however, the then Executive
Director of the Suicide Prevention Program told the OIG that there is
an expectation that the suicide prevention coordinator will consult
with the patient's treatment team, provide evidence of decreased
suicide risk factors, and document rationale for clinical judgment
about mental health conditions and behaviors. The OIG recommended the
Under Secretary for Health expedite the development of a National
Suicide Prevention Program policy and procedure to delineate the
deactivation process of High Risk for Suicide PRFs and monitor
compliance.\8\ The VHA action plan projected completion date was
December 2019. OIG staff will monitor VA's progress until the proposed
action is complete.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Alleged Deficiencies in Mental Health Care Prior to a Death by
Suicide at the VA San Diego Healthcare System, California, August 7,
2019.
\7\ VHA established the High Risk for Suicide Patient Record Flag
to alert staff to patients with immediate clinical safety concerns and
is therefore only activated for those patients assessed at high risk
for suicide and only for the duration of the increased risk. The
suicide prevention coordinator works with the patient's clinicians to
determine if the flag is needed, monitors its continued application,
and deactivates the flag when the patient no longer has an elevated
risk.
\8\ The recommendations directed to the Under Secretary for Health
are submitted to the Executive in Charge, who has the authority to
perform those functions and duties.
\9\ VA provides implementation plans and determines their projected
dates for implementation when providing comments on OIG draft reports.
At quarterly intervals starting 90 days after report issuance, OIG
staff requests the VA office provide an accounting of actions taken to
implement open recommendations, as well as whether the VA office
believes a recommendation may be closed. After receiving the VA
office's report, OIG staff reviews the materials and provides a final
determination whether any recommendations have been satisfactorily
implemented and can be closed. The decision to close a recommendation
is based on a review of VA's supporting documentation or independent
information obtained by OIG that indicates the corrective action has
occurred and is sustained or progressed enough to show recommendation
implementation.

The September 2018 Review of Mental Health Care Provided Prior to a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Veteran's Death by Suicide in the Minneapolis VA Health Care System

In September 2018, the OIG reported on the care of a patient who
was admitted to the inpatient mental health unit and subsequently died
from a self-inflicted gunshot wound less than 24 hours after
discharge.\10\ The OIG determined that the inpatient interdisciplinary
treatment team failed to appropriately coordinate with the patient's
outpatient treatment team. Specifically, inpatient mental health staff
did not identify an outpatient prescriber and schedule an outpatient
medication management follow-up appointment. Additionally, the system's
suicide prevention coordinator did not collaborate with the inpatient
interdisciplinary treatment team during admission. The OIG was unable
to determine that identified deficits, alone or in combination, were a
causal factor in the patient's death. However, the OIG did make
recommendations related to interdisciplinary team collaboration, which
are now closed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Review of Mental Health Care Provided Prior to a Veteran's
Death by Suicide, Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Minnesota,
September 25, 2018.

Review of Two Mental Health Patients Who Died by Suicide at the William
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital in Madison, Wisconsin

The review team assessed the care of a patient who committed
suicide less than 48 hours after being discharged from the VA
facility.\11\ The OIG found that the mental health clinical pharmacists
informally collaborated with facility psychiatrists but did not
appropriately refer patients with complex mental health issues whose
treatment was beyond the pharmacists' scope of practice. Specifically,
mental health clinical pharmacists acted outside of their scope of
practice in changing diagnoses and providing psychotherapy. The
collaborations were insufficient to meet the requirements of mental
health clinical pharmacists' scope of practice. Their independent
decisionmaking without sufficient psychiatrist collaboration or
supervision may have contributed to deficient mental health care. The
OIG also identified similar deficiencies by a mental health clinical
pharmacist in the care of another patient that died by suicide 13
months before the first patient's death. The OIG made recommendations
related to prescribing practices, including the use of collaborative
agreements, the assignment of prescribers for patients with complex
mental health needs, and strengthening mental health clinical
pharmacists' supervision processes. Based on a review of VA's
corrective actions, the OIG has closed all report recommendations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Review of Two Mental Health Patients Who Died by Suicide,
William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin,
August 1, 2018.

Review of Mental Health Clinical Pharmacists in Veterans Health
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Administration Facilities

The seriousness of the risks identified in the prior report led the
OIG to initiate a broader review of clinical pharmacists' practice in
mental health outpatient care settings. The OIG assessed VHA
facilities' use of clinical pharmacists who work under a scope of
practice in a mental health outpatient care setting.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Review of Mental Health Clinical Pharmacists in Veterans
Health Administration Facilities, June 27, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Clinical pharmacists have advanced specialized education and
training that allows them to provide comprehensive medication
management that includes resolving patient medication nonadherence and
assisting patients in achieving medication-related therapeutic goals.
Clinical pharmacists are not licensed independent practitioners and
therefore must collaborate with licensed independent practitioners who
have prescriptive authority, as outlined in a collaborative practice
agreement. Each clinical pharmacist requests the types of services he
or she will provide, which are reviewed and recommended by the relevant
facility's service chiefs and executive committee of the medical staff,
and then approved by the medical facility director.
The role of clinical pharmacists with a scope of practice in the
mental health specialty practice area has been a focus of expansion for
VHA in recent years. As VHA expands and increases its use of mental
health clinical pharmacists, it is imperative that there are
collaborating agreements in place and that scopes of practice clearly
delineate duties and are standardized to maximize patient safety.
The OIG's review found that mental health clinical pharmacists'
independence levels were not clearly identified by staff or facilities'
bylaws. Guidance provided conflicting instructions regarding the
requirements for collaborating agreements and lacked provisions for
oversight by a specific physician. Facilities' scopes of practice were
inconsistent in describing delegated duties that were specific to
mental health. VHA policy also was insufficient to ensure the chief of
mental health conducts reviews and endorses mental health clinical
pharmacists' scopes of practice. Referral processes were not clear or
standardized regarding how diagnoses were conveyed to mental health
clinical pharmacists or whether involvement of a licensed independent
practitioner with prescriptive authority was considered to determine
appropriateness for patients' referrals. VHA policy does not require a
defined process to consider a patient's clinical complexity. Policies
lacked guidance on instructing mental health clinical pharmacists on
when or how to refer patients to a higher level of care. The OIG made
nine recommendations to the VHA Under Secretary for Health related to
autonomy, collaborating agreements, working with licensed independent
practitioners with prescribing authority, scopes of practice, and
referrals. Recommendations are to be completed no later than May 2020,
according to VHA action plans. OIG staff will monitor VA's progress
until all proposed actions are complete.

Coordination of Care with Non-Mental Health Providers

Patients' mental health care must be managed together with any
other medical conditions. Patients with complex medical histories
require coordination between mental health and non-mental health care
providers. Failures in communication may result in harm resulting from
medication side effects or interactions or worsening of the underlying
medical conditions. The following OIG reports found issues with the
coordination of care between mental health and non-mental health care
providers.

The January 2020 Report Deficiencies in Care Coordination and Facility
Response to Another Patient Suicide in Minneapolis

In January 2020, the OIG released a healthcare inspection report
assessing care coordination for a patient who died by suicide while
admitted to an inpatient medicine unit at the facility.\13\ The patient
was assessed as at a heightened but not imminent risk for suicide.
Facility emergency department staff failed to report the patient's
suicidal ideation to the facility's suicide prevention coordinator. Two
consulting staff members and an inpatient registered nurse completed
required suicide prevention training but failed to involve clinicians
when the patient verbalized suicidal thoughts and warning signs. Two of
the three staff documented the patient's suicidal thoughts and warning
signs in consult results notes, but the OIG did not find documentation
that the inpatient medicine resident reviewed or acted on the consult
results. The OIG made recommendations to the facility's director
related to improving emergency department staff's notification to the
suicide prevention coordinator when a patient presents with suicidal
ideation. The recommendations also called on the facility director to
ensure that inpatient consult results are acted upon by the responsible
care provider or appropriate designee. All recommendations are to be
completed no later than July 2020, according to VHA action plans. OIG
staff will monitor VA's progress until the proposed actions are
complete.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Deficiencies in Care Coordination and Facility Response to a
Patient Suicide at the Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Minnesota,
January 7, 2020.

Alleged Deficiencies in Oncology Psychosocial Distress Screening and
Root Cause Analysis Processes at a Facility in Veterans Integrated
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Service Network 15

In a December 2019 healthcare inspection report, OIG staff examined
a Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) 15 medical facility in
response to concerns identified in a June 2019 OIG healthcare
inspection.\14\ In part, this inspection evaluated the oncology service
staff's adherence to the facility's psychosocial distress screening
standard operating procedure in the care of two patients who died by
suicide. The OIG team found that facility oncology service staff
demonstrated compliance with psychosocial distress screening standard
operating procedures. However, the OIG was unable to determine if a
mental health evaluation completed prior to one of the patients'
leaving the clinic would have changed the patient's outcome. Completion
of a mental health evaluation may have identified additional risk
factors and provided greater opportunity for suicide prevention
interventions before the patient left the clinic. The OIG recommended
that the facility director conduct an evaluation of radiation oncology
clinic mental health consultation and treatment program needs and
adjust mental health provider coverage as warranted. The VHA action
plan projected completion date is May 2020. OIG staff will monitor VA's
progress until the proposed actions are complete.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Alleged Deficiencies in Oncology Psychosocial Distress
Screening and Root Cause Analysis Processes at a facility in Veterans
Integrated Service Network 15, December 11, 2019; Delay in Diagnosis
and Subsequent Suicide at a Veterans Integrated Service Network 15
Medical Facility, June 26, 2019.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coordination of Care During the Discharge Process

When patients transition between providers--whether this is due to
changes in levels of care (inpatient to outpatient) or to changes in
treatment settings (patient is moving or a provider leaving)--ethical
care demands a transfer of information about the patient (or
``handoff'') between providers to facilitate continuity of medical and
mental health care. Failure to provide such a handoff may lead to
patient harm related to interruptions in treatment. It may also result
in inappropriate repetition of previously completed testing or
inappropriate medication because of the gaps in transferred information
about previous intolerance or medication interactions. The following
reports involve issues with coordination in the discharge process.

Deficiencies in Discharge Planning for a Mental Health Inpatient Who
Transitioned to the Judicial System from a Veterans Integrated Service
Network 4 Medical Facility

An OIG team responded to allegations related to the discharge of a
patient from an inpatient mental health unit at a VISN 4 medical
facility, and subsequent transfer to a Federal detention center where
the patient died shortly after discharge and while incarcerated.\15\
The OIG team determined that VA facility inpatient mental health staff
failed to engage in proper discharge planning and proper treatment
planning processes. The VA facility staff did not contact the receiving
care providers at the detention center to provide any clinical
information on a patient with serious chronic mental illness and severe
medical comorbidities. Specifically, the OIG team determined that
inpatient mental health staff neglected to provide clinical hand-off
information to the patient's receiving mental health providers, and to
assign a mental health treatment coordinator responsible for overall
care and discharge planning coordination. The OIG made a recommendation
to ensure the provision of a complete medical and psychiatric
diagnostic summary to receiving providers. That recommendation remains
open and the OIG will continue to follow up with the facility until it
is fully implemented.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Deficiencies in Discharge Planning for a Mental Health
Inpatient Who Transitioned to the Judicial System from a Veterans
Integrated Service Network 4 Medical Facility, July 2, 2019.

The September 2018 Review of Mental Health Care Provided Prior to a
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Veteran's Death by Suicide in Minneapolis

In addition to the deficiencies in coordination of care with
consultants and other non-mental health care providers previously
mentioned, the September 2018 report also found issues related to
discharge planning. The OIG team determined that VA's inpatient mental
health staff failed to include the patient's outpatient treatment team
in discharge planning, did not identify an outpatient prescriber, and
neglected to schedule an outpatient medication management follow-up
appointment. The OIG team noted that the system's suicide prevention
coordinator did not collaborate with the patient's interdisciplinary
treatment team during admission or participate in discharge planning.
The OIG made a recommendation to the facility director to strengthen
processes that will help ensure mental health interdisciplinary
collaboration across levels of care in treatment planning, provision of
clinical services, and discharge planning that includes medication
management, as required by VHA. Based on a review of VA's corrective
actions, the OIG has closed the recommendation.

Coordination of Care With the Patient or With the Patient's Family/
Surrogate

Patient-centered care requires that providers involve the patient
or a patient's family (or decisionmaking surrogate) in all treatment
determinations. VA requires informed consent for all treatment options
across all disciplines. Failure to coordinate treatment decisionmaking
with patients or family represents a failure of ethical care. The
following reports involving deficiencies in coordinating care with the
patient or the patient's family or surrogate.

Two Patient Suicides, a Patient Self-Harm Event, and Mental Health
Services Administrative Deficiencies at the Alaska VA Healthcare System
in Anchorage

An OIG healthcare inspection reviewed allegations of deficiencies
in quality of care and administrative processes that contributed to two
patients' deaths by suicide and one patient's self-harm at the
facility's Social and Behavioral Health Services.\16\ Patient 1, who
was assigned a High Risk for Suicide PRF, visited the same-day access
clinic and noted on the triage form experiencing high anxiety,
depression, and hopelessness, but denied suicidal thoughts or plans.
The patient left the clinic without being seen by a mental health care
provider. The OIG team substantiated that same-day access clinic staff
failed to adhere to VHA and facility missing patient policies after
this at-risk patient left without being seen. However, the OIG team was
unable to determine that facility staff's lack of timely search and
outreach to the patient directly contributed to the patient's death by
suicide approximately 1 week later. Other potential contributing
factors were unknown.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Two Patient Suicides, a Patient Self-Harm Event, and Mental
Health Services Administrative Deficiencies at the Alaska VA Healthcare
System, Anchorage, Alaska, November 19, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG team substantiated that Patients 2 and 3 did not have
appointments scheduled after visiting the same-day access clinic, as
evidenced in the lack of providers' clinically indicated date, and
return to clinic orders, respectively. Failure to schedule a follow-up
appointment with a patient having active psychiatric symptoms can place
a patient at risk for adverse outcomes. The OIG team, however, was
unable to determine that the unscheduled appointments contributed
directly to Patient 2's self-harm and Patient 3's death by suicide.
The OIG made recommendations related to the Behavioral Health
Service's policies and procedures, same-day access clinic coverage, and
scheduling processes. All 11 recommendations are currently open and OIG
staff will monitor VA's progress until the proposed actions are
complete.

Deficiencies in Discharge Planning for a Mental Health Inpatient Who
Transitioned to the Judicial System from a Veterans Integrated Service
Network 4 Medical Facility

This previously discussed report also had findings related to
inadequate coordination of care during discharge planning. The OIG team
found that the VISN 4 facility staff did not obtain consent for
voluntary admission from the patient's surrogate as required for
patients who lack decisionmaking capacity or are subject to the State
law involuntary commitment options. Additionally, facility staff did
not discuss or consider issues such as guardianship, competency,
surrogacy, or alternative placements for the patient who may have
lacked decisionmaking ability. The family was not allowed to
participate in treatment team meetings and was not informed about
discussions that took place during these meetings despite numerous
attempts to obtain information regarding the patient's treatment and
discharge plan. Finally, although facility staff knew of the patient's
pending arrest 1 day prior to the discharge, staff did not inform the
patient, nor contact the patient's family member until after the
patient had been removed from the facility and transported to the
prison. The OIG made a recommendation to the facility director to
strengthen inpatient mental health unit processes to include the
patient, family members, or surrogate in treatment and discharge
planning decisions. That recommendation remains open and the OIG will
continue to follow up with the facility until it is fully implemented.

DEFICIENCIES IN VHA'S MENTAL HEALTH ENVIRONMENT OF CARE

While most suicides occur in the community, some do occur in the
hospital, most commonly by hanging. In 2017, The Joint Commission noted
that approximately 425 suicides within healthcare settings (not just VA
facilities) had been reported over the previous 5 years.\17\ For 2012
through 2017, VHA's National Center for Patient Safety told OIG staff
there were 37 inpatient suicides at VA facilities, including two in
locked mental health units. A patient suicide in a healthcare facility
is a ``never event,'' a largely preventable tragic event of deep
concern to both the public and healthcare providers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ The Joint Commission, ``Special Report: Suicide Prevention in
Health Care Settings,'' Joint Commission Perspectives, November 2017,
37(11):1 and 3-7.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OIG Hotline Reviews Related to Mental Health Environment of Care

OIG's hotline reviews are inspections of VA facilities to review
specific allegations or concerns that have been submitted to the OIG,
or that are discovered during the course of other OIG oversight
projects.\18\ Many hotline reviews focus on vulnerabilities in the
healthcare environment and are meant to identify and report on ways
that VHA can reduce and control environmental hazards that can help
prevent accidents, injuries, and suicide for patients, staff, and
visitors. The most recent OIG report (2019) related to the environment
of care examined a patient suicide at the West Palm Beach VA Medical
Center. It highlights the facility's failure to maintain a safe
environment for patients with mental illnesses and to take adequate
steps to mitigate physical risks.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ The OIG operates a hotline that accepts any complaints,
concerns, or allegations related to VA. The hotline website can be
accessed at https://www.va.gov/oig/hotline/.
\19\  Prior OIG reports demonstrate that concerns with a safe
environment for mental health patients are not new. For example, in
2013, the OIG substantiated allegations that the leadership at the
Atlanta VA Health Care System in Decatur, Georgia, did not have
effective polices and did not properly monitor inpatients at that
mental health unit. Mismanagement of Inpatient Mental Health Care,
Atlanta VA Medical Center, Georgia, April 17, 2013.

Patient Suicide on a Locked Mental Health Unit at the West Palm Beach
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA Medical Center in Florida

In August 2019, the OIG reported on its review of the care provided
to a patient who died by suicide while in the locked mental health unit
at the West Palm Beach VA Medical Center.\20\ The inspection examined
whether there were deficient conditions, and if so, their effect. The
patient (who previously received VA outpatient treatment) was placed on
``close'' observation status after being involuntarily admitted to the
medical center's inpatient unit, requiring observation every 15
minutes. Over the stay of several days, the patient was cooperative and
engaged in activities. By day four, the patient was planned to be
discharged to visit a family member, after first returning home, and
was updated as ``low risk'' of suicide. That afternoon, the
psychiatrist told the patient that because staff had been unable to
contact the spouse, the patient's discharge would be delayed. The
patient became significantly agitated. An hour later, after declining
medication to decrease agitation, the patient was in the day room using
the telephone, denied having suicidal ideations, and hopeful of
discharge the next day. The patient was noted as being in their room
for the rest of the afternoon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Patient Suicide on a Locked Mental Health Unit at the West
Palm Beach VA Medical Center, Florida, August 22, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At 5:45 p.m., a nursing assistant documented seeing the patient,
who refused dinner due to lack of appetite. The staff reportedly did
not enter the room. At approximately 6 p.m., a fellow inpatient went to
the patient's room, found the door closed, and encountered resistance
when trying to open it. A nursing assistant was called and found the
patient unresponsive with a garment tied around the neck--the other end
of which was wedged over the top of the door. After lifesaving efforts,
the patient was declared dead at 6:37 p.m. Inpatient mental health unit
staff care for some of the most high-risk patients with serious mental
illnesses, which requires special safety measures to prevent harm.
Given the need for those measures, the Mental Health Environment of
Care Checklist (MHEOCC) was designed to help VHA facilities identify
and address environmental risks for suicide and suicide attempts for
patients in acute inpatient mental health units. It consists of
criteria applicable to all rooms on the unit, as well as specific
criteria for areas such as bedrooms, bathrooms, seclusion rooms, and
staff work stations. The checklist was implemented in 2007 and research
has associated it with a substantial decrease in the rate of inpatient
suicides.\21\ The OIG team found that while the medical center did
conduct risk assessment rounds of the unit every 6 months, per VHA
policy, the medical center was not handling other responsibilities:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Bradley Watts et al., ``Sustained Effectiveness of the Mental
Health Environment of Care Checklist to Decrease Inpatient Suicide,''
Psychiatric Services 2017, 68:4, 405-407.

The facility did not meet VHA expectations by designating
an Interdisciplinary Safety Inspection Team to identify environmental
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
hazards and develop abatement plans.

Facility leaders failed to ensure that Mental Health
Environment of Care team members and other responsible staff received
the relevant checklist training. Staff members who are permanently
assigned to or have responsibilities on the mental health unit must be
trained, including housekeepers, chaplains, outpatient providers, and
police officers.

Facility staff did not consistently identify noncompliant
or unsafe environmental conditions. Staff did not identify that
corridor doors were a risk, claiming that prior oversight inspections
did not cite the doors. While true, that does not eliminate a need for
critical thought and risk mitigation. A proper inspection team is
expected to consider hazards beyond the checklist.

The facility did not complete the waiver process for
issues such as lack of seclusion room flooring cushions and cameras to
mitigate seclusion room blind spots. The OIG found no waiver requests
from the facility on these issues.

Oversight and follow-up did not consistently occur at the
facility, VISN, and VHA central office levels.

The report also presented findings and related recommendations in
four other areas regarding clinical care, risk mitigation, unit
staffing, and leadership responsiveness.\22\ Of particular concern, the
medical center's Police Chief, Associate Director, Associate Director
for Patient Care Services, and Assistant Director told OIG staff that
they were unaware of the facility's requirement for cameras. Leaders
did not understand the risks associated with the unit's corridor doors.
One leader told OIG that the facility was going ``above and beyond'' to
prevent further incidents by counting eating utensils, which, in fact,
is a long-standing, basic safety requirement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Additionally, the OIG found (1) the patient received
reasonable screening, clinical care, and level of observation given the
circumstances, although the patient's record did lack a unifying
treatment plan with measurable goals as required; (2) risk mitigation
findings included that no documentation was found in the unit's
rounding sheets that identified the corridor doors as a risk, patient
observation rounds were not conducted and documented in a manner that
could reasonably assure patient safety, and cameras, while installed,
were nonfunctional for years; (3) unit staffing was sufficient on the
day of the suicide, but one of the nursing assistants assigned to
conduct 15-minute safety rounds also performed other duties during that
time, contrary to protocol described by the unit nurse manager; and (4)
OIG staff found that facility leaders and managers knew, or should have
known, about lapses in the unit's physical environment, staff training,
and the MHEOCC inspections. Further, there was no indication they took
steps to educate themselves on these issues or solve them, and leaders
and staff accepted noncompliance and unsafe conditions. While the OIG
team determined that the facility responded promptly after the
patient's suicide, the actions only occurred after this ``never
event.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The current Patient Safety Manager reported to facility leaders in
a group forum that some of the unit's physical environment conditions
represented an ``immediate threat to life.'' The Associate Director
reportedly cautioned the Patient Safety Manager that using the term
``immediate threat to life'' was ``strong'' and to ``be careful what
you say.''
The OIG made 11 recommendations. One recommendation was to the
Under Secretary for Health to ensure that the MHEOCC work group reviews
and ranks hazards in mental health units and monitors abatement plans
or waiver requests. Another recommendation focused on ensuring VISN-
appropriate staff comply with semiannual report reviews and follow up
on abatement of issues identified in the checklist assessment. The
other nine recommendations were directed to the facility to improve
compliance with VHA's guidelines for inspections, operations, safety,
and training.
The Under Secretary for Health, the VISN director, and the medical
center director concurred with the recommendations and provided
acceptable action plans for implementation. All recommendations were to
be completed no later than September 2019, according to the action
plans. The OIG will follow up and review implementation actions to
determine if the recommendations can be closed in accordance with OIG
policy.

Inpatient Mental Health Clinical Operations Concerns at the Phoenix VA
Health Care System

The OIG conducted a healthcare inspection in response to
allegations received in 2016 and 2017 related to the clinical
operations of the inpatient mental health unit regarding patients
admitted with a diagnosis of dementia.\23\ Among other concerns, the
OIG substantiated that inpatient mental health unit staff did not
consistently follow the facility's patient safety observer policy that
outlined one-to-one care. The OIG reviewed patients requiring one-to-
one care during January 2017 and found patient safety observer--to-
patient ratios were not one-to-one, patient safety observers did not
maintain constant visual observation of patients, and documentation was
inconsistent. Additionally, due to the facility's incomplete
documentation, the OIG was unable to determine whether nurse staffing
was adequate to meet patient care needs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Inpatient Mental Health Clinical Operations Concerns at the
Phoenix VA Health Care System, Arizona, May 7, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2017, the OIG team substantiated that the inpatient mental
health unit was not a therapeutic environment due to the absence of
cleanliness and interior updates, patients not wearing personal
clothes, and a noncompliant patient advocacy program. In 2018, the OIG
team noted a satisfactory improvement in the cleanliness after the
facility contracted with an external company that provided cleaning
services.
The OIG made seven recommendations to the facility. The OIG has
closed the recommendations related to patient safety observer policy
compliance, inpatient mental health unit nurse staffing methodology,
the cleanliness of the inpatient mental health unit, and use of the
Patient Advocate Tracking System. While six of the seven
recommendations are closed, the OIG continues to monitor compliance
with training and improvements to the therapeutic environment of the
unit.

Inpatient Security, Safety, and Patient Care Concerns at the
Chillicothe VA Medical Center in Ohio

The OIG reviewed the care of a patient who fell to his death from a
window at the Chillicothe VA Medical Center in 2017.\24\ The OIG
determined that there were not adequate security and safety measures in
place, and these deficiencies contributed to the patient's death. The
OIG also found that the facility's attempts to provide an institutional
disclosure to the family were inadequate. Although the patient was not
cared for in an inpatient mental health unit because of other medical
conditions, generally the patient received appropriate care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Inpatient Security, Safety, and Patient Care Concerns at the
Chillicothe VA Medical Center, Ohio, September 12, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG found, however, that the inpatient unit's external windows
were not secured shut or limited in their opening width, in violation
of VHA policy. Each VHA facility is required to conduct an Annual
Workplace Evaluation with occupational safety and health staff
examining safety and industrial hygiene issues. VHA experts had
previously sent out guidance on installing brackets to limit opening
width, and the facility took no action to resolve this issue despite a
previous attempt by a patient to jump out of a window that opened
fully. In this case, the patient had been placed on special
observation, where the observer must remain within arm's length of the
patient at all times. The observer lost sight of the patient and, in a
few moments, the patient climbed out of the bathroom window after
entering the bathroom and closing and locking the bathroom door. The
observer attempted to grab and rescue the patient, but the patient's
fall resulted in death. The OIG determined that staff did not adhere to
the facility's observer policy related to the content, frequency, and
hand-off documentation requirements. Moreover, facility leaders failed
to monitor staff compliance with the special observer documentation
requirements. The OIG also reviewed training records and found unit
staff did not complete the Prevention and Management of Disruptive
Behavior training, the special observer competencies, and other
required trainings. The OIG found that facility leaders' failure to
ensure that staff were trained in key competencies likely contributed
to staff being unaware of the guidelines and duties.
The OIG made four recommendations to the facility director
regarding exterior windows being made compliant with VHA's guidelines,
compliance with observation policies and training competencies, and
reviewing the discussion of the institutional disclosure that took
place with the next of kin. All recommendations have been closed.

The OIG's Comprehensive Healthcare Inspection Program Focus on
Inpatient Mental Health Units' Environment of Care

The OIG uses its Comprehensive Healthcare Inspection Program (CHIP)
to provide cyclical, focused evaluations of the quality of care
delivered in the inpatient and outpatient settings of VA facilities.
OIG CHIP teams evaluate areas of clinical and administrative operations
that reflect quality patient care, with focused review areas changing
every fiscal year.\25\ These inspections are one element of the overall
efforts of the OIG to ensure that the Nation's veterans receive high-
quality and timely VA healthcare services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ The nine areas for Fiscal Year 2018 were leadership and
organizational risks; quality, safety, and value; credentialing and
privileging; environment of care; medication management; mental health;
long-term care; women's health; and high-risk processes. For Fiscal
Year 2019, medical staff privileging was substituted for credentialing
and privileging. Fiscal Year 2020 is the same as Fiscal Year 2019
except care coordination was substituted for long-term care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OIG staff determine whether facilities maintain a clean and safe
healing, recovery-oriented environment, particularly in selected areas
often associated with higher risks of harm to patients, such as in
locked mental health units.

Comprehensive Healthcare Inspection Summary Report Fiscal Year 2018

In Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, OIG staff completed 51 CHIP inspections,
with the results summarized in a report that, among other topics,
highlighted inpatient mental health units' environment of care
deficiencies at those facilities inspected from April to September
2018.\26\ Generally, VA facilities met requirements associated with
infection prevention, general safety, privacy, and availability of
supplies. Construction and Nutrition and Food Services areas, locked
mental health units, and emergency management programs met many of
their respective requirements. However, the OIG identified concerns
with environmental cleanliness, installation and testing of panic
alarms in high-risk areas, seclusion rooms in locked mental health
units, and emergency management processes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Comprehensive Healthcare Inspection Summary Report Fiscal Year
2018, October 10, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Fiscal Year 2018, VA inspected 27 mental health units that
yielded the following findings:

Twenty-three had evidence of monthly alarm system
testing, but only 17 of those 23 documented evidence of VA police
response times.

Four had dirty ventilations grills and/or floors.

Five of 19 applicable locked mental health units with
seclusion rooms lacked flooring made of a material that provides
cushioning.

In Fiscal Year 2019, during continued physical inspections of 27
additional VA inpatient mental health units' environment of care, OIG
staff found these deficiencies:

Four of the 27 units did not document evidence of panic
alarm testing. Of the 23 units that had evidence of panic alarm
testing, three did not include VA police response times.

Five units had cleanliness issues.

Four of 22 applicable units' seclusion rooms did not have
flooring made of a material that provides cushioning. Facility managers
reported a lack of awareness of these requirements and admitted to
their lack of oversight in ensuring a safe environment of care.

The Fiscal Year 2018 Summary Report made four recommendations to
the Under Secretary for Health to improve the environment of care
nationally, based upon aggregate data collected during the related CHIP
site visits. VHA, VISN, and facility leaders concurred with OIG
recommended improvements and set their completion timeframes to
accomplish and monitor compliance with the following:

Ensure that facility managers maintain a clean and safe
environment (June 2020 projected completion date).

Confirm that VA police test panic alarms and document
response times to alarm testing in locked mental health units and high-
risk outpatient clinic areas (November 2019 projected completion date).

Make certain that facility managers install floor
cushioning in locked mental health unit seclusion rooms (June 2020
projected completion date).

Verify that facility managers annually review emergency
operations plans and resource and asset inventories (November 2020
projected completion date).

OIG staff will monitor VA's progress.

Other OIG Work Related to VHA Mental Health Care Experience

The OIG has released reports on other issues that can directly
affect VHA's ability to provide effective mental health care. The
following recent reports highlight areas within VHA that require
attention to help ensure a supportive environment and appropriate
coordination for effective mental health care.

OIG Determination of VHA's Occupational Staffing Shortages, Fiscal Year
2019

Since January 2015, the OIG has reported on VHA clinical staffing
shortages as required by the Veterans Access, Choice, and
Accountability Act of 2014 (PL 113-146).\27\ Although the 2018 report
was the fifth OIG report on staffing shortages within VHA, it was the
first report that included facility-specific data reported by leaders
at 140 VA medical centers. Users can examine the particular self-
reported needs of an individual facility as opposed to only national
data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ OIG Determination of Veterans Health Administration's
Occupational Staffing Shortages reports were previously published on
June 14, 2018; September 27, 2017; September 26, 2016; September 1,
2015; and January 30, 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It was also the first report to include nonclinical positions, such
as police and custodial personnel, as required by the VA Choice and
Quality Employment Act of 2017 (PL 115-46).\28\ These nonclinical
occupations also can affect the ability of VHA facilities to provide
quality and timely patient care in a safe and clean environment. The
results of the review underscore the extent to which mental health care
and related shortages are a widespread issue across VHA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ OIG Determination of VHA's Occupational Staffing Shortages,
Fiscal Year 2019, September 30, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Medical center directors most commonly cited the need for medical
officers and nurses, which is consistent with the OIG's five previous
VHA staffing reports. The data showed that 131 of 140 facilities listed
the medical officer occupational series (or a related VHA assignment
code) as experiencing a shortage, with the psychiatry and primary care
positions being the most frequently reported. Of the 140 facilities,
102 listed the nurse occupational series (or a related VHA assignment
code) as experiencing a shortage, with practical nurse and staff nurse
as the most frequently reported. Within nonclinical occupations, the
OIG found that police occupations, general engineering, and custodial
workers were among the most often cited as shortages. Overall, 99 out
of 140 VHA facility directors reported at least one severe shortage in
mental health occupations.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Mental health occupations include Psychiatry; Registered
Nurses - Inpatient and Outpatient Mental Health; Nurse Practitioner -
Mental Health/Substance Use Disorder; Clinical Nurse Specialist -
Mental Health/Substance Use Disorder; Social Science/Licensed
Professional Mental Health Counselor; Psychology; Psychology Aid and
Technician.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Inadequate Governance of the VA Police Program at Medical Facilities

The safety of VA personnel, veterans and their families, and
visitors to VA facilities is not just a responsibility for clinical and
administrative VHA personnel but also VA's police service. Veterans may
have interactions with VA police during their care at a VA facility--in
some cases it may be the first interaction they have upon entering a
facility. These interactions underscore the importance of an
appropriately governed, well trained, and adequately staffed VA police
service, particularly when they interact with veterans experiencing a
mental health crisis.
The OIG in this report did not focus on VA police encounters with
individuals in mental health crisis. It examined the effectiveness of
the police program governance structure and the challenges in staffing
and overseeing its police workforce.\30\ Accordingly, there is some
concern about how overall governance and police staffing might affect a
broad array of facility duties, including those related to mental
health concerns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ Inadequate Governance of the VA Police Program at Medical
Facilities, December 13, 2018.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ONGOING OIG WORK RELATED TO VHA MENTAL HEALTH CARE

In addition to the recent work highlighted in this statement, the
OIG has many other ongoing and planned projects related to VHA mental
health care. The OIG recognizes the tremendous importance of mental
health care and suicide prevention and is coordinating and focusing
efforts across the OIG to ensure effective oversight of VHA's efforts.
For example, the OIG is conducting an audit to determine whether
suicide prevention coordinators are effectively managing crisis line
referrals to connect at-risk veterans with needed services.
Specifically, the audit will assess whether VHA provided oversight and
established processes for suicide prevention coordinators to ensure
veterans are reached to assess their needs.
Additionally, the OIG is in the final stages of developing a
focused review that will evaluate the quality of care provided at
Readjustment Counseling Services clinics, also known as Vet Centers.
The review will cover key clinical and administrative processes at Vet
Centers that are associated with promoting quality care such as
effective governance, appropriate environment of care, VHA care
coordination and collaboration, and suicide prevention. The OIG also
has ongoing reviews of recent incidents in which there are allegations
that veterans experiencing a mental health crisis did not receive
appropriate or adequate care. This includes incidents that have
occurred at VA medical centers and at the Veterans Crisis Line. The OIG
hotline continually works with expert staff to triage incoming
information and remains vigilant to issues that could undermine
appropriate and timely mental health care, and investigate thoroughly
allegations of patient harm, suicide, and related concerns at VHA
facilities.

CONCLUSION

This Committee and VA have made it a priority to improve the mental
health care and suicide prevention capabilities of VHA. All OIG staff
share your sense of urgency in addressing these issues. Recent OIG work
has detailed the challenges some veterans face accessing and receiving
high-quality mental health care within VHA. However, we should not lose
sight of the good work that dedicated mental health care providers and
other professionals are doing within VA. There are tremendous numbers
of patients and providers who have had positive experiences that should
be valued and applauded. The reports highlighted in this statement show
that there are still considerable challenges however, particularly
regarding deficiencies in the environment and coordination of mental
health care that have persisted and led to negative outcomes for
veterans experiencing mental health crises. The OIG is committed to
providing recommendations that flow from our oversight work to help VHA
improve its programs and veterans' experiences. The OIG will continue
to monitor the many aspects of mental health care and suicide
prevention provided by VHA to help ensure the improvements sought by
this Committee and our Nation are realized.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or other members of the Committee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of C. Edward Coffey

Good morning, Chairman Takano, Ranking Member Roe, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for inviting me to participate in this very
important hearing on suicide prevention for America's veterans. I am
Dr. Ed Coffey, a neurologist and psychiatrist, and Affiliate Professor
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at the Medical University of
South Carolina, in Charleston, SC.
You requested that I share insights about the efforts of non-VA
health care systems to establish comprehensive suicide prevention
approaches. I am happy to do so. While as a physician I have always
viewed suicide prevention as a key priority for my patients, my
involvement in suicide prevention at a healthcare systems level began
over 20 years ago, when I served as Vice President for Behavioral
Health Services at the Henry Ford Health System in Detroit, MI (1996-
2014). In that capacity I had the great pleasure to lead a team of
incredible individuals who set out to radically transform a large
mental health care delivery system by participating in the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation's ``Pursuing Perfection National Collaborative.'' We
chose to focus our initiative on ``perfecting'' the care of persons
with depression, and by leveraging the power of an audacious goal - the
elimination of suicide - we achieved dramatic and sustained reductions
in patient suicide, as well as improved performance of our entire
delivery system. Our approach to achieve these results has since been
endorsed by numerous organizations - including The Joint Commission and
the U.S. Surgeon General's 2012 National Strategy for Suicide
Prevention - and recently SAMHSA has funded the implementation of the
Zero Suicide model by numerous states, tribes, and health care systems
across the US. In addition, the vision of ``Zero Suicide'' has inspired
an international movement, and I am pleased to be supporting such
implementation which is underway in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, the
Netherlands, and the United Kingdom.
In my remarks today, I will briefly review the origin of our Zero
Suicide model and discuss its key components. But first, by way of
background I want to review some statistics that highlight the growing
suicide crisis in our country.

The Suicide Crisis in America

This Committee is well aware of the growing tragedy of suicide in
America.

While deaths from cancer and heart disease have declined
in the US, the rate of death by suicide has increased 33 percent in the
past 16 years (1999 - 2017) (Figure 1). That rate is actually
accelerating more recently, and it is disproportionately higher in
women and in people living in rural areas.

The statistics are worse for veterans, where the
incidence of suicide is 50 percent higher than the general adult
population, and 80 percent higher in female veterans.

Suicide is the 10th leading cause of death in the US, and
the second leading cause of death between ages 10 - 34. In 2017, we
lost 850,000 Americans to suicide, 86100 of whom were veterans.

Many more Americans - 81.4 million - report having
attempted suicide each year, and over 10 million report seriously
considering suicide.

In light of these grim statistics, a new approach to suicide
prevention is clearly needed.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8957.061

The Origin of the Zero Suicide Model

In 2001, the Institute of Medicine's Crossing the Quality Chasm
report called for sweeping reform of the American health care system,
and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation together with the Institute for
Healthcare Improvement responded with a $26 million national
demonstration project - known as the ``Pursuing Perfection National
Collaborative'' - that challenged health care systems to dramatically
improve patient outcomes by redesigning all major care processes in
order to deliver ideal care. At Henry Ford Health System, our
participation in the first phase of Pursuing Perfection (we were not
ultimately awarded an implementation grant) challenged us to create a
workplace culture in which the performance goal was perfection, not
just incremental improvement.
We selected for transformation the care of persons with depression,
but we struggled initially to articulate what a vision of ``perfect
depression care'' would look like. Finally, one of our staff suggested
that if depression care was truly perfect, no patient would die from
suicide. That stunning idea set in motion a debate that continues even
today. Some have argued that a goal of no suicide is not realistic or
achievable (e.g., How can we stop it if someone really wants to do
it?), that it is overly simplistic, and that it could provoke distress
among patients, family members, and health care providers that would
only make matters worse. Our team challenged these assumptions and
asked, If zero is not the right goal for suicide occurrence, what
number possibly could be? Very quickly we came to realize that because
of its radicalism, the goal of Zero Suicide provided the requisite
galvanizing force essential to drive the hard work of transformation.
It should be noted that the concept of ``zero defects'' has been
around since at least 1966, spreading to industries throughout the
world, and recently, innovating to zero was called 1 of 10 megatrends
for innovation. High-reliability organizations aggressively pursue
perfection, an approach that has driven commercial aviation to achieve
remarkable levels of safety. Why shouldn't this same approach be
applied to health care?

The Zero Suicide Model

In our view, the Zero Suicide Model is an approach to system
transformation that consists of three essential components (Figure 2):
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T8957.062

A radical conviction that ideal (perfect) health care is
attainable.

Such a conviction is fundamental to the model, as it provides
the driving force essential for the hard work of relentless
transformation. Absent such a radical conviction, implementing
multimodal suicide prevention strategies is less likely to be
effective and sustainable.

A roadmap to achieve that vision.

Performance is about ``pursuing perfection,'' not simply
incremental improvement. Such performance is made possible by a
``just culture.'' A ``just culture'' is one that embraces the
radical goal of perfect care, and that makes the pursuit of
that care possible by viewing errors or near misses as system
failures from which to learn and rapidly improve. In response
to errors, a just culture asks ``What happened and how?'', not
``Who did it?'' A just culture seeks recovery, restoration, and
improvement, not blame, punishment, or retribution.

A requisite expertise in systems engineering.

Teammates must be expert in promoting and implementing
systematic evidence-based approaches. In our Perfect Depression
Care Initiative, we focused on three key strategies: safety
planning (particularly safe gun ownership), rapid access to
definitive care, and managing the transitions of care.
Teammates must also be quick learners when mistakes happen, so
that they can rapidly correct system defects and continually
improve to achieve zero defects.

With this model we were able to reduce the rate of suicide among
our patients by 75 percent, even while over that same 10-year period
the rate of suicide actually increased in the general population of the
State of Michigan. As noted earlier, others are now adopting iterations
of the Zero Suicide model and are describing similar positive results.
Additionally, research (funded by NIH and SAMHSA) is underway to
formally study the effectiveness of the Zero Suicide model.

Conclusion

As noted by the Institute of Medicine in its report Crossing the
Quality Chasm, ``In its current forms, habits, and environment,
American health care is incapable of providing the public with the
quality health care it expects and deserves. ...The current care
systems cannot do the job. Trying harder will not work. Changing
systems of care will.''
Zero Suicide is an example of how we might change our systems of
care, and it provides a potential model for achieving dramatically
improved performance, including the audacious goal of eliminating
suicide. To be sure, suicide prevention is a very complex issue that
involves clinical and socio-cultural-political components. Still, the
Department of Veterans Affairs is in a position to address such
complexity, and there is no reason why it couldn't become the world
leader in dramatically improving systems issues such as health
engagement, healthcare access, and the social determinants of health,
among others. In addition, because veterans and service members are
venerated in our society and widely acknowledged as expert in injury
prevention, they have the opportunity to serve as the model for safe
gun ownership in our broader society, and in so doing, catalyze a
movement that would save thousands of lives.
Thank you again for the opportunity to participate in this hearing
today, and to represent my many colleagues around the globe who have
courageously embraced a vision of ideal care and Zero Suicide. I am
happy to respond to any questions you may have.

Selected Supporting Documents

Coffey CE. Building a system of perfect depression care in
behavioral health. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf, 33:193-199, 2007.
Coffey CE, Coffey MJ, Ahmedani BK. An update on Perfect Depression
Care. Psychiatric Services, 64:396, 2013.
Coffey MJ, Coffey CE, Ahmedani BK. Suicide in a health maintenance
organization population. JAMA Psychiatry, 72:294-296, 2015.
Coffey MJ, Coffey CE. How we dramatically reduced suicide. Case
Study. NEJM Catalyst. (Posted April 20, 2016 at http://
catalyst.nejm.org/dramatically reduced-suicide/).
Coffey CE. Perfect depression care and the origin of Zero Suicides.
National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine Workshop on
Improving Care to Prevent Suicide Among People with Serious Mental
Illness, Washington, DC, September 11, 2018. Proceedings published in:
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019.
Improving Care to Prevent Suicide Among People with Serious Mental
Illness: Proceedings of a Workshop. Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/
Coffey CE, Ahmedani BK, Coffey MJ. Challenges in suicide prevention
research (letter). JAMA, 321 (11):1105, 2019.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of American Legion

Chairman Takano, Ranking Member Roe, and distinguished members of
the Committee, on behalf of National Commander James Oxford and the
nearly two million members of The American Legion, we thank you for the
opportunity to address the important issue of caring for veterans in
crisis. As the largest veterans service organization in the United
States, we stand ready to assist this committee and the Department of
Veterans Affairs to ensure that America's veterans are provided with
the highest level of support and healthcare.

The Comprehensive Approach

Veteran suicide is a national issue and far exceeds the ability of
any one organization to handle alone. The American Legion stands behind
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) in its efforts to collaborate
with partners and communities nationwide to assist veterans in crisis.
The public health approach looks beyond the individual to involve
peers, family members, and the community in preventing suicide.
Preventing veteran suicide is a top priority for VA, but they need help
from dedicated partners to reach veterans who are in crisis.
On April 24, 2019, National Commander Brett Reistad teamed up with
Dr. Keita Franklin, VA's previous Executive Director of Suicide
Prevention, and penned a letter emailed to nearly 850,000 American
Legion members, family, and friends, to let them know that we are
working together to adopt a public health approach to suicide
prevention.\1\ It is imperative that the entire extended veteran
network is involved in assisting veterans in crisis. Equally as
essential is the need to centrally coordinate all efforts to ensure
valuable resources are not squandered in duplicative efforts, as well
meaning as they may be.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.legion.org/commander/245458/legion-va-team-
approach-suicide-prevention
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In an effort to increase collaboration with partners and
communities nationwide, The American Legion's TBI/PTSD Committee
developed a Mental Health Survey. The target audience was veterans and
caregivers, of which 13,648 responded. The data collected indicated
82.47 percent of survey participants never received any form of suicide
prevention training, and 67.39 percent of survey participants were
somewhat likely, likely, or very likely to take suicide prevention
training if offered. Survey participants identified training as a
critical area and are ready to participate if the opportunity is made
available.

VHA Staffing Issues

The American Legion remains deeply concerned by the trend of
suicides reported at VA facilities. One contributing factor to the
increase in suicide on VA campuses may be traced to staffing shortages
experienced by VA hospitals and clinics. Data released in September 30,
2019, as mandated by the VA Choice and Quality Employment Act of 2017,
reported 2,500 occupational staffing shortages across the VHA system.
Of note, 60 percent of the facilities noted severe occupational
shortages for Psychiatry, making it the most cited clinical
occupational shortage.\2\ The high rate of employee turnover,
insufficient recruitment, non-competitive salary, geographical
recruitment challenges, private sector competition, and drawn-out
hiring processes attribute to shortages in VA personnel. These factors
inherently lend themselves to overworked staff, poor patient
experiences, and lower quality of care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ OIG report 19-00346-241
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In keeping with The American Legion Resolution No. 115, Department
of Veterans Affairs Recruitment and Retention, we urge Congress to pass
legislation to improve VA's tedious hiring process and increase VA's
recruitment, retention and relocation budget.\3\ It will allow VA to
retain quality mental health providers, incentivize exemplary
performance, and increase employee morale. Improvements in these areas
will lead to increased customer satisfaction and overall quality of
care for veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://archive.legion.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12203/5772/
2016N115.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Access to Care for Rural Veterans

Connecting those who served to the medical resources they deserve
is a top priority for The American Legion.\4\ Many veterans live in
remote areas and are unable to access care in a timely manner which can
create major issues in a time of crisis. The VA has taken action to
address this issue by expanding its Telehealth capabilities, and has
teamed up with The American Legion and Philips to bring VA healthcare
to veterans in a familiar setting - their local posts. Through Project
ATLAS (Accessing Telehealth through Local Area Stations), Philips will
install video communication technologies and medical devices in
selected American Legion and VFW posts to enable remote examinations
through a secure, high-speed internet line. Veterans will be examined
and advised in real time through face-to-face video sessions with VA
medical professionals, who may be located hundreds or thousands of
miles away. Project ATLAS aims to increase the convenience and
accessibility of care which will prove to be essential to veterans in
crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://archive.legion.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12203/6926/
2017N075.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conclusion

Chairman Takano, Ranking Member Roe, and distinguished members of
this committee, The American Legion thanks you for holding this
important hearing and for the opportunity to explain the views of the
nearly 2 million members of this organization. The American Legion is
committed to working with the Department of Veterans Affairs and this
committee to ensure that America's veterans are provided with the
highest level of support. For additional information regarding this
testimony, please contact Mr. Jeffrey Steele, Senior Legislative
Associate of The American Legion's Legislative Division at (202) 263-
2993 or
[emailprotected]

______

Prepared Statement of American Federation of Goverment Employees, AFL-
CIO

Chairman Takano, Ranking Member Roe, and Members of the Committee,
The American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO and its
National Veterans Affairs Council (AFGE) appreciate the opportunity to
submit a statement for the record on caring for veterans in crisis, and
the essential role that Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) police play
in deescalating crises and ensuring that every veteran receives timely,
comprehensive care. AFGE represents more than 700,000 Federal and
District of Columbia government employees, 260,000 of who are proud VA
employees. The workforce we represent includes police officers working
at the vast majority of VA medical facilities across the Nation, and
many of these officers are veterans themselves.
Short staffing of police officers and clinical staff, reduced
emergency and urgent care services within the VA, and lack of permanent
medical center leadership all threaten the ability of VA police
officers to adequately respond to veterans in crisis. These are all
symptoms of a health care system under great strain from the ever-
increasing privatization of veterans' health care.

Overview

VA police officers are very often the first point of contact for a
veteran in crisis at a VA medical center. Their mission is to provide a
compassionate, safe response that ensures that the veteran is quickly
connected to the treatment he or she needs. The veteran's mental health
is the priority of the officers. In many instances, the police officer
is the one who deals directly with a homicidal or suicidal individual
who tries to leave the facility and is refusing to be admitted for
inpatient care. As one officer stated
These officers are an integral part of both the Behavioral
Emergency Response Teams (BERT) that handle crisis situations inside
inpatient and outpatient facilities and the external response teams
that cover the rest of the campuses. Officers may identify veterans in
crisis when they seek help at a VA emergency department (ED), VA urgent
care center or through outreach by VA mental health professionals or
Crisis Line of call center employees. The officer then attempts to
engage the veteran, deescalate and connect to clinical care by phone or
in person. If needed, the VA police officer will reach out to local law
enforcement to go to the veteran's home and convince him or her to come
into the VA for treatment. Depending on the State and individual
facility policy, the officer may also be able to impose a temporary
detention order on the veteran to secure an initial mental health
assessment.

Dangers of Short Staffing

VA officers have reported that their facilities have been at
minimal staffing levels for years. The Department's outdated staffing
policy risks the safety of the veteran in crisis, other veterans and
family members and employees. If one of the officers must leave the ED
to address an incident elsewhere on the campus, often there is simply
not enough coverage to properly respond to another emergency involving
a veteran. The larger the campus, the greater the gap in police
coverage becomes. As an officer who works at one of the 39 medical
centers with the greatest complexity (based on patient volume, patient
risk, teaching and research, specialists and ICUs) reported, even
though their staffing minimums are usually higher (4 officers per
facility), they still lack sufficient coverage when they are responding
to multiple calls or need to leave the campus to have a veteran
detained.
The VA Office of Inspector General (OIG)'s June 2018 report found
that VA police rank seventh highest in the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) regarding occupational shortages, with 52
facilities reporting police shortages, an 18 percent vacancy rate and
numerous facilities staffed below authorized levels.\1\ Turnover of VA
police officers is also very high; an officer reported to us that
nearly a third of the officers at his facility leave every year.
Reports we received from the field confirm what the OIG found in its
2018 report--that noncompetitive wages are a top cause of the inability
to recruit and retain officers at the VA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ OIG Determination of Veterans Health Administration's
Occupational Staffing Shortage Fiscal Year 2018, June 14, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG also identified a serious structural problem in its June
14, 2018 report: a lack of standardized police officer staffing models
that can be utilized by medical facilities to determine the appropriate
number and composition of officers. The lack of a sound staffing model
forces facilities to resort to extreme short-term measures such as
contracting out critical police officer functions to companies without
specialized experience or training, or ``borrowing'' VA officers from
other nearby facilities.
A number of additional factors further strain already short-staffed
police forces, including large campus sizes, facilities in urban areas
and high crime areas, high usage levels, large rehabilitation and
homeless veteran units and EDs at maximum capacity.
Severe short staffing of clinical staff on emergency response teams
further endangers veterans in crisis. Officers express frustration over
the inability to access front line medical staff, especially during
transitions from the day to evening shifts, before night staff and on
call staff come on duty.
Chronic short staffing and high turnover at the leadership level is
also taking its toll on the VA police force. Officers find it
increasing difficult to determine where to bring concerns given
constant changes in leadership at their facilities. In addition, front
line officers feel that their voices are not welcome. They no longer
have the ability to express their views through labor-management groups
that would be convened in the past. In contrast, VHA regularly receives
input and recommendations from facility level chief of policy
committees, that often include officers who come from outside the VA
and lack the critical hands on experience that rank and file officers
could bring to the table. These committees appear to communicate with
VA Central Office but not with the rank and file officers at the
facility.
Sadly, Secretary Wilkie continues to appear unwilling to fill the
nearly 50,000 vacancies that the VA is required to report under the VA
MISSION Act. The VA must be held accountable for this chronic and
harmful short staffing, which continues to erode VA's capacity every
year and provide the justification for further dismantling of the VA
through privatization.

AFGE urges the Committee to insist on firm deadlines for filling
the unfilled vacancies in the VHA police force and other VHA positions
that have been identified by the OIG. We also recommend that the VA's
current mandate to report vacancies under the VA MISSION ACT be
expanded to include a breakdown by profession so that veterans and the
public know which facilities have a shortage of police, clinical staff
and other positions.

Training

Officers are generally satisfied with the Standardized Training
they receive at the VA Law Enforcement Training Center (LETC). However,
they express interest in receiving more skills training at their
facilities to ensure that they are fully equipped to serve as the first
point of contact for veterans with suicidal ideations and engage in
successful de-escalation. For instance, while everyone gets
standardized mental health training to assess immediate threats made by
a veteran, the initial LETC training is only an acceptable baseline and
VA leadership should consider providing more hands-on training with
role playing using the Crisis Intervention Team (CIT) model that
originated in Memphis and has been replicated in facilities across VA.
AFGE also recommends updating the LETC training to include more
training models that focus on treatment rather than arrests, consistent
with VA policy that law enforcement should be the last resort.

The Danger of Closed VA Emergency Departments and Urgent Care Centers

Improvements in officer training and staffing will be of far less
value if veterans in crisis do not have a designated place to go for
help and comprehensive care within the VA. Sadly, that is exactly the
direction that the VA is heading toward. AFGE has raised concerns with
Congress for over a decade about the dismantling of VA health care
through the closing of in-house EDs and urgent care centers. We know
anecdotally that many VA medical centers across the country have lost
EDs and urgent care centers over the years but are not aware of any
comprehensive studies of this trend.
VA officers have reported that the absence of a designated place in
medical centers for a veteran to go to when he or she is crying out for
help greatly impedes their mission to make treatment, rather than
arrest, the first priority. One officer at a facility that lost its ED
expressed concern that veterans in his community no longer have an
appropriate place to go where they can just get ``something off their
chest.'' As he explained, when a veteran becomes agitated, he now has
to be sent across town for emergency care and then back again to the VA
for continued treatment. This breakdown in continuity of care can cause
a great deal of stress for the veteran. Additionally, the VA officers
and clinicians risk ending up with less information because the
emergency care was provided outside of the VA instead of within VA's
integrated system. Therefore, AFGE urges the Committee to conduct
oversight into the status of EDs and urgent care centers across VHA
facilities and how their closures are impacting veterans in need of
crisis intervention.

AFGE appreciates the Committee's attention to the important issue
of caring for veterans in a crisis and the role of the VA police. We
look forward to working with you to address needed improvements in
order to provide VA police officers with more tools to assist veterans.
Thank you.

[all]
