- EXAMINING HOW THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS SUPPORTS SURVIVORS OF MILITARY SEXUAL TRAUMA

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING HOW THE
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
SUPPORTS SURVIVORS OF MILITARY SEXUAL TRAUMA

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

AND THE

WOMEN VETERANS TASK FORCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2020
__________

Serial No. 116-53
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

48-958 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire, Chairman

KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York           JACK BERGMAN, Michigan, Ranking
MAX ROSE, New York                       Member
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
California                           American Samoa
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHIP ROY, Texas

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2020

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Chris Pappas, Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations.................................................     1
Honorable Jack Bergman, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations.............................................     2
Honorable Julia Brownley, Chairwoman, Women Veterans Task Force..     4
Honorable Mark Takano, Chairman, Full Committee..................     5

WITNESSES

Mr. Willie Clark, Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations,
Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     6

Accompanied by:

Ms. Beth Murphy, Executive Director, Compensation Service,
Veterans Benefits Administration, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs

Dr. Margret Bell, National Deputy Director for Military
Sexual Trauma, Veterans Health Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

Dr. Julie Kroviak, Deputy Assistance Inspector General for
Healthcare Inspections, Office of the Inspector General, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................     8

Ms. Tammy Barlet, Health Policy Coordinator, The American Legion.     9

Ms. Kayla Williams, Senior Fellow and Director, Military,
Veterans and Society Program, Center for a New American
Security.......................................................    11

Ms. Samantha Kubek, Staff Attorney, New York legal Assistance
Group..........................................................    13

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Willie Clark Prepared Statement..............................    37
Dr. Julie Kroviak Prepared Statement.............................    40
Ms. Tammy Barlet Prepared Statement..............................    44
Ms. Kayla Williams Prepared Statement............................    47
Ms. Samantha Kubek Prepared Statement............................    52

Statements For The Record

Paralyzed Veterans of America....................................    57
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America.........................    59
Disabled American Veterans.......................................    61

EXAMINING HOW THE
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
SUPPORTS SURVIVORS OF MILITARY SEXUAL TRAUMA

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2020

U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations
Women Veterans Task Force
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 10 o'clock
a.m., in room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Chris Pappas
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigation]
presiding.
Present from Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigation:
Representatives Pappas, Rose, Cisneros, Peterson, Bergman,
Bost, and Roy.
Present from Women Veterans Task Force: Representatives
Brownley, Takano, Luria, and Brindisi.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHRIS PAPPAS, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

Mr. Pappas. The hearing will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
I ask unanimous consent for our colleague Representative
Chu to participate in today's hearing, should she be able to
attend.
Today's Oversight and Investigation Subcommittee hearing is
being held jointly with the Women Veterans Task Force, chaired
by Congresswoman Brownley. Our panel will examine a question of
great importance: How well does the Department of Veterans
Affairs support survivors of military sexual trauma?
Sexual harassment and sexual assault during military
service is, unfortunately, widespread. Military sexual trauma
remains one of the most harmful problems for the military and
veterans communities, representing an insidious cultural
failure throughout the Department of Defense and Department of
Veterans Affairs.
According to VA, at least 25 percent women veterans report
experiencing military sexual trauma, as do 1 percent of men.
The numbers are likely far higher. Recent estimates show that
at least 70 percent of cases go unreported. In addition, men
and women who are lesbian, gay, or bisexual, are twice as
likely to experience sexual assault than heterosexual service
members, even after the repeal of ``don't ask, don't tell.''
Let us be clear, military sexual trauma is profound
violence at the hands of fellow servicemembers, but it is also
followed by institutional betrayal. It represents a destruction
of confidence in individuals and institutions with whom
servicemembers entrust their lives.
The risk for suicide among military sexual trauma survivors
is among the highest levels in the veteran population, and
survivors also have twice the risk of homelessness. Although
access to benefits and health care has a direct preventative
effect on veteran homelessness and suicide, these survivors
continue to face numerous hurdles that block access to these
vital resources.
As we will hear from our witnesses, VA is widely considered
to be the best service provider for survivors of military
sexual trauma. However, oversight conducted by the Subcommittee
on Health and the Women Veterans Task Force identified many
barriers for survivors who try to access VA treatment. Many
veterans are being turned away from care under the
misunderstanding that they are ineligible.
Furthermore, survivors applying for benefits face barriers
that can worsen mental anguish. Applying for benefits for
military sexual trauma is an arduous, lengthy process that
requires the veteran to prove that he or she has a disabling
condition and that it is connected to an in-service trauma.
This process can be exhausting and even re-traumatizing.
Our panel represents key officials and experts with
important knowledge and perspectives. It is my hope that we
will hear critical information about the extent of this
problem. Equally important, we need to determine the solutions
to ensure that survivors are not re-traumatized when seeking
care. Our veterans need access to high-quality care and they
deserve nothing less.
With that, I would like to recognize Ranking Member Bergman
for 5 minutes for any opening remarks that he may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JACK BERGMAN, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE
ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all of
you for coming today. We are here to discuss the vitally
important, but tragic topic of Military Sexual Trauma, or MST.
MST is a serious and immediate issue facing both women and
men in uniform. In Fiscal Year 2018, the Department of Defense
found that there was a significant increase in the number of
sexual assault crimes filed by servicemembers.
The men and women of our military joined to defend our
freedoms and values, they accepted the risks and dangers
inherent in serving in the military; however, they should
never--and I repeat, never--have to face physical and mental
trauma resulting from sexual assault or harassment by a fellow
soldier, sailor, airman, or Marine. Those who perpetrate these
crimes must be held accountable and appropriately punished for
their actions; we cannot tolerate anything less.
It breaks my heart to know that this subcommittee cannot
remove the pain, suffering, and hurt caused to those who have
experienced these assaults. However, what this body can and
must do is work to ensure that VA is providing comprehensive,
innovative, and empowering care and benefits to MST survivors.
In order to do this, today we will look at the services and
benefits provided by the Veterans Health Administration, VHA,
and the Veterans Benefits Administration, VBA, for MST
survivors.
According to Fiscal Year data provided by VA, roughly
142,000 women and 81,000 men have a positive MST screening. For
these veterans seeking MST-related health care, we need to look
at the environment of care, the staff providing the care, and
whether policies are being followed and are meeting MST
survivors' needs.
Currently, VHA requires an MST coordinator at every medical
facility. MST coordinators are responsible for implementing
national and local policies, serving as a point of contact for
MST survivor care, providing staff education, conducting
outreach, and communicating with leadership and other
stakeholders.
In Fiscal Year 2019, the VA Inspector General found, quote,
``high compliance with several of the selected VHA requirements
regarding MST coordinators, their activities, and the provision
of care to patients after positive screening,'' end quote.
However, there were areas where improvements can and must be
made, such as staff training and communication with local
leaders.
I hope to discuss the workload and staffing of MST
coordinators, particularly the VHA policy that permits the MST
coordinator function to be a collateral duty. I am interested
in hearing from our VA witnesses about how they determine the
appropriate coverage level. I would like also to hear from our
non-governmental witnesses as to whether they believe MST
coordinator coverage is adequate and, if not, why not.
I also want to explore environment of care issues. The
committee has heard accounts of MST survivors who have felt
uncomfortable or unwelcome at VA facilities because of a lack
of privacy, stigmas around MST survivors, and a lack of gender-
specific care locations. VA has done a lot of work to make
veterans feel at ease in a VA medical center; however, we need
to hear what VA can do to ensure that all veterans feel safe,
secure, and welcome in VA facilities while seeking care.
Turning to VBA, we need to make sure that veterans applying
for benefits for MST-related conditions are treated with
dignity and evaluated fairly. In August 2018, the VA Inspector
General found that MST survivors claims for Post Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD) benefits were inaccurately adjudicated.
Since that report, my colleagues on the Disability Assistance
and Memorial Affairs Subcommittee, which is led by my good
friend and fellow Marine, Mike Bost, and which Representative
Radewagen and I had the pleasure of serving on last Congress,
has held two hearings that address the IG's findings. VA has
closed two of the six recommendations. I hope to hear more
about the progress VA is making in closing the remaining
recommendations as they work toward improving the disability
claims, the process for MST survivors.
I want to take a moment to thank our non-governmental
witnesses for being here today. Your written testimony includes
personal accounts or the accounts of your clients in coping
with sexual trauma. MST is a difficult and painful issue to
discuss, but your testimony personalizes the issue for us.
Thank you for being here today to give MST survivors a voice.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, General Bergman.
I would now like to recognize Congresswoman Brownley, chair
of the Women Veterans Task Force, for 5 minutes for any opening
comments she may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JULIA BROWNLEY, CHAIRWOMAN, WOMEN VETERANS
TASK FORCE

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Chairman Pappas, for holding this
hearing today and then you for your support in working with the
Women Veterans Task Force.
Since launching the task force last year, 81 other Members
of Congress, both Democrats and Republicans, have joined
together to advance equity and access to resources, benefits,
and health care for our women veterans. Together, in November,
we passed the Deborah Sampson Act, which will transfer VA
resources for women veterans. I am hopeful that the Senate will
also pass the bill.
The Women Veterans Task Force has heard from women veterans
both at events here in D.C. and all over the country. We have
been to Guam and Puerto Rico, Alaska and the Dakotas, to New
York, and of course my home State of California. Everywhere we
go, we meet with women veterans who are so proud of their
service, and VA employees and veteran and community
organizations who are committed to serving them. We also have
heard consistently that military sexual trauma represents the
single most destructive problem within the military and veteran
community.
Sexual violence in the military by one servicemember
against another is the ultimate betrayal of the values and
trust that servicemembers are required to put in one another.
Sexual violence in the military impacts both men and women.
Today, women who serve in the military are up to seven times
more likely to experience MST than men.
The Veterans Health Administration is the leading provider
of health care in the Nation for treating military sexual
trauma. In November, I visited the National Center for PTSD,
Women's Health Sciences Division in Boston, where I met with
researchers who developed innovative ways of treating post-
traumatic stress in women. While in Boston, I also met with
women veterans who shared that VA health care saved their
lives. Accessing the care is a different story, a completely
different story. When it comes to accessing VA care and
benefits, both women and men often face barriers that can make
recovering from trauma much more difficult.
Toward the end of 2019, multiple incidences highlighted
these barriers. One in San Diego, a physician contracted to
perform Compensation and Pension (C&P) exams for the Veterans
Benefits Administration was convicted of sexually assaulting
five women veterans. In West Virginia, Federal authorities
investigated allegations of multiple sexual assaults against
veterans at a West Virginia VA hospital. Here in Washington
D.C., a Navy veteran and member of my own staff was sexually
assaulted in the atrium of Washington D.C.'s VA Medical Center.
In fact, VA's own research found that one in four women
veterans experience sexual harassment at VA facilities. This is
unacceptable. No veteran should have their well-being and
livelihood endangered because of hostility in what should be a
safe and welcoming environment.
We must highlight that it is on the Department of Defense
to end its culture of sexual violence. Just last week, we
learned that sexual assaults at the service academies increased
by 30 percent in the past year. Meanwhile, this committee will
always work to make every effort to ensure VA provides adequate
resources to survivors of military sexual trauma. It is
imperative that we have policies in place that work for all
veterans.
Today, I wish to say once again to survivors, we believe
you and we are committed to enabling safe and welcoming access
to the support that you need and deserve.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I would now like to recognize Chairman Takano, the chair of
our Full Committee, for 5 minutes for any opening comments he
may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, CHAIRMAN, FULL COMMITTEE

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairman Pappas.
I want to first make note about the importance of this
hearing. The committee and the Women Veterans Task Force have
focused much-needed attention on a problem experienced by too
many servicemen and women. As my colleagues have already
stated, sexual harassment and sexual assault during military
service is widespread. Today's testimony will show that VA
recognizes how much these violent crimes affect the well-being
of our veterans. However, the Department must demonstrate that
it is doing everything it can to provide survivors with the
services they need and deserve. Oversight by the committee and
task force staff, as well as testimony of our witnesses, will
show both significant advances, as well as some major
shortfalls.
I understand that VA's Office of Inspector General (OIG)
will give some disappointing statistics. For example, the IG
concluded that a significant portion of primary care and mental
health clinicians hired after 2012 had not taken the required
training on military sexual trauma.
We know that sexual and gender harassment remains prevalent
at VA medical facilities; this is simply unacceptable. I also
understand that there are major inconsistencies between
different elements of the Department when responding to the
needs of survivors, which leads to eligible veterans not being
allowed to access critical services, including mental health
counseling.
Last year, I made reducing veteran suicide this committee's
top priority, and last week our committee announced our new
strategy to address this crisis, inspired by the Center for
Disease Control's seven core strategies for suicide prevention.
Today's hearing will focus on two of these goals: strengthening
the access and delivery of care, and creating protective
environments.
We know that survivors of military sexual trauma are among
the most at risk for suicide. I have heard of many positive and
effective VA programs that provide help and support for
survivors. Many VA employees are dedicated to making a
difference and I am sure all of my colleagues will join me in
applauding these efforts. However, given the importance and
nature of these issues, many of the solutions we will explore
today will require attention from the top levels of the
Department. We cannot talk about suicide prevention without
addressing fairness and compassion in accessing benefits and
eliminating all barriers to accessing health care, including
ending sexual violence at VA facilities.
I call on Secretary Wilkie to elevate addressing military
sexual trauma to a much higher priority throughout VA.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses and, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Chairman Takano.
I will now recognize our witnesses. First, we have from VA
Mr. Willie Clark, Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations
of the Veterans Benefits Administration. He is accompanied by
Ms. Beth Murphy, Executive Director, Compensation Service at
VBA, and Dr. Margret Bell, National Deputy Director for
Military Sexual Trauma at the Veterans Health Administration.
Mr. Clark will provide the testimony for all the VA
witnesses and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WILLIE CLARK

Mr. Clark. Good morning, Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member
Bergman, members of the subcommittee, Chairwoman Brownley, and
members of the Women Veterans Task Force. Thank you for the
invitation to speak today on this very and vitally important
topic of VA support for survivors of military sexual trauma.
Accompanying me today is Ms. Beth Murphy, Executive
Director of Compensation Service at VBA, and Dr. Margret Bell,
National Deputy Director for Military Sexual Trauma for VHA.
VBA strives to deliver accurate and timely benefits to our
veterans. To ensure compassionate assistance is provided to
veterans who experience military sexual trauma while serving in
the Armed Services, we have made process improvements,
including establishing specially trained teams to process
claims, mandating quality checklists, requiring second-level
reviews for claims processors, until high accuracy is achieved.
In addition to benefits, VA provides care for mental and
physical health conditions related to military sexual trauma
free of charge. This includes out-patient, residential, and in-
patient care, as well as pharmaceuticals. Eligibility for this
care is very broad and veterans may be able to receive free
care even if they are not eligible for other VA care.
VBA has significantly updated and improved its annual
training for the processing of military sexual trauma-related
claims, health care services, and cultural sensitivities for
identified positions. VBA also plans to hold its first
collaborative military sexual trauma training symposium this
year to provide participants with education, networking
opportunities with employees, veterans service officers,
Department of Defense, and our VA leadership. Participants will
exchange resources and ideas, and ultimately work together to
enhance the veteran's experience with VA programs and services.
VHA also has a range of initiatives to ensure both clinical
and front-line staff are prepared to assist survivors. The
Military Sexual Trauma Consultation Program is available to any
VHA staff member or provider with questions related to
assisting veterans.
VA is dedicated to improving outreach to veterans,
especially those affected by military sexual trauma. VA
conducts recurring targeted outreach that includes briefings to
inform, educate, and empower veterans to access VA benefits,
health care, and resources. Every regional office has
coordinators who are specially trained to assist veteran
survivors in the claims processes, and collaborate with VHA and
other stakeholders to provide a holistic VA experience. We
require a male and a female coordinator at every one of our
regional offices.
VBA Central Office also has program managers that provide
recurring guidance to the field on military sexual trauma-
related outreach, including a quarterly teleconference. I
personally sit in on this conference and speak to our military
sexual trauma coordinators in the field.
For transitioning servicemembers, the Transition Assistance
Program briefing provides information about military sexual
trauma and related health care benefits.
Furthermore, VBA ensures that all public contact
representatives who interact with veterans and families receive
annual training to help them identify indicators of stressors
and signs that a veteran may have experienced military sexual
trauma. VBA and VHA coordinators collaborate on outreach to
ensure there is a warm handoff to VHA coordinators for
assistance with access to counseling and treatment.
Throughout the year, VHA coordinators engage in local
outreach, which includes educational advances designed to
increase knowledge and awareness among all staff throughout the
medical facility, informational events about the impact of
military sexual trauma and services for veterans, and
awareness-raising events that include opportunities for
survivors to share their stories of military sexual trauma and
recovery.
Providing veterans with the benefits and services they have
earned in a manner that honors their service is a priority for
VA. Due to the difficult nature of military sexual trauma, it
is particularly critical for us to ensure all interactions with
veterans and survivors are compassionate and sensitive. To that
end, VA ensures claims are processed by highly skilled,
experienced employees who have received training to process
these claims, VA and staff have the information and resources
they need to provide streamlined access to specialized veteran-
centric care, and comprehensive action is taken to improve
outreach.
This concludes my testimony. My colleagues and I will be
happy to address any question from members of the committee and
the Women Task Force.

[The Prepared Statement Of Willie Clark Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Mr. Clark.
Next, we have Dr. Julie Kroviak, Deputy Assistant Inspector
General for Healthcare Inspections, and I would like to
recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JULIE KROVIAK

Dr. Kroviak. Thank you. Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member
Bergman, Chairwoman Brownley, and members of the subcommittee
and task force, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Office of Inspector General's oversight of VA policies and
procedures related to military sexual trauma.
The OIG has done extensive work regarding benefits and care
to veterans who have experienced MST. In August 2018, the OIG
issued a report regarding claims processing, and that report
was the subject of two hearings before the Disability
Assistance and Memorial Affairs (DAMA) subcommittee.
Today, I look forward to discussing the OIG's Office of
Healthcare Inspections' Comprehensive Healthcare Inspection
Program, or CHIP, results for Fiscal Year 2019. These reviews
at 43 randomly selected VHA facilities focus on compliance with
selected VHA requirements related to MST, including processes
carried out by the MST coordinators, the provision of care to
patients after positive screening, and mandatory staff
training.
MST is recognized as a patient experience, not a diagnosis
or mental health condition. Although post-traumatic stress
disorder is commonly associated with MST, other frequently
associated diagnoses include depression and other mood,
psychotic, and substance use disorders. Depending on an
individual's experience and stage of recovery, treatment needs
can vary.
The OIG produces a wide variety of reports to evaluate
VHA's health care quality and delivery; our CHIP program is one
such element. OIG CHIP teams evaluate nine areas of clinical
and administrative operations, and rotating high-interest sub-
topics at each facility approximately every 3 years. The recent
mental health care review focused on MST performance
indicators.
Each of the facilities we evaluated had a designated MST
coordinator. The OIG found that 98 percent had generally
established and monitored informational outreach activities and
91 percent tracked and monitored MST-related data. The OIG,
however, noted several opportunities for improvement.
First, VHA must ensure coordinators communicate issues
concerning MST services and initiatives with local leadership.
Important data trends could require leadership decisions
regarding resource allocation and other operational decisions
to better support the needs of veterans seeking care for their
MST experiences. The OIG found that only 79 percent had a
process for accomplishing this responsibility.
Oversight of staff training is also a critical function of
the MST coordinator. The OIG found that only 88 percent had
established and monitored MST-related staff training. Without
evidence of up-to-date training, VHA cannot ensure that staff
is trained and prepared to react and respond to the often
complex needs of veterans who have experienced MST.
VHA requires that all veterans seen in VHA medical
facilities be screened for experiences of MST and those results
documented in the electronic medical record. Veterans should be
screened at least once and then re-screened following
additional military service, separation, or declination of the
initial screening. Those who screen positive must have access
to appropriate MST-related mental health care.
The OIG reviewed the provision of MST-related care for
1,903 patients from these 43 facilities who had a positive
screening and observed a high compliance with each of VHA's
requirements that were assessed.
Additionally, VHA requires that all mental health and
primary care providers complete their respective mandatory MST
training no later than 90 days after entering their position;
however, only 62 percent of these clinicians hired after July
1st of 2012 had completed that MST within the 90 days. This
could potentially result in newly hired clinicians providing
counseling, care, and service without the required MST
training.
My written statement references an OIG audit report
regarding MST claims process and I want to update the status of
these recommendations. Four of the six recommendations remain
open. OIG staff will continue to work with VBA staff on
obtaining sufficient documentation to close these
recommendations.
The OIG recognizes the need for VA to provide compensation
and health care services to veterans who experienced MST during
their military service. These services must be delivered timely
and by staff with appropriate training and sensitivity. Recent
and ongoing OIG work has detailed the challenges some veterans
face when accessing and receiving these much-needed services,
as well as experiencing unnecessary delays and unfair denial of
benefits.
Reporting such experiences can be traumatic in itself for
these men and women, thus we are committed to continuing
efforts to highlight opportunities for streamlining the process
of compensation and access to high-quality treatment, with the
ultimate goal of active coping and healing for each survivor.
Chairman Pappas, this concludes my statement. I would be
happy to answer any questions you or other members may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Julie Kroviak Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Dr. Kroviak.
I would now like to recognize Ms. Tammy Barlet, Health
Policy Coordinator for The American Legion. Thank you for
joining us and you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TAMMY BARLET

Ms. Barlet. After 18 years, U.S. Coast Guard Veteran Emma
Dale finally had the courage to file a claim for PTSD due to a
military sexual assault that she endured while serving on
active duty. Six months after filing her claim, she received a
letter from the VA denying her benefits. Another 6 months,
after she received another letter from the VA, detailing that
her PTSD claim was reinvestigated and she was rated at 50
percent.
Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and distinguished
members of the subcommittee, in addition to the members of the
Women Veterans Task Force, on behalf of our National Commander,
James W. ``Bill'' Oxford, representing nearly 2 million
members, it is my duty and honor to present The American
Legion's testimony on the VA's MST policies.
Emma, an Oregon native, overcame one barrier only to arrive
at another: appropriate care at VA health care facilities.
After 18 months with her initial psychiatrist, the provider
told Emma she would be given a new therapist. Her new provider
abruptly discontinued her medications after only one session
and informed Emma that they were retiring in 2 months, causing
an adverse effect on her health care. This disruption in her
health care might have been avoided if she was aware that an
MST coordinator even existed at her VHA facility.
Emma's experience is just one of many veterans who are
survivors of MST facing barriers within the VA system. The
American Legion, though the System Worth Saving program, works
to assess the quality and timeliness of veterans' claims and
health care delivery, and provides feedback for veterans about
their health care.
The American Legion System Worth Saving program includes a
3-day visit to VA medical centers. The American Legion staff
meet with the medical center's MST coordinators to ensure the
facility is compliant with VA Directive 1115, the MST Program.
Many of the MST coordinators we interviewed stated they work
well over the 20 percent of their full-time equivalent
allotment just to ensure they meet the requirements of the
directive.
Another part of the System Worth Saving program is our
Regional Office Action Review, which affords us the opportunity
to interview VA employees and assess how VBA policies affect
timely and accurate claims delivery.
An August 2018 VA OIG report recommended that VA update the
current training on processing MST-related claims, monitor the
effectiveness of the training and take action as necessary.
VBA's response at that time was to update the four lessons and
mandate training. This updated training informed employees how
to better identify markers which point to an in-service event
in the veteran's service record. This process requires time-
consuming work on the part of the claims adjudicators. The
American Legion's initial assessment revealed that MST
coordinators, like VBA claims adjudicators, are not afforded
enough time to properly review a veteran's file. Other factors
such as inadequate training, high attrition rate, and
overworked MST coordinators threatened to maintain the status
quo. This is inconsistent with VBA's stated policies and
commitment to due diligence on behalf of our veterans.
We cannot talk about MST without acknowledging harassment,
which is an ongoing problem within our VA health care. There
are veterans who do not return to the VA because they
experienced a hostile environment. The VA's End Harassment
campaign should be updated to send a clear zero-tolerance
policy. VHA must work harder to bring awareness, empower
bystanders, create a reporting structure, provide victim
support, follow through with the investigations, and enforce
consequences to change behaviors and culture.
The American Legion believes that our Nation's heroes
should not suffer at the hand of the institutions whose sole
mission is to care for them. We believe in the quality of care
at VA facilities, remain committed to a strong VA, and maintain
that the VA is a system worth saving. The American Legion
recommends Congress to ensure that VA has all the necessary
resources to remain committed to provide veterans access to the
help they need to recover from MST and end harassment within
VHA facilities.
We thank Chairman Pappas and Ranking Member Bergman for
their incredible leadership, and for always keeping veterans at
the core of their mission.
It is my privilege to represent The American Legion before
this subcommittee and I look forward to answering any questions
you may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Tammy Barlet Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Pappas. Thank you for your testimony.
Next, we have Ms. Kayla Williams, Senior Fellow and
Director of the Military, Veterans, and Society Program at the
Center for a New American Security.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAYLA WILLIAMS

Ms. Williams. Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman,
distinguished members of the subcommittee and committee, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss a topic I believe is of
vital importance to the long-term well-being of too many of
America's veterans.
As a VA user, former VA employee, advocate, and researcher,
I have seen significant improvements in VA's provision of care
and benefits to MST survivors over the past 15 years. However,
when MST survivors seek care at a VHA facility and/or file a
claim for disability compensation with VBA, they still do not
always receive adequate or consistent services and support. It
is imperative that VA redouble its efforts to ensure continual
improvement in its support for MST survivors.
First, health care services. VHA offers an impressive array
of physical and mental health services to veterans who have
experienced MST, including universal screening and evidence-
based mental health treatment that ranges from telehealth to
in-patient care. However, inconsistencies and inadequacies
negatively impact veterans' ability to access and utilize care
across the system.
One barrier is difficulty accessing initial care. During a
recent Women Veterans Task Force meeting, VA leaders
demonstrated a lack of understanding of this issue, repeatedly
stating that MST survivors are eligible for care related to MST
without grasping that veterans cannot make it past the first
gatekeeper to attain the required provider determination that
their problem is MST-related.
Another barrier relates to the environment of care in VA
medical centers. Stakeholders in interviews CNAS recently
conducted as part of research undertaken on behalf of the New
York State Health Foundation routinely reported that many women
veterans are reluctant to seek services at VA medical centers,
which are perceived to be male-dominated spaces that are
unwelcome to women.
VA is well aware of this concern, which is why Central
Office developed and launched the End Harassment campaign.
Unfortunately, recent events have undercut public and
Department-level perceptions of how seriously senior VA leaders
take the severity of the problem and their willingness to
address it. The Department should redouble its commitment to
the campaign while concurrently taking other steps to increase
the comfort levels of women seeking care in the meantime.
For example, the Office of Mental Health and Suicide
Prevention should ensure all women's clinic have onsite mental
health care in accordance with the Patient Aligned Care Team
model; increased funding for women veterans mental health;
enhanced monitoring of assault and harassment in in-patient
mental health units; develop a women veterans mental health
provider subspecialty; and create a strategic plan to address
the rapid growth of the women veteran patient population.
VA should also increase availability of the Sister Assister
peer escort program, particularly at VA medical centers with
higher rates of harassment. The 25 percent rate of women
veteran patients who have experienced sexual harassment at VA
medical centers that VA publicly reports, as mentioned by
Representative Brownley, that is an average. Between different
sites, it ranged from 11 to 40 percent.
Moving on to VBA. Disability ratings can provide a vital
source of support for veterans' financial well-being,
especially if service-connected disability negatively affects
their ability to attain or keep a job. Unfortunately, the data
appears to show that men who seek disability compensation for
PTSD related to MST are being systematically discriminated
against by VBA despite overall improvements to the claims
system going back several years.
VBA has already made a number of changes in how it
processes PTSD claims related to MST to reduce disparities that
had previously been identified between the rate of claims
granted when the cause of PTSD is MST compared to other
precipitating events such as combat. While both men and women
have seen substantial increases in the percent of PTSD claims
granted due to MST, the grant rate for men has lagged
significantly behind at just 44.7 percent as of Fiscal Year
2018 compared to 57.7 percent for women. It is glaringly
apparent that men's cases are not being handled equitably.
I urge this committee to request VBA provide an update on
these grant rates for 2019 and early 2020 by gender. Should
these disparities remain, I urge increased oversight and
strongly suggest VBA roll out specialized trainings for raters
on both implicit bias and the specific MST experiences of men.
I further recommend this committee request more detailed
information from VA on each of the issues I have identified,
and also request Government Accountability Office (GAO) or OIG
conduct an investigation of the extent and severity of
harassment and assault in in-patient wards.
Members of Congress, as well as advocates, must closely
monitor actions by VA, VHA, and VBA to ensure rapid
improvements are made in improving care and services for
survivors, and that that progress is sustained in the long run.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Kayla Williams Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Ms. Williams.
Our final witness is Ms. Samantha Kubek, the Staff Attorney
for the New York Legal Assistance Group. You are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SAMANTHA KUBEK

Ms. Kubek. Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
I am a staff attorney at the New York Legal Assistance
Group, a nonprofit providing free legal services to low-income
New Yorkers. My division, LegalHealth, provides legal services
at hospitals across New York, including VA hospitals, where we
have served over 5,000 veterans.
In 2017, we opened the Nation's first legal clinics for
women veterans, a space where women, particularly MST
survivors, could receive trauma-informed legal services. I
represent male and female survivors from every branch and era.
What is true for every single one is the VA's current system
has at one time or another stood as a barrier to recovery.
The impact of a service-connection award on survivors is
more than just income; it validates the veteran's experience
and trauma. Often this results in less frequent mental health
visits and greater engagement in their lives. One client was
surviving on food stamps, living in a cramped studio with her
son and granddaughter. We spent a year putting together a
claim. Despite minimal in-service records and almost 30 years
since her service, she was awarded 100-percent compensation,
enabling her to obtain a VA home loan and buy a house. Her
entire family will live a completely different life because of
these benefits, but the process to get there is too difficult.
While proposed changes in bills such as H.R. 1092 go a long
way to improving the system, I want to provide insight from my
experience of the ways this system re-traumatizes survivors and
changes that could help alleviate this.
In every survivor's claim, they must submit a statement of
their assault and its impact, the first of many re-tellings
this process requires; each one forces them to relive it. Many
do not sleep for days before and after. Some become suicidal or
struggle to fight relapsing into addiction.
We must also provide their records from military and
civilian life. Often records are illegible or incomplete and
finding them takes months. I was once told by Department of
Defense (DOD) that restricted reports of assault were only kept
for 5 years before being thrown out. Sometimes I am told
reports cannot be found. Sometimes the VBA cannot obtain
records from the VHA. This causes unique harm to survivors.
Many have no corroborating military records as they did not
seek treatment or report. These cases, therefore, rely heavily
on VHA records. When the VA's two bodies do not effectively
communicate, the system fails survivors.
Once I have filed the case, the veteran receives a call
from someone at VBA, a stranger, asking about their assault and
whether they reported it. This happens even when their
statement addresses this and regardless of whether the veteran
specifically requests the VA to speak with their attorney
rather than with them.
Then they have their Compensation and Pension exam, where
another stranger will ask more questions regarding the assault.
They have no choice in whether this exam is with a man or a
woman. Clients have left this exam so distraught they are
admitted to the hospital, others are unwilling to go.
Finally, a decision is issued and, when claims are denied,
the VA's wording matters. A client once called me expressing
suicidal ideations after receiving her decision. Her daughter
was conceived from her in-service rape, detailed in her claim,
along with years of medical treatment. The denial letter stated
that there was, quote, ``no credible evidence that would
establish reasonable doubt and allow us to conclude that you
were in fact assaulted.''
This language is inhumane and insensitive, particularly
from a department that prioritizes reducing veteran suicide. It
is one thing to State that a veteran has not met a burden of
proof, it is another thing to State that their most traumatic
experience never happened.
Military sexual trauma endures long after the assault. It
is an intimate and personal invasion that occurs where you work
and live, possibly by someone who is your boss, in a situation
that you have no way to escape. In recognition of this, the VA
now allows survivors, regardless of discharge status, to obtain
related mental health care.
One of my clients was ineligible for VA care, but due to
this policy she was eligible to obtain MST-related care, but at
every appointment she was told that she was ineligible or,
worse, that she was not a veteran. Only after revealing she was
there for care relating to her rape was she able to check in
for her appointment.
I respectfully propose the following recommendations. The
VA, as in any other legal proceeding, should respect veteran-
appointed representatives and speak directly with them rather
than the veteran.
When records are unobtainable due to no fault of the
veteran, the VA should bear that responsibility. Veterans
should not be denied benefits because government agencies lost
their files.
Examiners should be required to review a veteran's
statement prior to their exam and avoid rehashing details
already in the record.
The VA must establish trauma-informed language and
protocols to be used across the VBA and VHA to ensure they are
not creating further trauma when they are addressing survivors.
Congress should enable the VA to fund free legal services
for veterans. This system is extremely complex and legal
representation is often a necessity, yet there are not enough
of us.
The VA must become the place that fixes the wrong the
military has failed to fix. It must do better to serve
survivors, bearing in mind their trauma.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you and the subcommittee for
your continued interest in this issue. I will be happy to
respond to any questions you may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Samantha Kubek In The Appendix]

Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Ms. Kubek. I want to thank
all our witnesses for their testimony here today.
I will now begin the questioning portion of today's hearing
and I would like to begin by recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
As we have heard here today, for many survivors of military
sexual trauma details of their experiences will be one of the
hardest, perhaps the hardest story that they are ever going to
tell.
Mr. Clark, I am wondering if I could turn to you and to our
VA witnesses. Why do VA's eligibility processes often result in
a survivor having to relive their trauma by providing specific
details about an assault to VA staff multiple times?
Mr. Clark. Chairman Pappas, we have worked to fix some of
these challenges that are brought up here and this one in
particular is like a gut punch to us. We have been working,
providing additional training to our processors to basically
say that if we can corroborate, if we can substantiate, if we
can grant a claim based upon the evidence in the file, there is
no need to make a call. Unfortunately, what has happened is, is
that some of our folks--and we have to get better at fixing
this--is they follow a checklist that basically says we need to
call the survivor to ask these questions.
So we are changing our processes to make our claims
processors, put them in a better position, because they do not
want to make these calls; they are tough, they are difficult.
As has been explained here, it makes an individual have to
relive these processes, what are their experiences that they
have gone through, and we have to do better at that. We are
doing better with that.
We are updating our checklists, we are conducting training,
we are--later this year, we are having our first symposium
where we are inviting claims processors in along with the
military sexual trauma coordinators, and we are inviting some
survivors in to talk about these types of experiences, so we
can impress upon our processors of the need to adequately,
compassionately process these claims.
I do not know if Ms. Murphy wants to speak to that.
Ms. Murphy. Mr. Chairman, if I could quickly add. There is
a statutory requirement in service connection, we are looking
for an in-service event or a condition that occurred in
service, we are looking for a current diagnosis of a condition,
and a link or nexus between the two. That goes for all sorts of
claims, including military sexual trauma. This can be a
difficulty for anybody.
What makes military sexual trauma different is that often,
as we have heard and we all know, it often is not reported in
service, so we have to lean in and dig a little deeper to look
for markers or indicators that would signal that something may
have happened. That is why, unfortunately, there are situations
where we do have to talk to the survivor a little more and try
to connect those dots. We understand that it can be difficult,
it is difficult for us too, but we do it as compassionately and
sensitively as we can.
Mr. Pappas. Well, I appreciate that. As Ms. Kubek
testified, clients have left exams and interactions with VA
distraught, even with suicidal ideations. I hope you will look
for ways to continue to hear the stories of these survivors, to
find out ways where there are barriers, and look for ways to
improve.
Certainly I want to commend VA for its world-class physical
and mental health care services, particularly as it is related
to military sexual trauma, but it is concerning to hear that
veterans have been turned away from VA in some instances
because staff do not always fully understand who is eligible
for these services.
Dr. Bell, who are the first people that veterans interact
with when they arrive at a medical center and how are they
trained on eligibilities for VA services?
Dr. Bell. Thank you for that question. It is obviously
going to vary from veteran to veteran and I think that is
important. I think it is important that we have no-wrong-door
approach to this, so whoever they make first contact with can
help get them to a person who can help if they are not person
directly. In particular we try and really make people aware of
our MST coordinators as a first person they can go to. They are
a clinician, they are going to be able to talk with you in a
private and confidential setting in a sensitive way about this,
and run interference for you a little bit in the system, if
that is something that makes you more comfortable.
Those folks, we provide a great deal of training to them on
MST-specific eligibility issues to make sure that they are well
equipped to be able to assist veterans in getting connected to
care.
Some veterans will show up in the eligibility office,
perhaps because they do not know that we have specialized
services and broad eligibility. It is important for us to make
sure that those staff have good training as well and have good
relationships with the MST coordinators.
I see time has run out, so I will stop.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you very much. Yes, my time is up.
I will now turn things over to Ranking Member Bergman for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Bell, what type of outreach does VA conduct to inform
veterans who are otherwise ineligible to enroll in VA that they
are eligible for MST-related care through the VA at no cost?
Dr. Bell. That is a core message in all of our outreach
materials, that that--a version of the line you just gave about
veterans may be eligible for MST-related care even if they are
not eligible for other VA care. That, again, is a message that
is going to occur in all of our major outreach materials.
Mr. Bergman. This is in your written material and other----
Dr. Bell. Written materials, on our websites----
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Dr. Bell.--and we do major campaigns in honor of Sexual
Assault Awareness month, it is a core message during that time.
Mr. Bergman. The last fiscal year, how many veterans who
were otherwise ineligible to enroll in VHA actually received
MST-related treatment from a VA medical facility?
Dr. Bell. That is a good question. I know historically it
has been a little challenging for us to get those data because
of the way things get administratively categorized. I do not
have that information on hand----
Mr. Bergman. Well, if you could take that----
Dr. Bell.--but we would be happy to get that----
Mr. Bergman.--for the record, that would be great.
Dr. Bell.--we would be happy to get that to you.
Mr. Bergman. Are these veterans also eligible for community
care through VA? If they are, why, and, if they are not, why
not?
Dr. Bell. Our legal--our treatment authority for MST does
permit us to provide community care for MST-related care.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Ms. Barlet, with over 2 million members,
The American Legion is in a unique position to assist VA in
educating veterans about the availability of no-cost MST-
related care. Would you please describe The American Legion's
outreach efforts?
Ms. Barlet. The American Legion's outreach efforts come
through our magazine and our websites, along with news article
that we will do that we see in our publications. We will also
be mentioning that in our Commander's testimony coming up.
Mr. Bergman. Dr. Kroviak, you are a primary care physician;
correct?
Dr. Kroviak. I am--I was; I am no longer delivering care.
Mr. Bergman. But you were?
Dr. Kroviak. I was.
Mr. Bergman. For roughly 20 years or so?
Dr. Kroviak. Eleven years at the VA.
Mr. Bergman. Eleven years, Okay. Your written testimony
indicates that only 62 percent of the VHA providers hired after
July 1st of 2012 completed MST training within 90 days of their
hiring, whereas 94 percent of providers hired before 2012
completed the required training. Did OIG review the cause of
this discrepancy and, if so, what did it find?
Dr. Kroviak. The 62 percent is the concerning finding in
the 90-day time line, so that gave an opportunity for providers
in mental health and primary care to potentially be counseling
and triaging patients with MST symptoms without appropriate
training. That was the concern, not that 94 percent were
getting it, it was within the timeframe that they were getting
it. There was a gap in them servicing patients and them having
the appropriate training to counsel patients with MST.
Mr. Bergman. Any ideas in explaining that 30-percent
increase?
Dr. Kroviak. It is data through our CHIP program, which is
basically we do a menu of subtopics that look at specific care
delivery programs within VHA. Locally, we get a lot of
responses from leadership that it is inadequate training and
mostly competing priorities of the providers from the time they
are on board to the oversight that they are getting appropriate
training.
Mr. Bergman. Okay, thanks.
Ms. Barlet, in your written testimony you discuss VBA
employees processing MST-related claims have discussed a
feeling of compassion fatigue when developing MST-related
claims. What is the prevalence of compassion fatigue among VBA
staff and how did you arrive at your conclusion?
Ms. Barlet. During our System Worth Saving visits, we have
the opportunity to meet with at least ten VA employees who
volunteer to meet with us and we are able to interview with
them. The prevalence, I will have to get back to you for the
record, but we have seen it overall to make it a concern for us
to add it to our System Worth Saving reports. Those reports are
transparent between the VA before we publicize them.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Well, I know the Legion has field
officers who provide veterans assistance in filing claims. Do
any of your field officers experience compassion fatigue and,
if so, what does the Legion do to address compassion fatigue in
its officers?
Ms. Barlet. Unfortunately, I deal more on the VHA side, but
I will be more--I will align your staff with those who are in
our VBA side of the----
Mr. Bergman. Well, the point is, if compassion fatigue is
real and one entity or other entities have a solution to deal
with it, we would love to hear it, because this is about
improvement.
With that, Mr. Chairman, hopefully we will have a second
round, and I yield back.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you.
Ms. Murphy. Mr. Chairman, would you allow me to just
interject quickly? Last year----
Mr. Pappas. Sure, you can briefly respond.
Ms. Murphy. Last year, we completed about 1.4 million
rating claims last year----
Mr. Pappas. Do you want to hit the mike? I do not know if
you are----
Ms. Murphy. Last year, we processed about 1.4 million
rating claims in VBA and we received about 14,000 MST, military
sexual trauma-related claims last year. It is about 1 percent
of our workload. We have specialized folks doing this work, it
is about 1,000 people that are earmarked for this. We do try to
honor their requests if they are being overwhelmed or if they
want to cycle off of this work, but it is not all of their work
all day long, they are mixed in with other cases.
We are sensitive to that and I just wanted to point that
out. Thank you.
Mr. Pappas. Thanks for your comments.
Mr. Clark. Sir, Chairman, if I can just add one quick
thing? We are----
Mr. Pappas. Quickly, and then we will move on to the next--
--
Mr. Clark. Quickly. We are adding compassion fatigue to our
training that we are having this year, we are leveraging a
collaboration with VHA, and specifically we are speaking to
compassion fatigue to address that issue.
Thank you.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you.
I will turn things over to Congresswoman Brownley for 5
minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just in response to that last conversation, 14,000 MST
claims out of an abundance of other claims, I get that, but we
know that that 14,000 is a really low--it is a low number and
the reason is, is because women are not accessing the VA
because they have been traumatized or re-traumatized to actual,
you know, pursue these cases. I think we have just got to get--
you know, we have got to get to the core of the problem.
I know that there are areas of excellence across the
country. I have been to Boston, I have seen what they are
doing. If we could replicate Boston across the entire country,
we would be in really good shape; however, that is not where we
are at the moment.
I have to say, and I want to ask the OIG, when we talk
about MST coordinators, that was one of the first responses to
this issue by the VA and always the testimony is, we have an
MST male/female coordinator at every location across the
country. To the OIG, did you ask the question, how many are
full-time?
Dr. Kroviak. We did not look at the actual Full-time
Equivalency (FTE) status of the MST.
Ms. Brownley. I think we need to clear that up, because
there are very few, based on all of the visits that I have done
across the country and hearing from women veterans here in D.C.
and across the country, there are very few MST coordinators
that are full-time. West LA, the largest medical center in the
country, has a part-time MST coordinator. She only spends a
couple of hours a week on MST, most of her other
responsibilities have nothing to do with MST. The largest
medical facility, you have to assume that is the largest area
of need, and yet only a part-time MST coordinator.
To me--and I know, I have brought this up many, many times,
but I know at medical centers, the leaders of medical centers
have a lot of autonomy, but we have got to figure out
accountability here, because we are not really fulfilling what
we are saying we are doing, and I think that that is just
really, really important to point out.
Ms. Williams, when you talked about the first gatekeeper,
this is like so important. And, Ms. Kubek, you supported this
issue. If a woman or man, you know, is entering a medical
facility and asking for help, and we are responding by saying,
sorry, you are not a vet, or, sorry, you do not have your
records, without saying, you know, we want to make sure you
have got to have those in order to get medical attention from
us with the exception of X, Y, and Z, and one of them being
military sexual trauma. This woman has to say I am raped, in
earshot of a waiting room to say I have been raped and I am
suffering from military sexual trauma, because I served my
country? That is just--it is unacceptable.
You know, the testimony about spending a year to be rated,
the fact that, you know, in some cases VBA will blame VHA for
not providing the record, hence the longer period of time.
You know, there is, I think, a lot that needs to be done
and accountability just continues to ring true for me in this
instance.
If you put all the policies down on paper, they look pretty
good, you know, but the fulfillment of those policies, you
know, are not happening across the country.
Ms. Williams.
Ms. Williams. Thank you very much, Ms. Brownley. To your
point, a friend of mine described once going into a VA medical
center seeking care and when they were trying to turn her away,
in a crowded waiting room, in front of many strangers, had to
pound on the table and say, loudly, ``I am an MST survivor.''
Nobody should have to be that outspoken to get care.
I would also note that the lack of awareness universally
about the presence of MST coordinators extends beyond VHA. In a
site visit we did to a VBA regional office, they had prominent
signs raising awareness that they have women veteran
coordinators available to assist, but nothing about the fact
that they also have male and female MST coordinators that could
make it a more comfortable process for survivors on the VBA
side.
Ms. Brownley. If they are full-time.
Ms. Williams. They did not raise awareness that they
existed at all. Yes, they should be full-time and also
awareness should be raised.
I would also urge that when all the folks who are that
front-line interaction, in addition to referring folks to MST
coordinators, should be able to let veterans know that, if they
need immediate support, they can go to Vet Centers while they
are navigating the rest of these processes, determining
eligibility, getting that first appointment, waiting for a
claim to be processed. Vet Centers are already there and
available and can provide that non-medical support throughout
the process, but it seems as if big VA is less likely to talk
about the benefit that exists on the Vet Center side, which is
eligibility is broader.
Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you for that. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you.
I will now recognize Congressman Bost for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Clark, something that was said in Ms. Williams'
testimony and according to the VA report, the grant rate for
MST-related claims for females is 63 percent, whereas the grant
rate for males is 51 percent. The VA is--what are we seeing in
the trends in terms of the types of MST-based claims filed by
male veterans compared to female veterans that may explain the
12 percent difference?
Mr. Clark. Thank you, Mr. Bost. We are working providing
additional training and, particularly, we have leveraged our
partnership and collaboration with VHA to develop sensitivity
training, among the other types of training, to give to our
claims processors, making them aware of this disparity.
It is true that, as has been said, that female survivors
the grant rate is higher, but the males, grant rates for male
survivors has been improving, it continues to improve. This is
something that we know, this is something that we address. We
obviously can not say grant cases so we can, you know,
equalize----
Mr. Bost. I understand that----
Mr. Clark.--the percentages, but we----
Mr. Bost.--but it seems strange.
Mr. Clark.--make them aware. It does and, yes, sometimes
biases creep in and this is where training--it is not a one-
and-done--we have to continually go back and talk to our
people, train them on these differences, because that is what
sensitivity training is.
It is to make you aware that there is a disparity there and
that you need to be aware when you make decisions that you have
considered that in your decision.
We work VHA to help us get training to provide to our
folks.
Mr. Bost. Okay. Dr. Kroviak, I understand that the OIG has
requested additional information from the VA, close
recommendations for 4 and 5 from August of the 2018 report on
denied PTSD claims related to MST.
Can you elaborate on that?
Dr. Kroviak. Yes, so, when we request--or when VA provides
us with data, we actually do a pretty intense review and not
only look for implementation, but also that the results have
been sustained. We had some concerns related with some of the
data provided, regarding the review that we recommended in that
report.
Mr. Bost. Well, let me tell you my frustration with this.
We had two hearings in the DAMA committee. This issue came up,
both of them. We asked for it to get done and nothing has been
resolved.
Mr. Clark, where we at?
Mr. Clark. Well, sir, again, this is something that we are
working on and, you know, when we have these kinds of
disparities, it takes time to--for these processes to be
implemented.
Again, making a decision about granting to survivors, a
service connection for, you know, if there is a male claimant,
we can not just say, We need to close this gap, so we want you
to grant this case. What we have to do is just leverage our
training for these individuals.
Ms. Murphy, if you have something else to add?
Ms. Murphy. Certainly. As far as the IG report from 2018--
from August 2018, there were six recommendations. We have asked
for 5 of those to be closed on the VA side, based on work that
we have done to satisfy those recommendations. We are still
doing some work on one.
It is not uncommon for us to go back-and-forth after we
have asked for something to be closed. IG will come back and
ask for additional information or clarification about something
and we have seen this on many different types of reports.
We are in the interactive process with IG. From our side,
we believe that we have finished 5 of them. We are still
working on the last one.
Mr. Bost. I have got a minute left, but I just want to say
this, this issue is an issue--let me tell you back whenever I
was in the service, it was just put your head in the sand and
ignore it. We can not be putting our heads in the sand and
ignoring it. We need to deal with it, whether it is male or
female, and we need to get it done and done correctly.
I understand we are all trying, but while we are working
trying, other people are out there suffering and adding to, as
was mentioned, that suicide level that we fight so hard and the
Chairman and all of us on this committee have tried desperately
to reduce.
This issue is something that we are going to continue to
look at. Obviously, when it takes two subcommittees and a
special committee to try to deal with this issue, it is
something that we have got to deal with.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you.
I will now recognize Chairman Takano for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Bost, for those sentiments. I
appreciate what you said, and coming from a former Marine who
understood----
Mr. Bost. What is that old saying?
Mr. Takano. Learning for life--I get it.
I appreciate the authority you bring to this.
I also want to express regret on behalf of Ms. Brownley.
She had to leave and she really wanted to stay.
I know I want to build on Mr. Bost saying Ms. Brownley's
line of questioning--I do not doubt the sincerity and the
desire of everyone here, including those at the VA, for want to
address this issue effectively, but it is unacceptable that
four women veterans, 1 in 4 women veterans experiences sexual
or gender harassment at VA facilities.
A key part of the solution is to ensure that all parts of
VA are working together. It also sounds like we need a lot more
focus from the top of VA leadership. Ms. Barlet, Ms. Williams,
and Ms. Kubek, could you quickly comment on the need for
elevating important solutions to military sexual assault within
VA to elevate it to higher levels.
Ms. Barlet. Thank you for the question, Chairman Takano.
Things like the end VA Anti-Harassment Campaign need to be
in your face. It needs to be just more than posters on the
wall. It needs to be in the waiting rooms.
One of the best practices that we have experienced is
during our--program was a women's health clinic in Salisbury,
North Carolina, where they take advantage of that room in
there, the waiting room, to not only educate the women that are
there weight for their appointments, by displaying VA-
authorized and YouTube videos, giving hint--giving explanations
on what to look for harassment, how to report harassment, and
things of that nature, along with materials throughout the
room.
That needs to be expanded to other VAs and it is a best
practice that is in your face.
Mr. Takano. Very quickly, because I want to get to the VA.
Go ahead, yes.
Ms. Williams. Thank you, sir.
When I worked at VA, as part of the Suicide Prevention
Campaign, every senior leader was expected to sign a pledge
affirming their commitment to being part of the campaign to end
veteran suicide.
That should be replicated with ending harassment. Every VA
leader should publicly State their commitment to ending
harassment in VA facilities should sign a pledge, take a photo,
write blogs about it, be open and transparent with their staff
about how important they believe it to be. I believe that
should start at the secretary and trickle-down through all
levels of VA leadership.
It is incredibly important that the rate of sexual
harassment and appropriate level of response to it at VA
medical centers, be a part of the rating of the success of VA
Medical Center directors. Hold them accountable for what is
happening in their facilities. Make this part of how their
performance is assessed.
If they are not being held accountable for what is
happening in their facilities about this, they will be much
less likely to take it as seriously as it needs to be.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Ms. Kubek. I would just like too add that you see massive
discrepancies across VA hospitals of how this issue is being
handled and I think that really reflects the fact that this
message really needs to be coming from the top so that you do
not have some VAs that are doing great at this and some VAs
that are not; all VAs have to do great at this issue. It is too
important for there to be even one hospital that is not doing
great.
I agree with Ms. Barlet, that the messaging has to be in
your face everywhere. There should be signs. You should not be
able to turn a direction in the VA without seeing messaging
about this.
Mr. Takano. At a recent suicide-prevention hearing, we
listened to an expert about systems and aiming for zero
occurrences within the VA system of suicides.
For the VA witnesses, could you describe who you report to
within the secretary's office when there is a need for higher-
level attention, such as improved coordination between
different entities.
Mr. Clark. I will start.
You know, our secretary has made it very clear--Secretary
Wilkie--sexual harassment will not be tolerated. Our direct
boss in VBA, Dr. Lawrence, our Under Secretary has made it very
clear that military sexual trauma, suicide-prevention training
has to be inculcated throughout our agency----
Mr. Takano. Who do you report to?
Mr. Clark. We report to the secretary, but if we would have
a problem with that, our secretary--our Under Secretary would
then meet with the secretary to discuss any challenges that
would need to be handled throughout the agency.
We have been leveraging with our--with VHA that we have not
had that challenge thus far, because our folks are accountable.
Our regional office directors in VBA have been told that they
must deal with military sexual trauma training. They must deal
with suicide prevention, and failure is not an option.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
If you would, Mr. Chairman.
Could you answer the question--yes, thank you.
Ms. Murphy. Sir, same chain of command for myself. Up to
the Under Secretary's Office and then up to the Secretary's
Office.
Ms. Bell. In VHA, the MST program is located within the
Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention. We report to
Dr. Dave Carol, but then up the chain within VHA.
Mr. Takano. All right. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Chairman Takano.
I would now like to recognize Ms. Luria for 5 minutes.
Ms. Luria. Thank you and thank everyone for being here
today to discuss this very important issue. I wanted to start
by first mentioning a September 2019 review that VBA did of
approximately 9,700 previously denied MST claims. It is my
understanding that of that 9,700, approximately 1900 required
additional development.
Can you give us an update since September how many of those
are complete, what phase the remaining percentage are currently
in.
Mr. Clark. Yes. Of the 9700, we still have 1900 that we
have--are working with Congresswoman Luria. Of those,
approximately 460 of those, we have found that we needed to
increase and we have increased the compensation on those 460.
There is another 500 that we are still developing, that are
under development, which may mean that we need additional
information. We need an exam.
The remaining number, roughly 900 or so, we have and it may
be a few less than that; those, the decision was sustained.
Again, once we go through and make a decision, we have to go
back and review those cases to ensure that they are done
correctly, and that is one of the recommendations that the IG
is waiting on us to finish working these cases so we can go
back to them.
As Ms. Murphy mentioned, this back-and-forth between the
IG, we do have to negotiate and sometimes go back and get
additional information before they will close out the action
item.
Ms. Luria. Okay. Well, thank you for the update on that
progress.
Do you anticipate another periodic review in 2020 and what
timeframe will that happen?
Ms. Murphy. If I could answer that, ma'am?
Mr. Clark. Yes.
Ms. Murphy. I think earlier it was referenced that these
9700 cases were inaccurately adjudicated. I would clarify that.
The IG found that they were improperly processed, which means
that a step of some sort was skipped. Maybe the necessary phone
call was not made----
Ms. Luria. Well, actually, to make 9700 significant, out of
how many? What percentage was that?
Ms. Murphy. These were denials.
Ms. Luria. Denials? Out of how many----
Ms. Murphy. Denials over----
Ms. Luria.--cases overall.
Ms. Murphy.--a couple-year period. So----
Mr. Clark. We looked from 1 October 2016 until June 2018.
Ms. Luria. Okay. Would you mind following up with the
numbers so I can understand the percentage and the scale of
this.
Ms. Murphy. Sure.
Mr. Clark. We will follow up.
Ms. Luria. Since we only have a little time remaining, I
would like to shift to some comments that Ms. Kubek made and
thank you for the work that you do providing legal assistance.
I found your remarks very important, talking about how we
process this. We frequently talk about how difficult this is
for a veteran to have to relive this, and I was not necessarily
aware that throughout the process that they are not allowed to
designate an alternate representative, either a medical
professional or a lawyer representing them to provide this
information so that they do not have to continue to relive this
in the process of answering questions about their claim.
I also noticed when Ms. Kubek brought this up during some
of her comments, Ms. Murphy, you shook you head, you said, you
know, that is not true. I am kind of understanding why there is
a disconnect and also that just made me feel like there is an
unwillingness on your part to, perhaps, listen to people who
are dealing face-to-face with real-life veterans, like we do in
our office when constituents come in.
Ms. Kubek's stories are stories I hear over and over again
from real people, and, I mean, are you--do you have a mechanism
to listen to this kind of information that you are getting from
the field where people are just not--the process is not working
for them, it is causing more pain, you know, more people are
actually having, you know, suicidal ideations are feeling more
in distress after trying to go through a process where they are
seeking help.
Ms. Murphy. Sure. No question, this is a horrible
situation. It is difficult to talk about it. It is difficult to
engage with people on it, and that is why it makes it even more
necessary to bring light to this, and that is what Congress is
doing with these oversight hearings. It is very necessary that
the whole greater veteran community continue to talk about this
and bring visibility to it. That we do training, that we work
together----
Ms. Luria. I have got it. You have got a lot of training. I
think you are putting effort into it in ways that----
Ms. Murphy. Yes.
Ms. Luria.--you know, you think are going to be productive
and I hope that those are actually helping with the problem,
but can a veteran who wants to have a claim, you know, filed,
can they have a lawyer or someone else designated, speak on
their behalf?
Is that allowed in the process?
Ms. Murphy. They certainly can take advantage of working
with one of our veteran service organizations----
Ms. Luria. When the person--when the claims person calls
and needs more answers, can that veteran say or can it be
documented in their file that they have a representative
speaking on their behalf?
Can Ms. Kubek speak for her client?
Ms. Murphy. It is documented in the file and if the veteran
chooses to have them speak, I do not see a reason that that
would not be----
Ms. Luria. Are your people trained for that?
Mr. Clark. We will make sure that they are trained.
Ms. Luria. You are telling us that it is not really a
problem with the rules; it is a problem with, potentially, how
the agents who were processing the claims have interpreted it.
Mr. Clark. Potentially, yes.
Ms. Luria. That they can speak to a different person.
Mr. Clark. Yes, Congresswoman Luria.
If you have an accredited representative and you are----
Ms. Luria. Like, what do you have to do to be accredited? A
lawyer?
Mr. Clark. Well, we just can not discuss--we cannot discuss
intimate, sensitive information from any claimant about that
claimant's information unless we have been served notice by a
representative who has been----
Ms. Luria. What is this, a power of attorney from an
individual?
Mr. Clark. It is a power of attorney, that is correct. That
is correct.
Ms. Luria. Okay. I mean, I think that could help improve
this process, because it really was not brought to light and
if--I think we are out of time, but it looks like Ms. Kubek
would like to follow up with a remark, if that is Okay?
Mr. Pappas. Sure. I will--yes, you are welcome to respond,
Ms. Kubek.
Ms. Kubek. Yes, I just wanted to say, so the appointment of
representation form, which the VA has, which is what I use to
say that I am representing my clients. It is filed in all of my
cases. It required me to provide my contact information, all of
that information.
What happens is when the veteran receives this call, first
of all, I feel that when someone has appointed a
representative, as in other legal proceedings--and Social
Security does this--they would talk directly with me at that--
from that point on, but, second of all, if that is not going to
be the choice, I have had veterans who receive a call from the
VBA say to the person on the phone, please speak with my
representative. I do not want to talk about this.
I have never once received a call after that has a
happened. I have never received follow-up on those claims, ever
in my years of doing this. It has not happened.
Mr. Clark. What we will do, Congresswoman Luria, if we know
about those, we need specifics. Now, obviously, if there are
thousands going on--and we will make sure that we get training
out to our employees to make sure that these kinds of
occurrences--again, we need this kind of feedback; that is how
we get better.
Speaking to specifics are kind of tough, because we do
grant thousands of claims daily--MST-survivor-type claims. We
do get these right in some cases.
Where we get them wrong, we need to know about it so we can
improve upon our processes, leverage our collaboration with the
Veteran Service Organizations (VSOs) and the Members of the OIG
and Members of Congress to tell us where we are getting it
wrong, and afford us the opportunity to get it better. If we do
not, then we discourage more people from coming from the VA and
that is why we are here, for people that have served this great
country and we need to do a great job, but we have to be
informed.
Of course, even in this environment, we are being informed,
you let us know where there is a problem--specifics--and we
will deal with specifics.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you very much, Mr. Clark. We will do a
second round of questioning, because, obviously, we have some
issues that we would like to further take a look at. I will
begin by taking 5 minutes and Ms. Kubek, you know, you talked
about in your testimony, ways that survivors relive their
trauma and we just had a discussion about one particular issue
in terms of representation for these individuals about ways
that VA can become more trauma-informed and institute better
practices.
I am wondering if you can emphasize some other ways or
suggestions that you have that VA can learn how to become
trauma-informed.
Ms. Kubek. Yes, I think the fact that when veterans are
scheduled for their compensation and pension exam, they have no
say whether this exam is done by a man or a woman. It is
incredibly problematic to me.
Given that the VA seems to acknowledge that veterans may
have a preference of whether they discuss such traumatic
memories with a male or female representative with their MST
coordinators, they should do the same thing with the
compensation and pension exam.
I also sympathize that these exams are often unnecessarily
repetitive of things that are already in the record. If the
veteran has provided, in some cases, you know, a six-page
statement of what occurred to them in the military, what has
happened since the military, all the ways their symptoms are
impacting them, the medical treatment they have been receiving,
all of these things, I, then, basically have to tell my clients
you are going to have to go into this exam and they are going
to re-hash every single thing all over again with you.
I know that examiners are required to read the veteran's--
they have to assert that they have read the veteran's file
before they can submit the exam. I do not know whether or not
the requirement exists that they review the file before meeting
the veteran, and I feel that that would be helpful to avoiding
unnecessary elaboration on things that have already been very
clearly stated.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you for that.
I wonder if we could ask VBA, you know, what prevents us
from being able to allow an individual to choose the option of,
you know, deciding what gender their medical benefits examiner
will be to, you know, make sure that we are protecting these
individuals.
Mr. Clark. Well, I will--if I can start, please--and,
certainly, Ms. Murphy, and certainly Dr. Bell can follow up--
but it is our understanding that a claimant can select the
gender of the physician that they would like to have do the
exam and, of course, for the practicing physician for
outpatient treatment. That is our understanding that that does
happen.
Ms. Murphy. Yes. If I could just add, my offices--I am
responsible for the C & P exam--contract exam program for VBA
and all of the providers. If you ask for a male or a female for
an MST--military sexual trauma sort of examination, we do honor
those.
If there is a situation where we can not, we may have to
work with the VHA or find a different contract examiner in the
area that could. I think it is limited by folks not knowing
that is available, number 1, and, number 2, maybe in the most
rural areas, if there is not another provider available, that
is something that we would have to work through.
I think maybe one of the takeaways from this and other
engagements is public information that you can request that. I
would also ask all of our partners in the VSO community and
veteran advocate community to reach out to us if this is not
happening, because we need that information, and to please
socialize that with the folks that you represent to make sure
they know that that is available.
Mr. Pappas. Does VBA ask the question?
Ms. Murphy. I would have to check with our specific
language that we use in our letters. I will have to get back to
you on that.
Mr. Pappas. Well, I think that would be important to know--
--
Ms. Murphy. Okay. Your Honor.
Mr. Pappas.--and, certainly, if that is an option, we
should be getting word out to individuals as best we can.
Ms. Kubek, if I can come back to you, you noted in your
testimony that cases where there is a lack of communication
across VA where the benefits side does not talk to the health
side to process MST claims and requests for these records are
sometimes denied. In some cases, you know, the VHA has actually
provided you with the requested records which kind of raises
the question why VA struggles to communicate internally.
How does this affect efforts to obtain benefits for MST-
related conditions?
Ms. Kubek. The records struggle affects all veterans. This
is not unique to MST survivors, but what happens for MST
survivors is twofold. The VA is frequently looking for markers
from their in-service. When a client's marker is, well, they
filed their restrictive report or when their marker is they had
a pregnancy test or they had an STD test done and I can not
access those records, whether it be from the military side of
things, from DoD--whatever the reason is that I can not access
them--all I have is the veteran's statement, which is going to
result in further probing of the veteran, because there is
nothing else substantiating their claim.
A lot of veterans do not have a lot to go on in their
military file, but they do have years of treatment--possibly,
for some of them, 40 years where they have been telling the
same story of what occurred to them--and when I can not--when I
get a letter back from VBA saying we were unable to obtain the
records from such and such a VA medical facility and I am
holding those records in my hand, I am confused, I think about
veterans who do not have representatives, which there is a lot
of them who do not necessarily know what to do with that
information--they may just think there is nothing they can do--
I know that I can then provide it directly to VBA, but I should
not have to. These are two halves of one body, and sometimes I
do not find it out until the decision letter, denying the
claim.
The VA has a duty to assist in these claims, and so when I
am first hearing about a failure or an inability to get record
at the decision level, something has gone wrong.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. I am over my time, but maybe VA could
just comment and respond to that internal communication.
Ms. Murphy. Certainly. If there were specific instances of
that, I would really be interested in seeing them so that we
could figure out a solution if there was an issue there.
I will say that we work closely with VHA. We have reach-in
ability in our systems to retrieve VHA records, ourselves, in
VBA, so that works for us, and if it were DoD or military
records, you know, that would be a separate situation from VHA
and we do have a VBA employee embedded in that community who
can look at sensitive records and give information to us.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Ms. Murphy.
I will turn things over to the Ranking Member Bergman for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you for the second round, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the one thing that all VA facilities have in
common is they are all different. Some are full-service, some
are limited-service, but the point is as we bridge the gaps in
the differences and try to create standardized, if you will,
procedures, standardized business models, we know that there
are going to be a certain percentage of variance based upon
that VA.
Dr. Bell, I was pleased to see that the IG found that each
of the facilities it evaluated did have an MST coordinator, who
was required by policy; however, the testimony in VHA policy
indicate that serving as the MST coordinator may be a
collateral duty.
Is there a formula for determining whether the MST
coordinator should be a part-time or a full-time duty and what
metrics are used to determine effectiveness?
Ms. Bell. I think in the precursor to your question, you
highlighted some of the challenges around this, which is that
every healthcare system varies widely; there are some that are
very small, have one medical facility. There are some that have
several large medical facilities with a number of community-
based outpatient clinics with it. Obviously, those systems have
very different needs in terms of how much time their MST
coordinator has.
Our national policy does specify a minimum amount of time
that an MST coordinator should be given that is really meant to
be queued toward the smaller system, the less-complex-type
system, but then delineates factors that leadership at that
facility should be considering in determining what additional
time the coordinator should----
Mr. Bergman. I guess what I--because we could talk about
it--I would like to see if there are any kind of metrics--you
can take it for the record, because to help--you know, if you
are one facility and you are trying to model it after a
different facility and you may not have the full-time--you may
not have the population. You may not have the need, okay, but
it would be helpful if you could give us some kind of, if you
will, basic metric to help those facilities understand at what
level you go from full time to collateral duty or whatever it
happens to be.
Ms. Williams, in your written testimony you reference the
Sister to Sister program that provides women veterans a battle
buddy to escort them in the VA. Quite honestly, it is troubling
to think that any veteran feels so unsafe at a VA facility that
they need a battle buddy to escort them.
Based on your comments, what are three immediate and
concrete actions that VHA can take to address to improve the
environment of care at VA to make veterans feel safer?
Ms. Williams. Thank you, sir.
As I previously mentioned, I think that additional emphasis
on the end harassment campaign will be very helpful to have
visible signage everywhere to ensure that all employees know
how they should respond if they witness an incident or are
informed about an incident and corrective actions can be taken.
I do think extending the Sister to Sister program is a
potential avenue, as well. This is not just for women that feel
unsafe, but also for those who are intimidated by how large
some of these facilities are and may be lost trying to wind
their way through them.
Another way that it can be helpful is that it makes women
veterans, in particular, aware that they can have somebody with
them and one area that that can be particularly important--and
we have heard from women veterans that during gynecologic
exams, if they have experienced MST, that can be a particularly
triggering event and having a supportive individual with them
can be helpful.
Just making women veterans aware that they can have
support, whether it is through a formal peer program that VA
runs or that they are allowed to bring in, you know, bring a
friend with them----
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Ms. Williams.--could be very helpful, as well.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Bell, who is responsible for educating frontline staff
and what does VHA do to measure effectiveness, and what do you
think about Ms. Williams' suggestion to use a secret shopper
program as a tool to improve awareness?
Ms. Bell. Frontline staff, in terms of--specific to MST?
Yes.
The secret shopper program, I believe she may have actually
been referring to, is a program that my office, the Office of
Mental Health and Suicide Prevention runs. We make phone calls
to all of the medical facilities and--all the healthcare
systems throughout the country and ask to speak to the MST
coordinator and then take note of whether they were connected
to them directly, how sensitive our interactions are, what our
experience was like, as if we were a veteran.
We make two calls; one from a male caller and one from a
female caller and then we provide the feedback from those
experiences back to the facility and then, of course,
congratulate them when they go well and when they do not go
well, ask them to take steps to improve the situation.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. I have got one quick one, can I go over
a little bit?
Okay. Dr. Bell----
Ms. Williams. I am so sorry. May I clarify to Dr. Bell?
My suggestion was that that excellent program be expanded,
instead of simply asking for connection to the MST coordinator,
but to that frontline eligibility team so that they know that
if somebody is seeking care, that that is where they should be
connected. Somebody should not have to say by name, I need the
MST coordinator, but if they walk in and say, I need care about
this, instead of being told, oh, well, you are not eligible to
be routed appropriately, and to model a program that those
eligibility officers that mimics the very successful one.
Mr. Bergman. I would suggest that you two have coffee and
work it out.
Ms. Williams. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Dr. Bell, are members of the Guard and
Reserve who do not meet the definition of veteran eligible for
MST-related care and are differences in the healthcare services
available to them; if so, what are those differences?
Because, you know, as we know the last--for the last 17
years, plus, the extended and literally unprecedented use of
the Guard and Reserve has put those Guardsmen and Reservists
into a different category than they maybe were before 9/11.
Ms. Bell. Unfortunately, our treatment authority is limited
to individuals who have veteran status or are currently in the
service. Former servicemembers, particularly, former members of
the National Guard and Reserve who do not have veteran status,
are unfortunately not eligible for MST-related care.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Well, that is something that we can work
on as a committee.
Thank you, you Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Ranking Member Bergman.
I will recognize Chairman Takano for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. General Bergman, you asked questions that were
definitely on my mind. They were excellent questions. Thank
you.
Mr. Bergman. I have got to get home, soon.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Clark, Members of Congress have proposed
legislation to address many of the barriers to accessing
benefits in the current application process. This includes a
bill by Representative Pingree, H.R. 1092.
In June, you testified on behalf of VBA that VA opposed
section--a section of H.R. 1092 that would significantly reduce
the burden on the veteran to prove that the sexual assault
occurred in service.
Why does VA oppose this section?
Mr. Clark. Congressman Takano, we will have to take that
back for the record.
Mr. Takano. Okay.
Mr. Clark. On this, specifically, I want to be clear about
addressing that.
If I can speak briefly to the outreach coordinator,
military sexual trauma coordinator, please?
We have talked about why it was not a full term----
Mr. Takano. Okay. I do want to know about it, I mean, I do
want to know what the VA's position is on it, if they are going
to continue to oppose it.
Mr. Clark. We will take that for the record.
Mr. Takano. I wanted to ask for the Center for a New
American Security (CNAS) and The American Legion (TAL) and New
York Legal Assistance Group (NYLAG), how could this legislation
and other statutory changes provide relief to MST survivors?
Ms. Barlet. Excuse me, Chairman Takano, would you mind
reminding me what the legislation was for?
Mr. Takano. Well, what this section does is it reduces,
significantly, the burden on the veteran to prove that sexual
assault occurred in service. You know, when veterans have PTSD
associated, say, with combat, it is--the burden is a lot less,
but when it comes to MST, the burden on the veteran is still
pretty high----
Ms. Barlet. Yes.
Mr. Takano.--so this legislation would address--would
reduce that burden.
Ms. Barlet. I would like to refer to our resolution 67 and
147. 67 urges that VA has enough qualified and treated
employees to correctly process the MST claims with the hope
that that would help alleviate the retraumatization on the
veteran; in addition, our VA and our Benefits Division does
annual training with our VSOs to encompass and help that
veteran through the process.
Mr. Takano. Great.
Go ahead.
Ms. Kubek. This legislation, I think, would be hugely
beneficial to survivors. I think it would change this process
dramatically.
The rules were changed for combat, because of the fact that
combat is a chaotic environment. I know this was said in the
hearing that you had on 1092 that combat is a unique
environment where the mission controls, there is not time to be
sitting there documenting every single thing that happens, and
so you can not always connect it back when you are trying to
track through the records.
I would argue that MST is like combat. I would argue that
sexual assault in the military is also a chaotic environment in
which you have absolutely no ability to be sitting there
documenting what occurred to you. There are so many reasons why
veterans would not have an ability to do the same--in the same
way that it occurred in combat.
I think that--I know that hesitations were brought up
against the bill because of that, but I think that I would
argue that the similarity are so strong that I think that makes
the case for why the changes proposed in this bill are needed.
Mr. Takano. Thank you very much for that.
Mr. Chairman, I may go over a little bit, but I want--I
think this is a very important question to ask.
We heard some concrete steps forward in response to General
Bergman's questions about the next steps.
For the VA witnesses, given the urgency, given how the--
from our other witnesses about how in your face the--the
quote--the word ``in your face'' or the term ``in your face''
was used, what concretely are the next steps to take this
issue, to elevate it?
My earlier question about taking this to the top levels, if
you were to go to the secretary or the Under Secretary or the
deputy secretary, what are the action steps that you would
recommend that need to be--to actually bring the two different
entities, the VHA and the VBA together to coordinate, what
needs to happen?
Mr. Clark. I think we are already doing some of that. We
are collaborating.
I mentioned earlier about our symposium that we are having
later on this year, that we are bringing in all of our
processors and our MST coordinators, who, by the way, they
conduct other forms of outreach. Often times, homelessness is
wrapped up into, you know, survivors of military sexual trauma.
That is one reason why they do a multitude of outreach things,
rather than just solely just to military sexual trauma.
We are working together, leveraging and collaborating
between our two agencies. We are meeting this year, and our
undersecretary has mandated that all of our regional office
leaders, our claims processors, on military sexual trauma, our
outreach coordinators, these individuals will be here in D.C.
later this year, and we will leverage things that we have
learned to improve upon this process.
We have heard the Inspector General. We have heard Members
of Congress. We have heard, and we continue to hear from
veterans when we conduct outreach, when we receive phone calls
from national call centers, solid State is a--Solid Start is a
program where we are contacting claimants as they leave the
service at particular points.
We are trying to get the word out to say to survivors of
military sexual trauma, and through our transition-assistance
program, to veteran servicemembers, even before they become
veterans, that we are improving upon this process and here are
the benefits that you are entitled to. When you leave service,
come to us. If we do not do something properly, let us know and
we will work to fix that. It is a continuous improvement type
of a process, not a one and done.
I feel that we are working together to do some of these
things and we look for--the same group--the Members of
Congress, the VSOs--to let us know where we can improve upon
our processes and we will implement those things.
Mr. Takano. Could you also respond.
Ms. Murphy. Certainly.
I think we have heard a lot of good ideas today. I
particularly like the idea about the signs we do have in our
public contact areas to add information that male and female
are available--coordinators are available--I think that is very
concrete.
I would say continuing to get the word out about the
availability of the military sexual trauma coordinators in VHA
and VBA so that folks know who they are and how to reach them.
For VBA, the information by name, by facility is available on
our website. With their phone numbers, you can contact them.
I think getting the word out about the free healthcare that
is available for military sexual trauma and VHA, regardless, if
you are service-connected or getting benefits, I think that is
very important. We keep that message going. Also, that if you
are going to a C & P exam, you do have the right to ask for
somebody who is gender-specific.
I think we have made strides and it just is a continued,
focused whole-veteran community effort to keep in touch this
going, to keep the visibility going.
Mr. Takano. I think you have made strides.
Given the urgency of this issue, I just want to push you to
take this to the top levels, identify those next steps, share
them with the committee.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you very much.
Before the closing of today's hearing, I would just like to
make a final few points.
First, today's testimony showed that VA provides vital
services for survivors of military sexual trauma; however,
accessing these services continues to pose major obstacles for
veterans. The testimony of the Inspector General, along with
oversight by the committee, the task force, and non-
governmental organizations like those who are here today has
made this clear--additional oversight is needed to dive deeper
into the root causes and equally important, identify the
necessary next steps toward solutions.
Second, I think it is very clear here today that there is
strong bipartisan interests in pursuing this issue and in
collaborating toward results. You saw that from the Members who
were here during this hearing, and I think that is shared
across Congress.
I look forward to working closely with Chairman Takano,
with Ranking Member Bergman, with Congresswoman Brownley, and
the task force, and all Members on both sides of the aisle, as
we continue to conduct our oversight, monitor developments and
press for improvements.
We also need to work together to pass more bills into law
that are now before Congress, as well as to develop additional
legislation. I mentioned that the Deborah Sampson Act is a
critical piece of legislation that would expand eligibility for
MST-related services at VA.
I wish to thank our witnesses today for their testimony,
our non-governmental experts and representatives from the
veterans community provided important testimony. Your
knowledge, personal experiences, and perspectives represent
critical resources for Congress and for the VA.
I applaud your ongoing work to ensure that those surviving
military sexual trauma have access to the care that they need
and that they deserve.
The VA officials here today from both, VBA and VHA, have a
critical role in supporting survivors of MST. You are clearly
dedicated to our Nation's veterans and are working hard to
ensure that the programs you lead are effective. I appreciate
your ongoing service and I know that you will convey, on behalf
of our subcommittee, our thanks to the many, many employees and
staff throughout the VA who are working hard to provide vital
resources and care.
Clearly, there is much more to be done and improvements to
make and implement and, however, I am confident that we will
continue to work together so that survivors of military sexual
trauma receive the services they need and deserve.
I would like to see if Ranking Member Bergman has any
closing comments?
Mr. Bergman. I am good.
Mr. Pappas. Chairman Takano.
Mr. Takano. No, thank you.
Mr. Pappas. While seeing none, members will have 5
legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include
any extraneous material, and, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Willie Clark

Good afternoon Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, Members of
the Subcommittee, Chairwoman Brownley, and Members of the Women
Veterans Task Force. Thank you for the invitation to speak today on the
important topic of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) support for
survivors of Military Sexual Trauma (MST). Accompanying me today is Ms.
Beth Murphy, Executive Director of Compensation Service, Veterans
Benefits Administration (VBA), and Dr. Margret Bell, National Deputy
Director for Military Sexual Trauma, Veterans Health Administration
(VHA).
VA is strongly committed to supporting Veterans who experienced
Military Sexual Trauma, or MST, which is defined as sexual assault or
repeated and threatening sexual harassment that occurs during military
service. Nobody should ever have to experience such trauma, much less
the men and women who are serving our Nation and protecting our
freedoms. And yet, too often, they do. Survivors of MST can experience
both physical and mental health issues as a result of that trauma. VA
is committed to helping these survivors receive the health care
services they need to treat MST-related mental and physical health
conditions. When Veterans suffer from MST-related conditions, VA may
also be able to provide disability compensation. In this statement, I
will provide an update on specific efforts within VBA and VHA to
improve services and care for Veterans who have experienced MST and on
the collaboration between VBA and VHA in support of MST survivors.

MST-Related Claims Processing

VA strives to provide accurate and timely benefits to our Veterans.
The sensitive and complex nature of MST-related claims makes it
critically important that VBA provide compassionate assistance to
affected Veterans in gathering all necessary evidence to fairly and
accurately decide their claims. To ensure MST-related claims are
prioritized, VBA designates specialized Veterans Service
Representatives (VSR) and Rating Veterans Service Representatives
(RVSR) at each Regional Office (RO) to be accountable for these claims.
These VSRs and RVSRs are specifically trained to process MST-related
claims. As a quality check, a second-signature review is required for
all MST-rating decisions until the specialized processors achieve a
required accuracy rate of 90 percent.
In September 2019, VBA completed its review of approximately 9,700
previously denied MST claims from October 1, 2016, through June 30,
2018. If, upon review, the denial was deemed incorrect, VBA initiated
corrective actions, as recommended by VA's Office of Inspector General.
Of the 9,700, approximately 1,900 required additional development.

MST-Related Health Care

VA provides care for mental and physical health conditions related
to MST free of charge. This includes outpatient, residential, and
inpatient care as well as pharmaceuticals. Eligibility for MST-related
care is very broad: Veterans may be able to receive free MST-related
care even if they are not eligible for other VA care. For example,
there are no length of service or income requirements to receive MST-
related care. Very importantly, an adjudicated service connection is
not required. Veterans do not need to have reported their experiences
of MST at the time they occurred or have other documentation that the
trauma occurred in order to receive MST-related health care. Veterans
do not need to initiate MST-related health care within a certain time
period after their experiences of MST or within a certain time after
discharge.
VHA offers a full continuum of mental health services for both male
and female Veterans who experienced MST. Specialty services are
available to target problems such as posttraumatic stress disorder,
substance use disorders, depression, and homelessness. Outpatient MST-
related services are available at every VA health care system, and MST-
related outpatient counseling services are available through VA's
community-based Vet Centers. VHA also offers residential programs for
Veterans who need more intensive treatment and support, and inpatient
programs are available for acute care needs. As with other VA health
care services, Veterans can receive care for MST-related conditions
from community providers if they meet the requirements for community
care referrals more generally
Every VA health care system has a VHA MST Coordinator who serves as
a point of contact for Veterans seeking help for MST-related issues.
VHA also works to ensure that Veterans are aware of MST-related
services and promotes engagement into care. Recognizing that many
survivors of sexual trauma do not disclose their experiences unless
asked directly, it is VA policy that all Veterans seen in VA medical
facilities must be screened for experiences of MST. This is an
important way to ensure that Veterans are aware of and offered the free
MST-related care available through VHA. For Veterans who experienced
MST, it also helps ensure that their trauma history is considered in
the provision of care.

MST-related Training

VBA has significantly updated and improved its training for the
processing of MST-related claims. During Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, VBA
required all MST claims processors to complete a mandatory course on
claims development and rating procedures. The training included
detailed descriptions of the types of evidence that may be considered
in support of MST-related claims. Another mandatory course featured
step-by-step instructions on how to utilize the new checklists. The
claims development checklists were designed to assist decisionmakers by
ensuring those reviewing a Veteran's claim for disability compensation
complete specific steps for MST-related claims. These courses are
available to ROs, as needed, to train new MST claims processors and as
refreshers for those who were previously certified.
Also, in Fiscal Year 2019, VBA provided a national refresher course
that included an in-depth review of MST error trends and pertinent
procedural and manual references. Going forward, this training will be
offered annually. Furthermore, in December 2019, at a semi-annual
training event for VBA managers, multiple small group breakout training
sessions were held that focused on the importance of handling MST
claims appropriately and with sensitivity. The importance of
consistency in claims development and ratings is reinforced during
other interactions as well. Throughout fiscal year 2019 and into Fiscal
Year 2020, MST-related claims have been a regular topic of discussion
on VBA's national Compensation Service Quality calls. Additionally, VBA
conducted a Special Focus Review (SFR) of MST claims in Fiscal Year
2019 to establish a baseline accuracy level. VBA will conduct another
SFR on MST claims in Fiscal Year 2020 to monitor progress and adjust
our process based on lessons learned.
VBA plans to host its first MST Training Symposium in April 2020.
MST Coordinators and employees designated to process MST-related claims
will be brought together for training to enhance their ability to
improve the Veteran experience. We plan to invite MST survivors to
speak directly on their experiences. In collaboration with VHA, the
training symposium will also feature an MST panel discussion with VHA
clinicians and a session on suicide prevention.
VA recognizes that all staff members in our health care system play
a role in improving access and reducing barriers to care. VHA has a
range of initiatives to ensure both clinical and frontline staff are
prepared to assist MST survivors. Since 2006, VHA has funded a national
MST Support Team to promote best practices in the field. The Team has
established an MST Consultation Program that is available to any VHA
staff member with questions related to assisting Veterans who
experienced MST. These consultations are a key way to assist staff in
providing high quality care and services. In addition, all VHA mental
health providers and primary care providers are required to complete
mandatory training on MST. VHA also offers a range of supplemental
national MST-related training for staff, including monthly training
calls, an annual conference on treatment program development, online
courses, and a community of practice intranet Website.
The MST Support Team also conducts an ``Answer the Call'' campaign
to ensure that Veterans calling VA medical facilities with MST-related
questions have positive experiences with frontline staff and are
quickly connected with a VHA MST Coordinator. As part of the campaign,
VHA employees conduct test calls to VA medical centers and select
Community-Based Outpatient Clinics to verify that frontline staff, such
as telephone operators and clinic clerks, are familiar with the terms
``military sexual trauma'' and ``MST,'' can readily identify and direct
callers to a VHA MST Coordinator and are sensitive to Veterans' privacy
concerns. Facilities receive feedback on the results of these calls and
use them to improve the Veteran experience.
MST-related training also is provided to those who conduct Medical
Disability Examinations (MDE). VBA requires completion of a general
certification for all contracted clinicians who conduct MDEs for MST-
related issues. This certification includes training courses that equip
contracted examiners with the sensitivity and skills to interact with
Veterans who have experienced MST and to recognize behavioral changes
indicative of MST. The training courses are designed for both contract
clinicians who perform these examinations and VHA clinicians. VBA and
VHA continue to collaborate to improve and update these training
courses.

MST Outreach

VA is dedicated to improving outreach to Veterans, especially those
affected by MST. Every RO has coordinators who specialize in outreach
for certain Veteran populations, such as homeless, former Prisoners of
War, and minority Veterans to assist them with benefits and services
including two MST Coordinators (a male and a female). MST Coordinators
working in the RO are specially trained to assist those who have
experienced MST and come to submit or follow up on their claim. To
support the RO MST Coordinators, there are two program managers in VBA
Central Office. The program managers provide recurring guidance to the
field on MST-related outreach, including through a quarterly
teleconference.
VBA conducts recurring targeted MST outreach that includes
briefings to inform, educate, and empower Veterans to access VA
benefits and resources. These briefings include information on how to
file an MST-related claim and how to contact an MST Coordinator near
the Veteran. In the first quarter of Fiscal Year 2020, VBA completed
187 hours of MST-related outreach at 22 events, reaching over 500
Veterans, family members, and other stakeholders. A complete list of
MST Coordinators serving in ROs, by State, can be found at https://
www.benefits.va.gov/benefits/mstcoordinators.asp.
VBA MST Coordinators also collaborate with VHA to conduct outreach,
ensure there is a warm hand-off to VHA MST Coordinators who are
available at every VA health care system for assistance with access to
counseling and treatment, and provide MST-related training to
Department of Defense (DoD) personnel.
VBA's MST Coordinators also work with the Women Veteran
Coordinators (WVC) at each RO, including in the National Call Centers
and at Pension Management Centers. WVCs conduct local outreach and VA
benefit briefings to women Veterans within their jurisdiction. At some
locations, the WVC also fulfills the role of the female MST
Coordinator. MST and WVCs work together with Veterans, their families,
and local groups advocating for Veterans to increase awareness of and
access to VA services and programs.
Furthermore, VBA ensures that all public contact representatives
who interact with Veterans and families receive annual training on a
daily basis to help them identify indicators of stressors and signs
that a Veteran may have experienced MST.
VHA also engages in a variety of outreach efforts to ensure
Veterans are aware that MST-related services are available.
Throughout the year, VHA MST Coordinators engage in local outreach
efforts, including hosting events in honor of Sexual Assault Awareness
and Prevention Month in April. These include educational events
designed to increase knowledge and awareness of MST among all staff
throughout the medical facility, informational events about the impact
of MST and VA services for Veterans, and awareness-raising events that
include opportunities for survivors to share their stories of MST and
recovery. To support these efforts, VHA has developed national outreach
posters, handouts, and educational documents for Veterans, secured
inclusion of information about MST on relevant va.gov Websites, and
developed a publicly accessible MST-specific informational Website at
https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/msthome/index.asp. . Outreach materials
include both gender-inclusive and gender-specific (i.e., targeting
women and men) products.
To assist transitioning Servicemembers, the VA Transition
Assistance Program benefits and services briefing provides information
including:

An overview of MST;

Information about MST-related care available at VA
medical centers;

Eligibility requirements for MST-related health care;

How to locate and connect with a VA MST Coordinator; and

How Vet Centers can also provide counseling and referrals
for those who have experienced MST.

Through the Transition Assistance Program, VA also informs
transitioning Servicemembers of where to find MST-related information
including the MST Fact Sheet and other VA resources on VA.gov.
Information about VA's MST-related services is also provided through
the Separation Health Assessment and DoD's Safe Helpline for
Servicemembers who experience sexual assault during their service.
Finally, VA utilizes an online presence by publishing MST-related
information across its public-facing Websites and social media
channels. One such VA Fact Sheet for Veterans filing claims for MST-
related disability conditions provides guidance, including how VA can
assist even if the assault was never reported.

Culture Change

VBA continues to maintain focus on MST-related claims and ensure
Veterans who file claims based on MST are properly served. I have
personally engaged MST coordinators and claims processors in the field
and am committed to ensuring that MST remains a priority topic for our
field office leaders. Dr. Lawrence has also made it a priority to
emphasize VBA's commitment to supporting those who have experienced MST
at all VBA national training conferences.
VBA ensures all staff are trained to assist Veterans with
compassion and sensitivity and has mandated that all RO personnel in
identified positions complete MST Sensitivity Training VHA developed
for VBA. Additionally, in November 2018, VA's Under Secretary for
Benefits, Dr. Paul R. Lawrence, released a video emphasizing VBA's
commitment to supporting those who have experienced MST, providing
treatment to help the healing process, and ensuring compensation for
those disabled by MST.

Conclusion

Providing Veterans with the benefits and services they have earned
in a manner that honors their service is a priority for VA. Due to the
difficult nature of MST, it is particularly critical for VA to ensure
all interactions with survivors are compassionate and sensitive. To
that end, VA ensures claims are processed by highly skilled and
experienced employees who receive specialized training on MST claims;
VHA staff have the information and resources they need to provide
streamlined access to specialized, Veteran-centric care, and
comprehensive action is taken to improve outreach. There is strong
commitment across VA to sustain and enhance these efforts moving
forward.
______

Prepared Statement of Julie Kroviak

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, Chairwoman Brownley, and
members of the Subcommittee and Task Force, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the Office of Inspector General's (OIG's)
oversight of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA's) policies and
procedures related to military sexual trauma (MST). The mission of the
OIG is to help improve the efficiency and effectiveness of VA's
programs and operations through independent audits, inspections,
evaluations, reviews, and investigations. The OIG's prior work has
identified deficiencies in Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)
processing of MST-related claims, which in part can be attributed to
lack of specialization, inadequate staff training, deficient internal
controls, and discontinued special focus reviews.\1\ The OIG has also
reviewed how the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) implements its
policies and procedures for treating patients who have MST-related
conditions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The OIG testified before the House Veterans' Affairs
Subcommittee on Disability Assistance and Memorial Affairs on June 19,
2019 and November 29, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sexual trauma experienced while in the military service affects
both men and women--with serious and long-term consequences. According
to the Department of Defense, more than 7,600 individuals reported a
sexual assault in Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, which is the most recent data
available.\2\ This statistic is an increase of about 12.6 percent from
2017. Understandably, many veterans who have experienced MST are
reluctant to report the sexual assault either at the time of its
occurrence or even much later. It is vital that VA makes every effort
to properly communicate available MST services to veterans and that
both VHA and VBA staff work expeditiously and with sensitivity to
ensure the provision of needed care, treatment, and benefits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Department of Defense Annual Report on Sexual Assault in the
Military, Fiscal Year 2018.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
BACKGROUND

VA uses the term ``military sexual trauma'' to refer to sexual
assault or repeated, unsolicited, threatening acts of sexual harassment
that occurred while a veteran was serving on active duty or active duty
for training.\3\ Furthermore, VA defines MST as ``psychological trauma,
which in the judgment of a VA mental health professional, resulted from
a physical assault of a sexual nature, battery of a sexual nature, or
sexual harassment which occurred while the Veteran was serving on
active duty, active duty for training, or inactive duty training.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ VHA Directive 1115, Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Program, May
8, 2018.
\4\ Military Sexual Trauma. https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/
mst_general_factsheet.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
MST is an experience, not a diagnosis or a mental health
condition.\5\ Although posttraumatic stress disorder is commonly
associated with MST, other frequently associated diagnoses include
depression and other mood, psychotic, and substance use disorders.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Military Sexual Trauma. https://www.mentalhealth.va.gov/docs/
mst_general_factsheet.pdf.
\6\ PTSD: National Center for PTSD. https://www.ptsd.va.gov/
understand/types/sexual--trauma--military.asp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 1992, Congress began passing a series of laws that provided
outreach and MST counseling and treatment programs for active duty
women veterans who experienced sexual trauma while on active duty.\7\
In 1994, these services where extended to men who have experienced
MST.\8\ Furthermore, the Veterans Health Program Improvement Act of
2004 permanently extended VA's authority and added MST counseling and
related treatment to veterans who experience sexual trauma while
serving on active duty or active duty for training (if service was in
the National Guard or Reserves).\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ 38 U.S.C. Sec.  102-585, Women Veterans Health Programs Act of
1992. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-106/pdf/STATUTE-106-
Pg4943.pdf.
\8\ 38 U.S. C 101 note. Veterans Health Programs Extension Act of
1994. (Public Law 103-452). https://www.Congress.gov/103/bills/hr3313/
BILLS-103hr3313enr.pdf.
\9\ 38 U.S.C 101 note. Veterans Health Programs Improvement Act of
2004. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-108publ422/pdf/PLAW-
108publ422.pdf.

THE OIG'S COMPREHENSIVE HEALTHCARE INSPECTION PROGRAM FOCUSES ON MENTAL
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
HEALTH ISSUES RELATED TO MST

The OIG uses its Comprehensive Healthcare Inspection Program (CHIP)
to provide cyclical, focused evaluations of the quality of care
delivered in the inpatient and outpatient settings of VHA facilities.
These inspections are one element of the overall efforts of the OIG to
ensure that the Nation's veterans receive high-quality and timely VA
healthcare services. OIG CHIP teams evaluate nine areas of clinical and
administrative operations that reflect quality patient care, with some
focused review areas changing every fiscal year.\10\ Additionally, the
OIG may annually rotate high-interest subtopics in the areas of mental
health care, women's health, high-risk processes, and medication
management.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ The nine areas for Fiscal Year 2019 were leadership and
organizational risks; quality, safety, and value; credentialing and
privileging; environment of care; medication management; mental health
related to MST; geriatric care; women's health; and high-risk
processes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Fiscal Year 2019, the CHIP mental health care review focused on
VHA facilities' compliance with selected VHA requirements related to
MST, including processes carried out by MST coordinators, the provision
of care to patients after positive screening, and mandatory staff
training. To accomplish this at 43 randomly selected facilities, OIG
inspectors reviewed the electronic health records of approximately 50
patients that had a positive MST screen from July 1, 2017, through June
30, 2018. They also conducted interviews and reviewed relevant facility
documents and training records.

MST Coordinators

VHA requires that MST coordinators be designated at each facility
and be a licensed credentialed clinician or possess expertise related
to trauma, mental health, and MST-related issues. VHA outlines MST
coordinator responsibilities as

Supporting the implementation of national and Veterans
Integrated Service Network-level policies concerning MST-related care;

Serving as a point person and source of information for
MST-related care issues;

Directing and providing facility staff education to
improve MST-related care;

Directing and engaging in outreach activities within the
facility and with community allies;

Developing facility-wide partnerships; and

Communicating with national, VISN, and facility-level
leadership, and other stakeholders.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ VHA Directive 1115, Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Program, May
8, 2018.

The OIG noted high compliance with several of the selected VHA
requirements regarding MST coordinators, their activities, and the
provision of care to patients after positive screening. Specifically,
each of the evaluated facilities had a designated MST coordinator. The
OIG found that 42 of 43 coordinators (98 percent) had generally
established and monitored informational outreach activities, and 39 of
43 coordinators (91 percent) tracked and monitored MST-related data.
The OIG, however, noted several opportunities for improvement.
First, VHA must ensure these coordinators communicate issues concerning
MST services and initiatives with local leaders. The OIG found that
only 34 of 43 coordinators (79 percent) had a process for accomplishing
this responsibility. Also, VHA must make facility staff aware of MST
issues, and make sure personnel have the knowledge and skill to work
with veterans who have experienced MST. Only 38 of 43 coordinators (88
percent) had established and monitored MST-related staff training.
These deficiencies may hinder the facility leaders' efforts to identify
and address opportunities for improvement.

Mental Health Referral and Follow-Up Process

VHA also requires that all veterans seen in VHA medical centers and
associated community-based outpatient clinics be screened for
experiences of MST and results documented in the VA's electronic health
record. Veterans should be screened at least once and then rescreened
following additional military service, separation, or declination of
initial screening.\12\ Those who screen positive must have access to
appropriate MST-related mental health care.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Department of Veterans Affairs, Military Sexual Trauma
Clinical Reminder Referral Question and Re-Deployment Activation Patch
PXRM*2.0*43 Installation and Setup Guide, Product Development, June
2015.
\13\ VHA Directive 1115, Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Program, May
8, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If a veteran requests any mental health services, a referral should
be entered in the electronic health record. If a veteran declines
mental health services or is currently enrolled in those services, that
information also should be documented in his or her electronic health
record.\14\ Evidence-based mental health care must be available to all
veterans with mental health conditions related to MST. All new patients
requesting or referred for mental health services must receive an
initial evaluation within 24 hours to identify urgent care needs and a
more comprehensive diagnostic and treatment planning evaluation within
30 days.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Department of Veterans Affairs, Military Sexual Trauma
Clinical Reminder Referral Question and Re-Deployment Activation Patch
PXRM*2.0*43 Installation and Setup Guide, Product Development, June
2015.
\15\ VHA Handbook 1160.01, Uniform Mental Health Services in VA
Medical Centers and Clinics, September 11, 2008, Amended November 16,
2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG reviewed the provision of MST-related care for 1,903
patients (from all 43 facilities) who had a positive screening and
observed high compliance with each of the VHA requirements assessed.
The OIG found that 1,832 of the 1,903 patients (96 percent) received a
referral for MST-related services or had an acceptable reason for
nonreferral.\16\ Further, of the 713 patients who were subsequently
referred to mental health services, 667 (94 percent) received an
initial mental health evaluation within one business day of referral or
had an acceptable reason for (1) non-evaluation or (2) evaluation
greater than one business day from referral.\17\ Finally, of the 713
applicable patients referred to mental health services, 667 (94
percent) received a mental health diagnostic and treatment planning
evaluation within 30 days of referral or had an acceptable reason for
(1) not receiving a mental health diagnostic and treatment planning
evaluation or (2) evaluation greater than 30 days from referral.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Examples of acceptable reasons included patient refusal and
MST-related issues already being managed by mental health providers.
\17\ Examples of acceptable reasons included patient declination,
patient no-show for appointment, and other patient causal factors.
\18\ Examples of acceptable reasons included patient declination,
patient was receiving mental health MST services, and patient no-show
for appointment.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mandatory MST Training

VHA requires that all mental health and primary care providers
appointed or utilized on a full-time, part-time, intermittent,
consultant, attending, without compensation, on-station fee-basis, on-
station contract, or on-station sharing agreement basis must complete
their respective mandatory MST training no later than 90 days after
entering their position.\19\ Full-time providers must complete a web-
based training program in VA's Talent Management System as a one-time
requirement.\20\ Additionally, providers who started ``before July 1,
2012, were required to complete the training no later than September
30, 2012. Providers starting after July 1, 2012, must complete the
training within 90 days of entering their position to be in
compliance.'' \21\ Because the MST coordinator may provide clinical
care to veterans who experienced MST, they are also subject to the
mandatory training requirements for mental health and primary care
providers.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ ``On-station'' refers to the location where healthcare
services were provided through fee-basis, contract, and sharing
agreements when they are VA premises.
\20\ VHA Directive 1115.01, Military Sexual Trauma (MST) Mandatory
Training and Reporting Requirements for VHA Mental Health and Primary
Care Providers, April 14, 2017.
\21\ Acting Deputy Under Secretary for Health for Operations and
Management (10N) memorandum, Compliance with Military Sexual Trauma
(MST) Mandatory Training for Mental Health and Primary Care Providers
(VAIQ 7663786), February 2, 2016.
\22\ VHA requested that facility-level MST coordinators or VISN-
level MST Points of Contact complete ``MST Training for Mental Health
Clinicians and MST Coordinators'' in June 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Providers in the following professions must be assigned the
training requirement for mental health providers: psychiatrists,
psychologists, social workers (includes primary care and other non-
mental health clinics or services), psychiatric nurses, marriage and
family therapists, licensed professional mental health counselors, and
mental health clinical pharmacy specialists. The primary care patient-
aligned care team (PACT) providers working in the following professions
must also be assigned the training requirement: physicians, advanced
practice registered nurses, clinical pharmacy specialists, physician
assistants, registered nurses, and licensed practical/vocational
nurses.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ VHA Directive 1115.01 defines the mental health providers as
``licensed professionals and license-eligible trainees who deliver
mental health clinical care in accordance with their privileges, scope
of practice, functional statement, or labor mapping. VHA policy does
not in general specify the occupational titles of those considered
qualified to deliver mental health care (see VHA Handbook 1160.01), so
providers from a range of professional disciplines may meet this
definition.'' VHA Directive 1115.01 defines primary care providers as
``licensed professionals and license-eligible trainees who deliver
clinical primary care services in accordance with their privileges,
scope of practice, functional statement, or labor mapping to patients
receiving care from VHA.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG found that of 324 clinicians hired before July 1, 2012,
there were 304 (94 percent) who had completed MST training. However, of
the 529 applicable clinicians hired after July 1, 2012, only 330 (62
percent) had completed MST training within 90 days of entering their
position. This could potentially result in newly hired clinicians
providing counseling, care, and service without the required MST
training.

OTHER OIG WORK RELATED TO MST

In previous years, the OIG has released reports on matters related
to MST and claims for benefits that can significantly affect veterans.

Review of Combat Stress in Women Veterans Receiving VA Health Care and
Disability Benefits

In a December 2010 report, the OIG identified deficiencies in
evaluating and processing MST claims and recommended that VBA conduct
specialized training and an analysis of the consistency in which MST
claims were processed. As a result, VBA implemented special focus
quality improvement reviews of MST-related claims and directed VA
regional offices to designate MST specialists beginning in 2011.

Denied Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Claims Related to Military Sexual
Trauma

In August 2018, the OIG reported that nearly half of denied MST-
related claims were not properly processed following VBA policy and
procedures.\24\ The potential impact on veterans seeking benefits
related to MST is considerable given that VBA processes an estimated
12,000 MST claims per year and the number of MST incidents reported
within the DoD continues to grow. These improperly denied claims
potentially resulted in undue stress for veterans in need. The OIG
audit team identified several deficiencies that led to the improper
denial of benefits such as lack of specialization, inadequate MST-
related claim-processing training for VBA staff, deficient internal
controls, and discontinued special focus reviews.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\  Denied Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Claims Related to
Military Sexual Trauma, August 21, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG made six recommendations to ensure the accurate processing
of MST-related claims. Two of the six recommendations have been closed.
In VBA's response to the OIG report, VBA leaders provided action plans
and dates of completion, ranging from November 30, 2018, to October 31,
2019, for the remaining four recommendations. VBA requested closure for
three recommendations; however, the OIG recently advised VBA that it
would need to provide additional information in order for the OIG to
consider closing them.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\  VBA requested recommendations 1, 4, and 5 be closed. VBA did
not request recommendation 3 be closed. The OIG requested additional
information for recommendations 4 and 5.
------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VBA requested closure of the recommendation related to reevaluating
all denied MST-related claims since the beginning of Fiscal Year 2017.
However, during a follow-up OIG sample review of that information,
reviewers became concerned about that process. As a result, the OIG is
conducting another audit to determine whether VBA properly reevaluated
those claims. Specifically, the audit will assess whether VBA has made
improvements and is correctly processing more recent MST-related claims
based on updated VBA policies, procedures, and training that resulted
from the OIG's August 2018 report recommendations. A final report is
expected to be published in the fall of 2020.

CONCLUSION

It is critical for VA to provide compensation and healthcare
services to veterans who experienced MST during their military service.
These services should be delivered promptly and with sensitivity.
Recent and ongoing OIG work has detailed the challenges some veterans
face when accessing and receiving these much-needed services. VHA must
ensure that MST coordinators carry out assigned administrative and
oversight responsibilities and clinicians complete mandatory MST
training in a timely manner. Although VBA has expressed a strong
commitment to addressing deficiencies identified by the OIG, its
delayed action in fully implementing recommendations may cause undue
stress to men and women deserving of care and discourage other eligible
veterans from stepping forward to report misconduct and seek
assistance. The OIG will continue to monitor all efforts to improve the
care and services provided to veterans who have suffered MST.
Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, Chairwoman Brownley, and
members of the Subcommittee and Task Force, this concludes my
statement. I would be happy to answer any questions.
______

Prepared Statement of Tammy Barlet

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and distinguished members
who proudly serve on this subcommittee; on behalf of our National
Commander, James W. ``Bill'' Oxford, thank you for the opportunity to
comment on the important issue of how the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) supports survivors of military sexual trauma (MST). It is
my duty and honor to represent The American Legion and assist this
subcommittee in better understanding this issue, how it impacts our
veterans, and provide recommendations for improvement. It is imperative
that we address these issues in an effort to ensure the institutions we
built to care for our veterans are giving them the quality care and
support they deserve.
The American Legion believes that our Nation's veterans should
never suffer at the hands of institutions whose existence and mission
is to care for them. We believe in the quality of care at VA
facilities, remain committed to a strong VA, and maintain that VA is a
``system worth saving.''

System Worth Saving

The American Legion uniquely understands the challenges VA faces in
order to support survivors of MST due to our routine site visits
through our System Worth Saving (SWS) program. This innovative
partnership was launched in 2003 to promote best practices at VA
Medical Centers (VAMC), identify any challenges, and make
recommendations to improve the quality of care for veterans. The
mission of the SWS program is to assess the quality and timeliness of
veterans' healthcare at VAMCs, the claims process at VA Regional
Offices (VARO), and provide feedback from local veterans about the care
and services offered. To accomplish this mission, The American Legion
conducts site visits to VAMCs and VAROs nationwide. The American Legion
compiles the reports from each visit for publication and distribution
to the President of the United States, Congress, VA officials, and
members of The American Legion.\1\ This comprehensive report provides
an understanding of VA challenges, best practices, and offers
recommendations based on our observations through our 100 years of
experience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.legion.org/systemworthsaving/reports
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a part of this program, Regional Office Action Reviews (ROAR)
are conducted at VAROs nationwide. During ROAR visits, the American
Legion randomly selects formerly adjudicated claims to review in order
to determine development accuracy, examination efficiency, and rater
competency related to the percentage assigned for each claimed
disability contention by the veteran. Additionally, ROAR visits afford
The American Legion an opportunity to interview employees on training,
climate, leadership, systems and adjudication; and provides VARO
leadership real time information of how a representative sample of
employees are perceiving the aforementioned issues.

Lack of Training

In 2011, the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) began special
training for employees who are involved in the MST-related claims
process, including mental health clinicians and office personnel.\2\ A
VA Office of Inspector General (OIG) report, released in August 2018,
recommended the Under Secretary of Veterans Affairs for Benefits to
update the current training for processing MST related claims, monitor
the effectiveness of the training, and take additional action as
necessary.\3\ VBA's response to the OIG report at that time was to
update the four lessons in the ``PTSD Due to MST'' training course, and
mandate training to be completed by March 2019. In future ROAR visits,
we will pay close attention to studying the quality and completion of
the 2019 update. Investing in the training of Veteran Service
Representatives (VSR) and Rating Veteran Service Representatives (RVSR)
will correct errors in claims before they occur, saving time and money.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.benefits.va.gov/BENEFITS/factsheets/
serviceconnected/MST.pdf
\3\ https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-17-05248-241.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lack of Adequate Time to Process MST Claims

In Fiscal Year 2019, the American Legion conducted a total of 12
ROAR site visits to VAROs nationwide. During these visits, VA employees
who previously worked as MST coordinators, or who are currently working
as MST coordinators, reported to The American Legion several internal
issues, such as not being granted excluded time (extra time) to develop
an MST claim by VA's Central Office and local leadership. Those
interviewed stated that because MST coordinators had received the
required MST training, it was perceived that the MST coordinators
should not need extra time. However, we cannot verify the veracity of
these complaints.
Since sexual assault or sexual harassment is not always reported
during service, part of VSR and RVSR training includes how to identify
markers in a veteran's medical record and personnel record.\4\ Markers
such as a sudden decrease in work performance, substance abuse,
pregnancy tests, tests for sexually transmitted disease, panic attacks,
and a request for transfer to another military duty assignment, are
used to build the disability claim evidence of the MST claims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Morral, A. R., Gore, K. L., & Schell, T. L. (2015). Sexual
assault and sexual harassment in the US military. Volume 2. Estimates
for department of defense service members from the 2014 RAND military
workplace study. RAND NATIONAL DEFENSE RESEARCH INST SANTA MONICA CA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During our ROAR interviews, employees have reported that although
they really want to perform quality work on these claims, they feel
forced to choose between quality and quantity due to the current
standards.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The American Legion. (May 2019). Wilmington Regional Office
Action Reivew After Action Report. The American Legion System Worth
Saving. https://www.legion.org/documents/legion/pdf/
SWS_ROAR_Report_Wilmington_2019.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

High Rate of Attrition and Compassion Fatigue

VAROs expressed to The American Legion their challenge and concern
over employee burnout and turnover due to employee stress. During our
ROAR interviews, VARO employees mentioned being conflicted over their
passion to help claimants, while working in an environment where morale
is low and unequal workload, adds to the workplace stress. Employees
confessed that the cost to fulfilling their quota usually means
foregoing lunch and breaks, mental fatigue, suicide ideations, and
increased requests for time off.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The American Legion. June 2019. St. Petersburg VA Regional
Office Action Review After Action Report. The American Legion System
Worth Saving. https://www.legion.org/documents/legion/pdf/
SWS_ROAR_Report_St_Petersburg_2019.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It should be noted that when MST coordinators call the veteran to
discuss the MST-related claim, it could expose them to the veteran's
trauma.\7\ The conversation can also potentially revictimize and
trigger the veteran. Both veteran and non-veteran employees have
expressed to American Legion representatives their feelings of
compassion fatigue when developing MST claims.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Suris A, Lind L, Kashner TM, Borman PD, Petty F. Sexual assault
in women veterans: an examination of PTSD risk, health care
utilization, and cost of care. Psychosom Med. 2004;66(5):749-756.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Implication of Biases and Subjective Ratings

The rating scale for PTSD ranges from 0 to 100 in increments of
ten.\8\ Therefore, a PTSD claim from MST can vary widely depending on
the rater. Coordinators have reported repeated instances of the
violation of 38 CFR 4.23, ``the attitude of the rater,'' which states:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Veterans Benefits
Administration References: 38 CFR-Book C, Schedule for Rating
Disabilities. http://www.benefits.va.gov/warms/bookc.asp

``It is to be remembered that the majority of applicants are
disabled persons who are seeking benefits of law to which they
believe themselves entitled. In the exercise of his or her
functions, rating officers must not allow their personal
feelings to intrude; an antagonistic, critical, or even abusive
attitude on the part of a claimant should not in any instance
influence the officers in the handling of the case. Fairness
and courtesy must at all times be shown to applicants by all
employees whose duties bring them in contact, directly or
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
indirectly, with the Department's claimants.''

VBA processes and raters can cause harm with implicit biases if
they lack sufficient knowledge regarding PTSD and MST. The scope of
this issue encompasses discrediting the claim, victim-blaming, and
accepting that men could also be victimized. Per Resolution 67 (August
2014), Military Sexual Trauma, The American Legion urges the VA to
conduct an analysis of MST claims volume, assess the consistency of how
these claims are adjudicated, and determine the need, if any, for
additional training and testing on processing of these claims and urge
the VA to employ additional Women Veterans Coordinators (WVCs) and to
provide MST sensitivity training to claims processors and WVCs.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://archive.legion.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12203/3716/
2014N067.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

VHA Facility MST Coordinators

In addition to ROAR, our SWS program includes 3-day visits to VAMCs
to inquire about that facility, as a whole, and how the departments
within the facility operate. During a visit, The American Legion staff
meets with the MST Coordinator to ensure the facility is in compliance
with Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Directive 1115, MST program.
This directive outlines the responsibilities of implementing policies,
educating staff, directing, engaging in outreach activities, developing
partnerships, and serving as the expert for MST-related care. They are
also responsible for communicating with national, VISN, facility-level
leadership, and other stakeholders.
Per Resolution No. 147, August 2014, Women Veterans, The American
Legion supports the VA's establishment of a women veterans awareness
training programs that educates employees about the changing roles of
women in the military, their combat-related exposures and MST
sensitivity.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://archive.legion.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12203/5488/
2016N147.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

End Harassment Campaign

No discussion about MST would be complete without acknowledging
harassment. Harassment has been a widely reported and ongoing cultural
problem within the military \11\, and many believe continues in VA
facilities. It has been reported that many veterans do not return to
the VA because of the hostile environment.\12\ The current VA
#EndHarassment Campaign must be updated. The message of zero-tolerance
must be clearly stated to bring awareness, empower bystanders, lay out
instructions for reporting incidents, and provide support for the
victim. The campaign should also follow through with investigations and
establish consequences in order to change behavior and culture. One
best practice at a VAMC that The American Legion saw during the SWS
program, was the use of televisions in waiting areas to display
messages about health conditions, details on VBA and VHA benefits, and
other pertinent information. Televisions displaying VA #EndHarassment
Campaign videos, along with other valuable messaging can be a useful
tool to spread awareness. Studies show when leadership takes harassment
seriously, their employees raise their concern to the same level.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.militarytimes.com/news/pentagon-congress/2019/05/
02/defense-department-to-make-sexual-harassment-a-crime/
\12\ https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/12/us/politics/women-veterans-
harassment.html
\13\ National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
2018. Sexual Harassment of Women: Climate, Culture, and Consequences in
Academic Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press. doi: https://doi.org/10.17226/24994.
------------
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recommendations

The American Legion believes all veterans deserve to have their
claims developed and rated by knowledgeable, competent, and bias-free
VSRs and RVSRs. Veterans deserve to have access to healthcare providers
for mental and physical health as a result of their MST experience.
Therefore, The American Legion recommends the following steps to
alleviate this issue:

1. Reevaluate and change policy, if necessary, to set a
specified amount of excluded time that can be allotted for the
development of MST claims.

2. Enforce the existing zero-tolerance policy concerning
attitude of the rater with regard to MST claims. Any rater
violating this policy should face appropriate disciplinary
action.

3. Enforce that document raters who repeatedly fail to consider
markers in their rating decision of MST claims be retrained. If
they continue with the same behavior, they should face
appropriate disciplinary action.

4. Provide resources and remind employees of existing resources
they can use for self-care when triggered or experiencing
compassion fatigue due to handling MST cases.

5. Re-educate VBA employees about immediate healthcare
resources at VA facilities and Vet Centers so veterans may
begin the path to healing.

6. Re-evaluate the duties and responsibilities of MST
coordinators and consider a possible increase of the percentage
of full-time equivalent.

The American Legion recommends Congress ensure the VA has all the
necessary resources to remain committed to providing veterans access to
help they need to recover from MST and end sexual harassment within VHA
facilities.

Conclusion

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and distinguished members
who proudly serve on this subcommittee, The American Legion thanks you
for the opportunity to illuminate the positions of the nearly two
million veteran members of this organization. Safeguarding those who
have selflessly raised their right hand in defense of this Nation
receive the benefits and care they deserve is a priority of The
American Legion. By the action of this committee, we can see that it is
for you as well.
As always, The American Legion thanks this committee for the
opportunity to elucidate the position of the nearly 2 million veteran
members of this organization. For additional information regarding this
testimony, please contact Mr. John Medin, Legislative Associate, at

[emailprotected]
or (202) 263-5756.
______

Prepared Statement of Kayla Williams

I. Overall

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, distinguished members of
the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss a topic I
believe is of vital importance to the long-term well-being of too many
of America's veterans.
The problem of sexual harassment and assault in the United States
military has been widely reported upon, often framed as a predominantly
women's issue.\1\ However, many survivors are men: though a higher
percent of women are assaulted, the total number of men who experienced
Military Sexual Trauma (MST) remains high, since men comprise 90
percent of veterans.\2\ VA offers both care and benefits for veterans
who experienced MST if they subsequently develop conditions such as
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as a result of being harassed or
assaulted. However, when MST survivors seek care at a Veterans Health
Affairs (VHA) facility and/or file a claim for disability compensation
with the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), they do not always
receive adequate or consistent services and support. It is imperative
that VA redouble its efforts to improve care for MST survivors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Zachary Cohen, ``From fellow soldier to `monster' in uniform:
#MeToo in the military'', CNN, February 7, 2018, https://www.cnn.com/
2018/02/07/politics/us-military-sexual-assault-investigations/
index.html; and ``Sexual Assault Reports in U.S. Military Reach Record
High: Pentagon'', NBC, May 1, 2017, https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-
news/sexual-assault-reports-u-s-military-reach-record-high-pentagon-
n753566.
\2\ DoD Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office, ``Department
of Defense Annual Report on Sexual Assault in the Military'', April
2019, https://www.sapr.mil/sites/default/files/
DoD_Annual_Report_on_Sexual_Assault_in_the_Military.pdf, page 3
includes estimated past-year prevalence of sexual assault from 2006-
2018.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VHA

VHA offers an impressive array of mental health services to
veterans who experienced MST, including universal screening and
evidence-based care that ranges from telehealth to inpatient. However,
inconsistencies and inadequacies negatively impact veterans' ability to
access and utilize care across the system.
One barrier is difficulty accessing initial care. While VA may be
able to provide care for MST to veterans who are otherwise ineligible
for care, some veterans report experiencing challenges overcoming the
first barrier of simply getting access to a provider who can make the
determination that they need care related to MST. During a recent Women
Veterans Task Force meeting, VA leaders demonstrated a woeful lack of
understanding of this issue, repeatedly stating that MST survivors are
eligible for care related to MST without grasping that veterans cannot
make it past the first gatekeeper. That process should be improved.
VA's office of mental health services has an excellent ``secret
shopper'' style program to ensure frontline staff connect both men and
women veterans requesting MST services to the MST Coordinator at VA
Medical Centers (VAMCs) across the country. This should be expanded to
confirm that those first assessing eligibility for care know to connect
veterans seeking services for MST-related conditions with the MST
coordinator to facilitate their navigation of the processes required
for them to access care if they are not otherwise eligible for VA care.
Additionally, staff should be trained to inform veterans pending
eligibility notification that they can also seek immediate support at
Vet Centers, where more veterans are eligible for care.
Additional oversight is also needed on inpatient mental health
care. Inpatient VA sites can be terrifying for women and vulnerable
men, with young, physically strong men in the early stages of learning
to manage what can be severe mental health symptoms; there are very few
women and few protections. There are numerous reports of harassment and
even assault, yet VA continues to maintain that there is insufficient
need for more women-only options and is reluctant to refer women to
inpatient community care options, where mixed units are more likely to
have better monitoring, locks, and separate wings. Congress should
request regular, detailed reports of harassment and assault instead of
annual statistical data, to better understand the extent and severity
of the challenges; alternatively, Congress could consider requesting
GAO or OIG investigation.
VA should also develop a mental health equivalent of Women's Health
Primary Care Providers, allowing mental health providers to specialize
or choose to focus on treating women. There is a growing community of
practice that seeks to understand and offer best treatment for complex
conditions such as combat PTSD combined with MST-related depression,
understanding how these mental health conditions intersect with
reproductive issues or parenting, and other complex issues requiring
both interest and proficiency. In the future, one can imagine a
specialty in women's mental health. VA could be an early leader in the
field by supporting women's mental health providers and the
psychologists, psychiatrists and others who want to specialize in
developing such a specialty and best treatment practices, which in VA
would also include cultural competency for women's military
experiences.
VA's Office of Mental Health and Suicide Prevention should also
develop a strategic plan for improving MST care, particularly for the
rapidly growing population of women veteran VHA patients. Between 2007
and 2016 the rate of women veterans using VHA increased by 45 percent,
compared with an 8 percent increase in the women veteran population.\3\
That rapid growth is particularly important when considering
appropriate mental health staffing: the Sourcebook indicates that 42
percent of women using VA have a mental health condition.\4\ However,
despite the goals of the Patient Aligned Care Team model, not all
women's clinics have onsite mental health. Funds are not increasing for
women's mental health, and the women's mental health champion role is a
collateral duty, not a full-time job, making it inadequate to address
this rapidly growing need. For women with a history of MST, access to
mental health care is made significantly more challenging - if not
impossible - when they are required to ``walk the gauntlet'' of
catcalling men while on their way to see mental health providers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ ``VA Utilization Profile Fiscal Year 2016'' (U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs' National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics,
November 2017), https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/QuickFacts/
VA_Utilization_Profile.PDF.
\4\ Frayne SM, Phibbs CS, Saechao F, Friedman SA, Shaw JG, Romodan
Y, Berg E, Lee J, Ananth L, Iqbal S, Hayes PM, Haskell S.,
``Sourcebook: Women Veterans in the Veterans Health Administration.
Volume 4: Longitudinal Trends in Sociodemographics, Utilization, Health
Profile, and Geographic Distribution'', Women's Health Evaluation
Initiative, Women's Health Services, Veterans Health Administration,
Department of Veterans Affairs, Washington DC. February 2018 , https://
www.womenshealth.va.gov/WOMENSHEALTH/sourcebookvol4onlineappendix.asp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In CNAS research, stakeholders routinely report that women are
reluctant to seek services at VA Medical Centers as they are, or are
perceived to be, male-dominated spaces and thus less sympathetic,
understanding, or welcoming to women. Women with a history of MST are
more likely to find this to be an insurmountable barrier to care,
preferring not to reenter an environment full of prior military men;
however, few providers in the civilian setting are familiar with the
effects of MST. Experience with not only VA staff and providers but
also fellow patients informs veterans' willingness to engage with the
system, trust the care they receive, and seek care in the first place.
For example, according to VA's own research, 25 percent of women
veterans reported inappropriate/unwanted comments or behavior by men
veterans while at VA.\5\ Women veterans who reported harassment were
less likely to report feeling welcome at VA, which related to delaying
and/or missing care. Interviews CNAS recently conducted supported VA's
conclusions; one stakeholder said about experiencing harassment at VA:
``A veteran doesn't necessarily go back to VA. If they have a negative
experience, they're not coming back.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 2015 VA Health Services Research and Development, through an
interview with 1,387 women veterans in 2015. Of the women reporting an
incident on VA grounds, 61 percent reported harassment, 16 percent
reported that their veteran status was questioned, 7 percent reported
both harassment and that their veteran status was question, and 5
percent reported threatening/criminal behavior, https://
www.hsrd.research.va.gov/publications/vets--perspectives/0419-How-
Stranger-Harassment-of-Women-Veterans-Affects-Healthcare.cfm.
\6\ Forthcoming report, Nathalie Grogan, Emma Moore, Brent Peabody,
Margaret Seymour, and Kayla Williams, ``New York State Minority
Veterans Needs Assessment'', CNAS, 16.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA is well aware of this concern, which is why Central Office
developed and launched the End Harassment campaign.\7\ Unfortunately,
recent events have undercut public perception of how seriously senior
VA leaders take the severity of the problem and their willingness to
address it. In January, Secretary Robert Wilkie updated Representative
Takano on the department's response to staffer Andrea Goldstein's
allegation of being sexually assaulted at the DC VA Medical Center that
the matter had been closed with no charges filed, stating ``VA is a
safe place for all Veterans to enter and receive care and services''
and calling Ms. Goldstein's claims ``unsubstantiated.''\8\ This letter
undermines efforts to end harassment at VA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Patricia M. Hayes, ``VA: It's our responsibility to end
harassment'', Vantage Point, August 15, 2019, https://www.blogs.va.gov/
VAntage/64559/va-our-responsibility-end-harassment/.
\8\ Jennifer Steinhauer, ``No Charges in Assault Complaint at V.A.
Hospital, and a Public Fight Erupts'', The New York Times, January 16,
2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/16/us/politics/sexual-assault-va-
hospitals.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Changing the culture that has allowed this behavior to flourish
requires strong leadership. Employees take sexual harassment seriously
when leaders do.\9\ By publicly sending such a dismissive, belittling
letter about the negative experience of a woman veteran patient,
Secretary Wilkie sent a strong message to VA staff, including VA
police, as well as women veteran patients and potential perpetrators,
that senior VA leadership does not take this problem seriously. This
messaging tells women veterans that should we report sexual harassment
or assault in a VA facility, not only will there be no consequences to
the bad actor, but that we ourselves may face public humiliation for
coming forward, because calling the claims ``unsubstantiated'' subtly
impugns a woman's reputation. A reported sexual assault may be
determined to be ``unfounded'' or ``unsubstantiated'' for any number of
reasons, such as a lack of physical evidence. That does not mean it was
a false report or that the incident did not occur, and conflating
concepts like false and unproven perpetuates dangerous myths that false
accusations are common. More concerningly, in this specific case, VA's
Inspector General wrote, ``Neither I nor my staff told you or anyone
else at the Department that the allegations were unsubstantiated.''\10\
This subcommittee should seek clarification on how such a
miscommunication occurred and was conveyed by the Secretary to HVAC and
the public, as well as impressing the importance of taking these
concerns seriously upon the Secretary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Chloe Hart, Alison Dahl Crossley, and Shelly J. Correll,
``Study: When Leaders Take Sexual Harassment Seriously, So Do
Employees'', Harvard Business Review, December 14, 2018, https://
hbr.org/2018/12/study-when-leaders-take-sexual-harassment-seriously so-
do-employees.
\10\ Richard Sisk, ``IG Rebukes VA Secretary for Saying Navy LT's
Sexual Assault Claim `Unsubstantiated' '', Military, January 16, 2020,
https://www.military.com/daily news/2020/01/16/ig-rebukes-va-secretary-
saying-navy-lts-sexual-assault-claim-unsubstantiated.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This incident demonstrates that VA staff at both the national and
local level did not understand their obligation to take complaints
seriously and respond appropriately. It is imperative that the End
Harassment campaign be reinvigorated and taken seriously at all levels
of the organization. In the meantime, telehealth can help increase
access, but still is not available widely enough. VA should accordingly
immediately expand the ``Sister Assister'' program to better support
women veterans, particularly those who have experienced MST, and raise
awareness about its availability. That program, currently available at
some VAMCs, allows women veterans to request a ``battle buddy'' to meet
them at a designated entrance, escort them through the facility, and
either accompany them during appointments or stay in the waiting
room.\11\ For women veterans who are uncomfortable navigating the male-
dominated VA hospital environment or want companionship during
appointments, this program can offer valuable support from vetted and
trained volunteers, reducing a barrier to seeking care. VAMC directors
should work closely with MST coordinators, Women Veterans Program
Managers, Voluntary Services managers, Community Veteran Engagement
Boards, and other local stakeholders to identify barriers that may
disproportionately affect MST survivors and jointly develop a local
action plan to vigorously implement the End Harassment campaign, launch
the Sister Assister program, and take any additional steps needed to
improve the environment of care.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  See more at https://www.madison.va.gov/giving/
assignments.asp; the program appears to be available at several VAMCs
in Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Michigan.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VBA

Disability ratings can provide a vital source of support for a
veteran's financial well-being, especially if a service-connected
disability negatively affects their ability to attain or keep a job.
Unfortunately, the data appears to show that men who seek disability
compensation for PTSD related to MST are being systematically
discriminated against by VBA, despite overall improvements to the
claims processing system going back several years.
VBA previously made a number of changes in how it processes PTSD
claims related to MST.\12\ These changes were instituted to reduce
stark disparities that had been previously identified between the rate
of claims granted when the cause of PTSD is MST compared to other
precipitating events, such as combat.\13\ Overall, these efforts were
largely successful in eliminating the gap: PTSD claims granted for MST-
related causes climbed 20 points in 7 years, from 35.6 percent in
Fiscal Year (FY) 2011 to 56.6 percent in Fiscal Year 2018, while the
rate for non-MST causes has hovered around 54 percent for several
years, as shown in Figure 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Government Accountability Office, Military Sexual Trauma:
Improvements Made, but VA Can Do More to Track and Improve Consistency
of Disability Claim Decisions, GAO-14-477 (June 9, 2015), https://
www.gao.gov/products/GAO-14-477.
\13\ Karen McVeigh, ``Obama administration sued by veterans over
military sexual assault'', The Guardian, April 30, 2014, https://
www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/30/us-military-veterans-lawsuit-
military-sexual-assault.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
FIGURE 1

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: File sent to the author by VA in January 2019 responding to
FOIA request 19-00345-F.

However, this generally positive trend masks a more complicated and
concerning story. When broken down by gender, it becomes clear that
these gains have not benefited men and women equally. While both men
and women have seen substantial increases in the percent of PTSD claims
granted due to MST, the grant rate for men has lagged significantly
behind, at just 44.7 percent, compared to 57.7 percent for women. This
is not to discount the real improvements - the grant rate for men in
2011 was a shockingly low 26.9 percent, an appalling 33 points behind
their grant rate for combat-related PTSD that same year. However, the
rate for women who file for disability compensation because they
developed PTSD after surviving MST has been higher than for any other
category reviewed since 2015. It is glaringly apparent that men's cases
are not being handled equitably.

FIGURE 2

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: File sent to the author by VA in January 19 responding to
FOIA request 19-00345-F.

Why might this be the case? VA's Inspector General found in 2018
that thousands of MST survivors may have been incorrectly denied
benefits due to paperwork and procedural mistakes.\14\ They made a
series of recommendations, including that VBA have specialized raters
process MST claims, require additional review of denied claims, and
develop a checklist for processors to use so they do not skip
steps.\15\ These are all valid and important steps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Leo Shane III, ``Report: VA may have mishandled thousands of
sexual assault cases'', Military Times, August 21, 2018, https://
www.militarytimes.com/veterans/2018/08/21/report-va-may-have-
mishandled-thousands-of-sexual-assault-cases/.
\15\ Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Inspector General,
Denied Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Claims Related to Military Sexual
Trauma, Report #17-05248-241 (August 21, 2018), https://www.va.gov/oig/
pubs/VAOIG-17-05248-241.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Inspector General also recommended that VBA update training for
MST claims processing and monitor its effectiveness. Given the
disparities I identified, I believe this recommendation is
fundamentally important and strongly urge VBA to include information
specifically about male survivors. Their experiences of sexual assault
are different: RAND research found that men who are sexually assaulted
in the military are more likely to have been assaulted multiple times,
by multiple offenders, and during duty hours; men are also more likely
``to describe an event as hazing or intended to abuse or humiliate
them.''\16\ Crucially important for VBA claims processors and raters to
know, military men are even less likely than women to either officially
report or tell anyone at all about being assaulted. Lack of knowledge
about the large number of men who are sexually assaulted in the
military and lack of understanding about their experiences may combine
perniciously with implicit bias to drive claims processors and raters
to inadvertently treat men's cases differently.\17\ Rather than generic
training on MST, VBA must include specialized training both on the
specific experiences of men and how raters' own implicit biases may
color their reactions so they can actively work to overcome these
challenges. VBA has previously shown itself capable of acting swiftly
and comprehensively to address the overall disparity in MST claims. Now
it must take those efforts to the next level and ensure men who have
survived sexual harassment and assault in the military are not re-
victimized when filing claims: they deserve equitable disability
compensation from VA. However, when I first became aware of these gaps
as a VA employee in 2017 and notified VBA of the concern, they
responded dismissively that their training was adequate. I urge this
committee to request VBA provide an update on these grant rates for
2019 and the beginning of 2020, and demand more specialized trainings
and oversight be implemented if they remain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Morral, Andrew R., Kristie Gore, Terry L. Schell, Barbara
Bicksler, Coreen Farris, Bonnie Ghosh-Dastidar, Lisa H. Jaycox, Dean
Kilpatrick, Steve Kistler, Amy Street, Terri Tanielian, and Kayla M.
Williams, Sexual Assault and Sexual Harassment in the U.S. Military:
Highlights from the 2014 RAND Military Workplace Study. Santa Monica,
CA: RAND Corporation, 2015. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_briefs/
RB9841.html.
\17\ ``Implicit Bias Explained'', Perception Institute, https://
perception.org/research/implicit-bias/.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
II. The Way Forward

Members of Congress as well as advocates in the veteran's community
must closely monitor actions by VA, VHA, and VBA over the coming years
to ensure rapid improvements are made in improving care and services
for MST survivors, and that progress is sustained in the long run. Our
nation must do a better job supporting those who were assaulted while
in uniform; we cannot let them be doubly betrayed by discrimination and
inequity within the VA system. Progress requires strong, principled
leadership from the Secretary, who must demonstrate to veterans and VA
employees that he will immediately redouble efforts to end harassment
within VA Medical Centers and end inequality in claims grant rates.
______

Prepared Statement of Samantha Kubek

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and members of the
Subcommittee, on behalf of the New York Legal Assistance Group (NYLAG),
thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Samantha Kubek, and I am a Staff Attorney in the
LegalHealth division of the New York Legal Assistance Group, a
nonprofit law office dedicated to providing free legal services in
civil law matters to low-income New Yorkers. NYLAG addresses emerging
and urgent needs with comprehensive, free civil legal services, direct
representation, impact litigation, policy advocacy, financial
counseling, medical-legal partnerships, and community education.
LegalHealth, a division of NYLAG, partners with medical
professionals to address the nonmedical needs of low-income individuals
with serious health problems. This past year, we served 7,940 clients,
including nearly 1,000 veterans through our partnership with three New
York VA Hospitals. Working closely with veterans' healthcare providers,
we expand access to needed veterans' services by upgrading bad paper
discharges, stabilize incomes for veterans with significant health
needs, and help to reduce veteran homelessness by preventing evictions.
I joined NYLAG specifically to open the Nation's first women
veterans legal clinics, with the goal of creating a safe space where
female veterans, especially those who are survivors of sexual assault
in the military, could receive trauma-informed legal services. In 2017,
we opened clinics at the Bronx and Manhattan VA Medical Centers, which
I continue to staff today.
When we opened these clinics, we did so with the knowledge that VA
hospitals have traditionally been male-dominated spaces, and that many
women veterans report feeling unwelcome. We wanted to create a space
where women could feel safe. Yet even with this goal and this
specialized clinic, it wasn't easy to get women veterans to come to the
clinic. After opening, I learned that because the clinic's waiting room
was located in a mixed gender outpatient mental health space, women
were hesitant to sit there--a fact that could have explained the many
clients I had scheduled who would not show up for their appointment.
With the support of our VA hospitals, I found space inside the women's
health clinics at each hospital. Since then, I've met with over 300
women veterans in my clinics.
Today, in addition to my clinics for women, I also staff clinics
for male veterans. As a consequence, I have represented male and female
survivors of military sexual trauma, or MST. My clients have served in
every branch of service, from WWII until just months ago. They come
from a wide variety of backgrounds, races, and life experiences. They
have served in combat and they have served stateside. While their
symptoms often manifest in different ways, one thing is true for every
single one: the current system in the VA, both in terms of benefits and
healthcare, has, at one time or another, stood as a barrier in their
recovery.
Survivors of military sexual assault can apply for service-
connected benefits when their related health conditions persist. The
impact of benefits on survivors is far more than simply increasing
their income. I have seen the ways in which these benefits are life-
changing and transformative. I've seen clients who, after receiving
their benefits, gain a sense of validation--a government agency has
told them that they are seen and believed. For some, this results in
less frequent visits to their mental health providers and an increased
level of engagement in their daily lives. A client of mine, Rebecca,
came to me surviving on food stamps. She lived in a cramped, studio
apartment in the Bronx with her son and granddaughter. Rebecca had
survived a sexual assault while in the Marines. She never knew she
qualified for VA benefits, believing her injury had to occur during
combat for it to ``count.'' We worked together for almost a year,
painstakingly putting together a claim for benefits despite minimal in-
service records and the passage of almost thirty years between her
service and the time of filing her claim. Ultimately, Rebecca was
awarded 100 percent disability compensation. With this money and this
new status, we worked to help her obtain a VA home loan, which she went
on to use to purchase a home for herself and her family. All of them--
Rebecca, her son, and her granddaughter--are now living a completely
different life as a result of these benefits. They have gained
something intangible but essential: hope for a better future.
The process to obtain benefits, to see outcomes like Rebecca's, is
too difficult. Along the way, veterans are repeatedly re-traumatized
and held to standards far too high, given the circumstances of sexual
assault. While the changes proposed in bills such as H.R. 1092 would go
a long way to improving this system, I offer this testimony to share
the experiences of my clients of the ways this system often re-
traumatizes survivors, the heavy burden placed on veterans and their
representatives, and changes that could help alleviate this situation.
The steps required when a veteran seeks to file or appeal a claim
for service-connected benefits relating to MST are complex and
convoluted. For those who are represented, representatives like myself
can bear some of the administrative burden of these claims, yet the
system still requires too much of survivors, and unnecessarily re-
traumatizes them. For veterans without representation, they must
navigate this system alone, which is all but impossible.
When a client comes to me about MST, my main challenge is to show
that I am someone they can trust; I am someone who understands that
this system is unduly hard; and I will do my best to make it less
difficult to the extent I can.
I tell them right away that I do not need to hear their story
immediately. For those who have been through the VA claims processes
before, this is a welcome surprise. They've just met me, and telling
someone about the sexual trauma they've endured is difficult and
painful. And very intimate. I do tell them, because I have to tell
them, that at some point, we will need to compose a personal
statement--a written retelling by them of the incidents that occurred
to them in the military, and the ways in which those incidents have
caused them pain--pain that they still feel today. I tell them that I
am open to their doing this in whatever way is best for them--they can
write something for me to review, they can come in and tell me their
story and have me help them put it onto paper, or they can work with
their therapist.
Nothing in law school prepares a lawyer for sitting in a room with
someone as they pour their heart out about the worst moment of their
life. My clients are the strongest men and women I know--if they
weren't, they wouldn't have made it this far. But re-telling their
story forces them to relive it. Many tell me they don't sleep for
nights before or nights after they come to see me. I often implore them
to schedule therapy appointments for immediately following our
appointment in which they discuss this event in detail. That way, I
know they will be safe in the likely event that their powerful and
overwhelming feelings are re-triggered. I've had clients become
suicidal after re-telling their trauma, and I've had clients struggle
to fight relapsing into drug or alcohol addiction they have been
fighting since their service.
In the meantime, I must painstakingly gather all of their medical
records, both from in the military and from since they were discharged.
For some, this record is in the thousands of pages. I must comb through
their personnel files, many of which are handwritten from years ago,
searching for words like ``rape'' or ``assault,'' visits to the
gynecologist or the base psychologist, checking for STD or pregnancy
tests. Often, the records come back completely illegible or incomplete.
Sometimes I get a letter back telling me the records have been sent
elsewhere, and when I send the request to the second place, I get
another similar letter, and this paper chase continues like this for
months. I once received an email from the Department of Defense
informing me that they only hold on to ``restricted reports''--a common
form of sexual assault reporting--for 5 years. After that, they throw
them out. In some cases, I'm told records cannot be obtained-whether
it's due to the records being lost, destroyed, or for no reason at all.
This is despite FOIA requests, the involvement of senators, and
diligent and persistent follow up.
As part of a veteran's application, they are asked to State in
which Veterans Health Administration (VHA) facility they have received
treatment, so that the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) can
obtain the records from them directly, as they are both part of the
larger Department of Veterans Affairs. Sometimes the VBA tells me that
they cannot obtain records from the VHA. This happens in one of two
ways. In the first, the veteran receives a letter after filing their
claim or appeal in which the VBA states they cannot obtain the
veteran's health records from a VA hospital. In almost every instance
of this occurring with my clients, I have a copy of these same records
in my files, and I obtained this copy by filing a request with the VHA.
In this case, I then send the VBA the records. The second way is that
the veteran receives a negative decision on their claim or appeal, in
which the VBA lays out the evidence they considered in deciding the
claim. In such a letter, they may State that they tried to obtain
records from a VA health facility and were unable to obtain them. When
this happens, it reflects two failures. One, the VBA should always send
the letter laid out in the first scenario. As per their ``duty to
assist,'' they should be requesting missing records, even ones they
should already have, if they cannot obtain them. Second, the VBA has
now denied a claim due to its inability to get records simultaneously
being held within the larger VA system. The veteran is being denied
benefits because of a failure within the VA system, not because of any
inadequacy or failure of the veteran's claim.
This process is infuriating for all veterans, but it creates
greater harm in cases of MST. Most MST survivors have no in-service
records to back-up their assertions. Most do not seek treatment during
the service, due to the stigma for needing mental health treatment in
the military and for the myriad reasons survivors of sexual assault in
all walks of life rarely seek help. Many do not report the assault to
anyone for the same reason, and so personnel files do not reflect
anything either. As a result, these cases rely very heavily on the
veteran's medical records from their life post-service. When the VA's
two bodies are unable to communicate, the system fails them yet again.
I also ask for statements--from family members, friends, in-service
buddies--anyone who may know what happened to them and saw how it
changed them. I speak with doctors, social workers, and psychologists.
As an attorney in a medical-legal partnership, I have enhanced access
to my clients' providers, and am able to have extensive conversations
with them and to request letters directly from them to support the
veteran's case.
At the end of this long and frustrating process, I at last have a
completed case to file with the VA. I tell the client that now we file
and then we wait. I also must tell them that two things will happen
between now and when their claim is decided.
The first is that they will receive a call out of the blue from
someone at the VBA. This will be a stranger, someone they do not know
and have never spoken with. And this person, who may be male or female,
will ask them for details about their sexual assault and whether they
filed a report at the time of the assault. This will happen regardless
of whether we explicitly stated in the file that they did or did not so
file.
This will happen regardless of the fact that they have appointed me
as their attorney, and in any other legal proceeding, the agency would
speak with me, rather than with the individual. Not only their answers,
but the very wording of their answers in this conversation, will have
an impact on the decision made in their case.
The second is that they will be called by the VA to schedule their
Compensation & Pension exam. For some, this will be scheduled at the
VA. For others, it will be scheduled with an independent contractor.
They will have no control over whether this exam is with a man or a
woman. When it is time for their exam, they will meet with this doctor,
who is a stranger to them, and upon meeting them, will be asked yet
again questions regarding what happened in the service, how it impacted
them, what their symptoms are. This will happen regardless of the level
of detail we have included in their statement. This meeting can last
for hours.
I have had clients who leave this appointment so distraught that
they are admitted to inpatient psychiatry. I have had clients who are
unwilling to go. Other clients have struggled to maintain sobriety,
sobriety only achieved after a long and difficult struggle. Far too
many have called me expressing suicidal thoughts and inclinations such
that I strongly encourage and offer to connect them with the VA's
Crisis Line or with their therapist.
Finally, after all of this, a process which, more often than not,
lasts for months, or in the case of appeals, sometimes years, a
decision is issued. When claims are denied, the VA's wording has a
profound impact upon the veteran. A client, Sarah, called me 1 day in
tears. Sarah had served in the Army in the 1980's. During her service,
she was raped, and then became pregnant from the attack. She carried
the baby to term and now has a daughter who is in her twenties. Sarah
loves her daughter; nonetheless, the daughter is also a constant
reminder of the brutal attack Sarah endured. We presented this to the
VA in her personal statement, supported by years of therapy and medical
treatment. When the VA denied Sarah's claim, they wrote, ``The evidence
of record does not provide credible evidence that the claimed stressor
occurred.'' Further on they expanded, ``The service treatment records
and personnel file show no credible evidence that would establish
reasonable doubt and allow us to conclude that you were, in fact,
assaulted.''
I understand that claims will be denied. I understand that
sometimes meritorious claims may be denied improperly--that is why we
have the appeals system. But this language is extremely insensitive and
inhumane. Sarah called me in tears from her car. Her husband was
driving her to the VA--she had become suicidal after reading these
callous and unfeeling words.
I wish that I could say that Sarah's situation is rare, but it is
not. The VA makes many statements that it is concerned about the high
rate of veteran suicide--a cause deserving of the highest level of
concern--yet its own words can cause veterans to consider taking their
lives. It is one thing to State that a veteran has not met a burden of
proof. It is another thing altogether to discount completely their most
traumatic moment and to tell them that they find no credibility that it
occurred.
Military sexual trauma is unique in the ways it can consume a
person's life. It is an intimate and personal invasion that occurs both
where you live and where you work, that may have been committed by
someone who is your superior, your commander, your colleague upon whom
you must rely. It often occurs in a place where your life may already
been in danger, and in a situation that you have no way to escape for
some substantial period thereafter. Many of my clients, now senior
citizens, decades after their assault, still struggle to overcome the
burden of that trauma.
In recognition of the severity and duration of trauma from military
sexual assault, the VA changed its policies to allow veterans who are
survivors, regardless of their discharge status, to, at the very least,
obtain care at the VA when the treatment is directly tied to their
trauma. One of my clients, Maria, is such a survivor. She was
discharged from the Army with an ``uncharacterized'' discharge, without
enough days of service to qualify for care. During her time in the
Army, Maria had been gang raped, and is engaged in an ongoing struggle
with her mental health. As per the VA's policy, she is eligible to
obtain mental health treatment at the VA. But every time Maria goes to
the VA for an appointment, she is told she is ineligible for treatment.
No explanation. On more than one occasion, she was told she was
ineligible because she wasn't a veteran. Each time this would occur,
Maria would say to the VA staff, ``I was raped in the service, and I'm
here for care related to that.'' As if those were magic words, the
staff person would then realize their error, and allow Maria to check
in for her appointment. It is important to understand that this
conversation, the prerequisite to her getting an appointment to have
care she is entitled to, occurs in a crowded waiting room, filled with
men and women who are strangers. This unnecessarily invasive revelation
must be aired publicly.

Considering all of this, I respectively propose the following
recommendations to best support survivors:

1. The VA, as in any other legal proceeding, should respect
veteran-appointed representatives and speak directly with them, rather
than with the veteran.

This should be the default in all cases. The VA
should be required to contact a veteran's representative when
explicitly asked to by the veteran. To do otherwise should be
considered a failure of the VA's ``duty to assist.''

2. When records are unobtainable due to no fault of the veteran,
the VA should bear that responsibility. Veterans should not be denied
benefits because government agencies lost, mismanaged, or have not
found their files.

3. Examiners and VBA employees should be required to review a
veteran's statement prior to the exam or any other conversation with
the veteran regarding their assault.

Currently, VA examiners are required to State whether
they reviewed the veteran's electronic file before writing
their report. However, they are not required to do so prior to
meeting the veteran--if this was required, the doctor could
avoid rehashing details that are already stated in the record
and that are agonizing to relate.

VBA staff should, when possible, avoid calling
veterans to provide sensitive information already present in
the claims file.

4. The VA must establish trauma-informed language and protocols to
be used across the VA, from the claims agents to the hospital
receptionists, to ensure the VA is not creating further trauma when
addressing survivors.

Systems should be developed to note in the electronic
records that the client is eligible for care for various
conditions so that veterans are not turned away when checking
in or asked to publicly disclose extremely private and intimate
information.

Trauma-informed VBA staff should be required to
review all language in denial letters to ensure veterans are
not unnecessarily re-traumatized.

5. Congress should enable the VA to provide funding for free legal
services to assist veterans with these claims. As demonstrated by my
testimony today, the VA benefits system is extremely complicated and
legal representation is often a necessity, yet there are not enough of
us, often due to lack of resources.

Legislation such as H.R. 3749, the Legal Services for
Homeless Veterans Act, would enable the VA to provide funding
for legal services for at-risk veterans.

The VA needs to become the place that fixes wrongs the military has
failed to fix. It must serve survivors--all survivors--while bearing in
mind the unique nature of military sexual trauma.
Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and members of the
Subcommittee, in closing, I want to thank you and the Subcommittee for
your continued interest in improving VA's response to and support of
survivors of military sexual trauma. Now is the time to address the
ways in which, even after service, the very system intended to help our
veterans is often causing additional stress and harm. We must do all we
can to ensure that survivors view the VA as a place where they are
safe, supported, and believed. Please know that NYLAG is ready to
assist you in these efforts. This completes my statement. I will be
happy to respond to any questions you may have.

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of Paralyzed Veterans of America

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and members of the
Subcommittee, Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA) would like to thank
you for the opportunity to submit our views on how the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) supports survivors of military sexual trauma
(MST). No group of veterans understand the full scope of care provided
by the VA better than PVA's members--veterans who have incurred a
spinal cord injury or disorder (SCI/D). Most PVA members depend on VA
for 100 percent of their care and are among the most vulnerable when
access and quality of care is threatened.
MST has serious and long-term consequences for survivors that can
continue long after the assault. Often thought of as a ``women's
issue,'' MST affects both men and women serving in the military. To
understand the scope of the problem, we need to examine incidents of
MST. In 2005, the Department of Defense (DoD) enacted a restricted
reporting option to allow for easier reporting of sexual assault.
Although there was an increase in reporting of assaults, only about 30
percent of sexual assaults are actually reported. While the number of
MSTs reported for men on active duty in Fiscal Year 2018 held steady at
0.7 percent (or about 7,500 men), the rates of MST continue to rise for
women serving in the armed forces, from 4.6 percent in 2016 to 6.2
percent.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Department of Defense Annual Report on Sexual Assault in
the Military, Fiscal Year 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to Rand's 2014 report, Sexual Assault and Sexual
Harassment in the U.S. Military, women on active service have almost
five times men's risk of sexual assault. However, Rand's 2018 report,
Needs of Male Sexual Assault Victims in the U.S. Armed Forces, found
that only 15 percent of military male sexual assault victims file a
report despite the fact that men in the military are more likely to
have experienced multiple incidents, have been assaulted by multiple
offenders during a single incident, and have been assaulted at work or
during duty hours. Male MST survivors are also more likely to survive
extremely violent assaults and more likely to be sexually assaulted
with weapons, and thus, have greater risk of physical injury.\2\ When
men are assaulted, however, they are less likely to report it because
they often characterize their assault as an incident of hazing or
something intended to abuse and humiliate them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Laskowski, D. (n.d.). Male Sexual Trauma: What you know, don't
know, and wish you knew [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from https://
www.fcasv.org/sites/default/files/Male%20Sexual%20Trauma.pdf; Matthews,
M., Farris, C., Tankard, M., & Dunbar, M.S. (2018). Needs of Male
Sexual Assault Victims in the U.S. Armed Forces.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is important to understand these rates of reporting of assaults
because VA is responsible for caring for the physical and mental
effects sexual assault takes on the survivor. Low rates of reporting
among all MST survivors often means that they do not have formal
reports of the assault. In 2011, due to difficulties in obtaining
evidence of stressors, the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA)
provided further guidance to allow for a more liberal approach for
determining MST-related claims.\3\ This liberalized approach helps
lessen the burden on survivors who already must endure a process that
includes describing the assault multiple times, in excruciating detail.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ VBA Training Letter, Adjudicating PTSD Claims Based on MST.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Everyone deserves to have their VA disability claim fairly
evaluated under a system that ensures the full weight of the evidence
is considered before a decision is rendered. It is hard enough to come
forward about an assault but to then have a claim unjustly denied is a
further traumatization of the veteran and interferes with the treatment
process.\4\ Thus, it is essential that MST claims be properly
adjudicated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Statement of Steve Bracci before the Committee on Disability
and Memorial Affairs Committee on Veterans' Affairs hearing on Ensuring
Access to Disability Benefits for Veteran Survivors of Military Sexual
Trauma, June 20, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the evidence shows, however, that is not always the case. An
August 2018 VA Office of the Inspector General (VA OIG) report stated
that nearly half of denied-MST claims were not properly processed by
VBA, which may have resulted in denial of benefits to those who are
entitled to them. In 28 percent of cases, despite sufficient evidence
to request a medical examination and opinion, staff did not request
such services. In 13 percent of cases, there were evidence gathering
issues. In 11 percent of cases, MST coordinators did not make the
required call to the veteran or the Veteran Service Representative did
not use required language in letters to the veterans. And in 10 percent
of cases, Rating Veterans Service Representatives adjudicated veterans'
claims based on contradictory or otherwise insufficient medical
opinions.\5\ These problems occurred due to lack of reviewer
specialization, lack of an additional level of review, discontinued
special-focused reviews, and inadequate training.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Office of Inspector General. (2018, August 21). Denied
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Claims Related to Military Sexual Trauma.
Retrieved from https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-17-05248-241.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PVA agrees with the six corrective actions proposed by VBA that
were outlined in the VA OIG's June 20, 2019, testimony before the House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs, Subcommittee on Disability Assistance
and Memorial Affairs. The recommended corrective actions included:

Reviewing all denied MST-related claims since the
beginning of Fiscal Year 2017 to determine if all required procedures
were followed then taking corrective action and rendering new decisions
as needed.

Assigning the processing of MST-related claims to a
specialized group of reviewers.

Requiring an additional review of all denied MST-related
claims and holding those conducting the review accountable for
accuracy.

Conducting special focus quality improvement reviews of
denied MST-related claims and taking corrective action as needed.

Updating the current training for processing MST-related
claims and monitoring the effectiveness of the training.

Updating the development checklist for MST-related claims
and requiring claims processors to certify that they completed all
required actions.

At this time, it is unclear if the goals laid out by VBA have been
fully met.
In addition to living with SCI/D, PVA members may also be MST
survivors. One complaint we receive from our members is that even when
they request a gender specific person to handle their MST-related
claim, often that request is not honored. VA should make every effort
to ensure these requests are accommodated. Otherwise, veterans may not
seek needed treatment.
Also, people with disabilities are more likely to be sexually
assaulted than their non-disabled counterparts.\6\ People with
disabilities experience similar forms of overt and covert sexual
assault and abuse as people without disabilities (for example, rape;
forced, unwanted, or disguised touching; sexual harassment; unwanted
sexual jokes or innuendoes; and other unwanted sexual contact or
activity). But for this population, sexual abuse can also come in the
form of lack of respect for privacy and unwanted exposure during
personal care (for example, bathing, dressing, and toileting).\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Strauser, D. R., Lustig, D. C., & Uruk, A. C. (2007).
Differences in Self-Reported Trauma Symptomatology Between Individuals
With and Without Disability: An Exploratory Analysis. Rehabilitation
Counseling Bulletin, 50(4), 216-225. https://doi.org/10.1177/
00343552070500040301.
\7\ California Coalition Against Sexual Abuse. (2010). Supporting
Sexual Assault Survivors with Disabilities. Sacramenta, CA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Persons who experience regular help with personal care may be
desensitized to touch. They may not feel comfortable speaking out if
handled in a confusing or uncomfortable manner. Social isolation may
rob the individual of their opportunity to report sexual assault/abuse.
For those people with disabilities who live in institutional or
hospital settings, there is an imbalance of power that increases the
opportunity for assault or abuse.
Often, disability status is never collected, reported in assault
cases, or even inquired about for rape survivors. If sexual assault
advocates are not properly trained they may unwittingly contribute to
people with disabilities remaining an under-served population.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Gorden, Melody L. (2013). Disabled Sexual Assault Victims:
Perceptions of Sexual Assault Professionals on Barriers to Providing
Services to Disabled Sexual Assault Victims. Retrieved from Sophia, the
St. Catherine University repository website: https://sophia.stkate.edu/
msw_papers/182.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One step VA can take to better serve the men and women under its
care is to devote attention to a program that will eliminate the
current environment of harassment at VA facilities. Harassment comes in
all forms and is a barrier to care that is only now really being
brought to light. VA must continue its Stand Up to Stop Harassment
campaign in VA medical centers and ensure that adequate funding is
available to promote and educate VA stakeholders to achieve the
necessary cultural changes needed to remove barriers to heath care
within VA for all veterans.
The VA is responsible for protecting staff and patients from
harassment. As they develop a comprehensive, department-wide strategy,
we urge policymakers to keep in mind that in some cases, patients who
have traumatic brain injuries, dementia, or who are confused or
impaired for other reasons may lack appropriate self-control or
awareness that results in inappropriate behavior toward others. VA
needs to understand the complex personal interactions of a health care
setting when determining harassment policies.
This is also a good time for VA to review existing policies and
procedures for reporting of sexual assaults within VA to ensure we are
meeting the needs of reporting and capturing the full situation within
its facilities. We hope part of the review process would include
greater scrutiny of what, if any, protections are in place to promote
the safety of catastrophically disabled veterans and ensure they are
not re-victimized or assaulted for the first time while under VA care.
At the same time, VA should also ensure that veterans service
organizations have an active role in this process.
Thank you again for the opportunity to submit our view on VA's
efforts to support survivors of MST.

Information Required by Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to Rule XI 2(g) of the House of Representatives, the
following information is provided regarding Federal grants and
contracts.

Fiscal Year 2020

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events--Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$253,337.

Fiscal Year 2019

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events--Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$193,247.

Fiscal Year 2018

Department of Veterans Affairs, Office of National Veterans Sports
Programs & Special Events--Grant to support rehabilitation sports
activities--$181,000.

Disclosure of Foreign Payments

Paralyzed Veterans of America is largely supported by donations
from the general public. However, in some very rare cases we receive
direct donations from foreign nationals. In addition, we receive
funding from corporations and foundations which in some cases are U.S.
subsidiaries of non-U.S. companies.
______

Prepared Statement of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America

Chairman Pappas, Ranking Member Bergman, and Members of the
Subcommittee, on behalf of Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America's
(IAVA) more than 425,000 members, thank you for the opportunity to
share our views, data, and experiences on an issue affecting too many
of our servicemembers, how the Department of Veterans Affairs supports
survivors of Military Sexual Trauma. IAVA would also like to thank the
Women Veterans Task Force for the valuable work they are doing to
address gaps in care for women veterans.
Millions of veterans rely on VA for both health care and benefits.
Ensuring that the system is able and agile enough to accommodate those
veterans is paramount to ensuring the lasting success and health of the
veteran population, including survivors of military sexual assault.
About 48 percent of all veterans and about 55 percent of post-9/11 era
veterans are enrolled in VA care. Among respondents to IAVA's most
recent member survey, 81 percent are enrolled in VA health care, and
the vast majority have sought care from VA in the last year. Eighty-one
percent of these VA users rated their experience at VA as average or
above average. IAVA members have been clear that access to VA care can
be challenging, but once in the system, they prefer that care. Further,
independent reviews of VA health care support that the care is as good,
if not better than the private sector.
The topic of MST is an issue that is of high importance both to
IAVA and to me personally. I served in the U.S. Navy from 2010-2014 as
an Aviation Electronics Technician. It was one of the most fulfilling
jobs that I have ever had and I miss it every day. I joined the Navy
because I wanted to see the world and hoped to 1 day become a pilot. At
least, that is what I told everyone. I am not a survivor of MST but I
am a survivor of sexual assault. I joined the military to escape from
my hometown and the constant reminder of what I had been through. I
relived it every day when I went to college and was forced to be around
my assailant because he was involved with my roommate. I relived it
every day because I grew up in a small town and every single piece of
that town reminded me of a day that I had spent with him. I relived it
every day because it happened in my house, in my bedroom, in my bed.
While I cannot fully comprehend the pain that these strong, resilient
men and women have, I do know what it is like to never be able to
escape from those that have taken something from you and be forced to
replay the horrific memories because of your surroundings. And I know
the pain of not wanting to exist anymore because of the helplessness
and fear you feel. This is the reason I joined the military and this is
also the reason I have never enrolled at VA.
We know that MST is not a women's issue, but it is an issue that
disproportionately affects women veterans. In IAVA's 2019 survey, 43
percent of our women veteran members and 3 percent of male veteran
members reported experiencing MST. Based on data from an anonymous
survey that is created by the Department of Defense every 2 years, the
Pentagon estimated that approximately 20,500 service members across all
the military branches were sexually assaulted in Fiscal Year 2018
alone. This is a substantial increase from 14,900 in 2016. Despite
these numbers, we still have recent reports of MST claims being
mishandled.
In recent years, VA has taken many steps to improve its services
for survivors of MST, but there are still gaps that need to be
addressed. The recent reports of the mishandling of MST claims does
nothing but scare those in need of care away from this powerhouse
health system. In 2018, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) found
that nearly half of denied MST-related claims were not properly
processed following VBA policy. They incorrectly processed claims,
including claims where the evidence was sufficient, yet the staff
failed to request a medical exam. There were evidence gathering issues
such as staff not requesting veterans' records and VA staff made
decisions based on ``contradictory or otherwise insufficient medical
opinions.'' VA research has shown that women veterans who have
experienced sexual trauma feel less safe at VA facilities. Since women
veterans are 2.2 times more likely than non-veteran women to die by
suicide, it is imperative that VA creates a safe and welcoming
environment for the women who have selflessly served this country.
Claims processors across VBA must be properly trained on MST-PTSD
related claims and follow the latest guidelines.
Retaliation is something that many MST survivors fear when it comes
to reliving their pain and coming forward. It is known that a large
portion of sexual assaults go unreported for fear of retaliation. Only
one-third of IAVA members reported their assault, and of those, an
alarming two-thirds also reported that they encountered retaliation as
a result of their reporting. We cannot afford to let this type of
mentality spill over into our VA health system. It takes unfathomable
courage to talk about sexual assault and even more to report it to
someone you do not know. I, myself, never had the courage to confront
my assailant and did not even talk about it until recently. I blamed
myself, as so many others do. The system for claims has to be clear and
victims have to believe that they will be heard and that they are not
just a file or claim number.
A recent OIG investigation at the VA North Texas Health Care System
found that the hospital lacked a gynecologist for almost 2 years and
lacked women's bathrooms in clinical areas, forcing female patients to
change out of hospital gowns back into street clothes before using
bathrooms in public areas. This hospital serves the fourth largest
population of women veterans in the Nation, with a population of
approximately 13,000. It is these types of errors that communicate a
lack of parallel between the care that female veterans receive as
opposed to their male counterparts. Our women veterans deserve better
and have earned better than this.
In the last 4 months of 2019, we were told that Federal authorities
were investigating allegations of multiple sexual assaults against VA
patients at a West Virginia department hospital. A San Diego area
physician working with VA pled guilty to assaulting and exploiting five
female patients referred to him by department health officials. And
finally, a House Veterans Affairs Committee staffer was harassed and
assaulted by a patient at the Washington, DC. VA Medical Center. It is
situations like these, as well as the others mentioned, that really get
at the core problem. Culture.
We have a culture problem within our military and it has spilled
over into VA. A 2019 Pentagon survey showed that 747 students within
military service academies said they received unwanted sexual contact
in 2018. This is almost a 50 percent increase from the 504 in 2016. The
men and women in our service academies are the future leaders of our
military. They must be held to a higher standard and set an example for
others to follow throughout their careers in the military and beyond.
We cannot afford to ignore the problem and let those affected feel
unheard. Everything stems from the culture problem. We need change, and
the time is now.
Passing the Deborah Sampson Act (H.R. 3224/S. 514) into law would
be a giant step for women veterans healthcare, but even with passage,
our fight is not finished. The VA motto does not help. It explicitly
excludes women from its mandate, and it reads as outdated: ``To care
for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow, and his
orphan.'' The passage of the Honoring All Veterans Act (H.R. 3010)
would directly impact this culture change. As women veterans are the
fastest growing demographic, a gender-neutral VA motto would display an
immediate commitment. We too ``have borne the battle.''
We have fought hard but our fight is long from over. Sexual assault
has proven to be increasing within the military and we are calling out
for the culture change now. I want to feel safe going to the VA. I want
to not be afraid of using the health system that 81 percent of IAVA
members rate at an average to above average, because it is my right by
serving in the United States Navy. Survivors deserve better. We have
earned better.
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you again for the opportunity to
share IAVA's views on these issues today. I look forward to working
with both the Subcommittee and the Task Force in the future.

Biography of Kaitlynne Hetrick

Kaitlynne Hetrick serves as IAVA's Government Affairs Associate,
helping to lead IAVA's advocacy efforts in Washington, DC. She served
in the United States Navy for 4 years as an Aviation Electronics
Technician 3d Class. Since departing from the Navy in 2014, she used
her GI bill to obtain her bachelor's degree at Baldwin Wallace
University while working with her fellow student veterans. Serving
first as the Secretary of her university's Student Veteran Organization
and then as the President, Kaitlynne worked to help fellow student vets
take advantage of all the programs offered to them due to their
service. Kaitlynne has also worked with several veteran non-profits to
help disabled and transitioning former servicemembers.
______

Prepared Statement of Disabled American Veterans

Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting DAV (Disabled American Veterans) to submit
testimony for the record on this important hearing looking at the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) support for survivors of military
sexual trauma (MST). DAV is a non-profit veterans service organization
comprised of more than one million wartime service-disabled veterans
that is dedicated to a single purpose: empowering veterans to lead
high-quality lives with respect and dignity.
The discussion on this issue is critical as the health and well-
being of far too many veterans--both male and female--has been
negatively impacted because of this type of personal trauma. Many DAV
members use VA's specialized mental health services and rely on the
veterans health care system to assist them in recovery from their post
deployment mental health challenges.
Sadly, the most recent report (2018-2019) from the Department of
Defense (DoD) Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office (SAPRO)
confirms there is increased prevalence of sexual assaults among service
members in the active force and at military service academies between
2014 and 2018.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, growing rates of sexual trauma were
reported by all branches of the armed forces. Over a 1-year period, 6.2
percent of service women and .7 percent of service men reported
experiencing MST. Rates of exposure for service women ranged from a low
of 4.3 percent in the Air Force to a high of 10.7 percent in the
Marines. For service men, the rates ranged from a low of .5 percent in
the Air Force to a high of 1 percent in the Marines. In all cases,
these rates are higher than those reported in 2016.\1\ The rates also
far exceed the 1.6 percent of women in the general population who have
experienced rape in the preceding 12 months (numbers of men were too
low to be considered representative).\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 2018 Workplace and Gender Relations Survey of Active Duty
Members. DoD Office of People Analytics. Defense Sexual Assault
Incident Data base, and DoD Sexual Assault Prevention and Response
Office.
\2\ Prevalence and Characteristics of Sexual Violence, Stalking and
Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey, United States, 2011.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sept.5, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, in the same survey, more than 24 percent of service
women and 6 percent of service men reported experiencing sexual
harassment during the past year of service. Significant numbers of
service members who reported experiencing sexual trauma also reported
experiencing harassment.
The impact and aftermath of sexual assault or harassment can be
devastating and long lasting and many veterans turn to the Veterans
Health Administration (VHA) following military service for treatment to
address conditions such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) or
depression related to MST. VA has a universal screening policy for MST
to help identify veterans who may require treatment for health
conditions associated with personal trauma.
According to VA, in Fiscal Year 2019, 142,929 or 30.6 percent of
female veterans and 80,884 or 1.7 percent of male veterans seen for
health care at a VA facility reported a history of MST when screened by
their VA health care provider. Because of differences in the definition
of MST in VHA, which also includes sexual harassment of a repeated and
threatening manner, these numbers may not directly correspond with
those reported by the military.
Every VHA health care system provided MST-related outpatient care
to both women and men in Fiscal Year 2019, with more than 2 million
MST-related outpatient visits provided. VA has specialized, high-
quality mental health care to include a full range of outpatient,
inpatient and residential services. Individual and group therapy is
available at Vet Centers, VA medical centers and some community-based
outpatient clinics.
VA also has designated MST coordinators at each VA healthcare
system to assist MST survivors seeking care. The MST Coordinator
position is a collateral role which can make fulfilling the
responsibilities of this position difficult. DAV encourages the
Subcommittee to investigate whether MST coordinators have adequate time
to fulfill their responsibilities and required duties and, if not,
ensure that VHA receives adequate resources to designate a full time
employee to this critical position at all facilities. In addition, VA
has developed specialized programs for eating and substance use
disorders and intimate partner violence, which can be co-occurring
issues for many MST survivors. DAV would like to see VA make
information about accessing these programs more accessible to veterans
who may need them, including the clinicians that may refer them to such
care.
DAV's 2018 report, Women Veterans: The Journey Ahead, detailed the
story of DAV member and Navy veteran, Leeia Isabelle, who, like so many
survivors, did not report the crime against her claiming she wanted to
``bury it and make it go away.''
``I was just going through the motions and I wasn't really fully
engaged in my life,'' she reported. Seeing the negative effects that
MST had on her relationships and overall well-being motivated her to
begin the long road to recovery for which she credits VA group therapy
with other women veterans, cognitive behavioral therapy, and
involvement with DAV. Leeia's story is typical of many veterans with
PTSD. Chronic symptoms of feeling numb, hypervigilant, anxious,
irritable, and a lack of interest in the people or activities that once
brought them joy can be overwhelming. These changes can strain
relationships, threaten employment, lead to homelessness and isolate
them from their families and communities.
Public Law 113-146, the Veterans Access, Choice and Accountability
Act of 2014, required VA to report on its treatment of conditions
caused or exacerbated by MST, specifically identifying the differences
in treatment of men and women with these conditions. The most common
diagnosis among those screening positive for MST for both men and women
is post-traumatic stress disorder (55.4 percent and 58.3 percent,
respectively) followed by depressive disorders (39.2 percent and 48.7
percent). Substance abuse is the next most common diagnosis for men
(15.6 percent) while anxiety follows for women (18.7 percent).\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Department of Veterans Affairs. Report on Treatment and
Services Available for Military Sexual Trauma in Response to Section
403 of PL 113-146.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VHA routinely uses cognitive behavioral therapy and rapid eye
movement desensitization therapy, which are identified as effective
treatments for veterans with PTSD due to a personal trauma. Most
importantly, VHA primary care and mental health staff complete
mandatory training for treating veterans with MST-related PTSD. This
specialized training includes a focus on gender-specific issues that
may arise in treating veterans of both sexes. VA also conducts
education that highlights the importance of sensitivity to the needs of
both male and female veterans who have experienced MST. VHA policy
``strongly encourages'' facilities to allow veterans to seek care from
a provider of their preferred sex when clinically appropriate, but VHA
maintains that there are benefits to be derived from both gender-
exclusive and gender-neutral MST care settings and that men and women
seeking care may request either of these types of care settings. Peer
support specialists can also be helpful in assisting veterans with
treatment engagement, goal setting and identifying motivators to move
forward with their recovery. DAV urges VHA to use the broadest latitude
in allowing veterans who have experienced MST to choose the sex of
their provider.
All health care providers conducting VA disability examinations
must also complete MST-specific training that addresses gender-specific
issues for both male and female veterans. This is an especially
important policy that directly affects veterans filing disability
claims for conditions resulting from MST. For years, DAV heard
complaints from women veterans who believed their disability claims for
MST-related PTSD were being erroneously denied. Based on continued
complaints from women veterans, VBA took action following an initial
review and assessment of MST-related claims and established a specific
protocol for development and adjudication of such claims.
VBA guidance created in 2011 requires that the same-sex MST
Coordinator at the regional office ask the claimant if the incident for
which he or she is seeking compensation was reported. If so, the MST
coordinator determines how best to obtain the incident report and does
so. Veterans Service Representatives (VSRs) contact veterans to follow
up by letter if MST coordinators are unable to reach the veteran by
phone. VSRs are also charged with gathering evidence in support of
claims. In the case of claims for MST they are also required to obtain
all military personnel files and in addition to advising claimants of
alternative evidence that may be provided to substantiate the stressor
such as journals, or statements of confidants or clergy who were aware
of the incident around the time it occurred.
Once received, VSRs review the evidence to confirm the stressor and
also identify any additional ``markers'' in military or other records
that may indicate the stressor took place around that time such as a
request for transfer, changes in job performance, changes in behavior
such as increased use of leave or medical care, documented pregnancy
tests, or recognition of new medical or mental health conditions. If
any markers are present, a medical exam must be ordered. Claims should
not be denied unless there is no evidence of a stressor, or of a
behavioral marker or of symptoms of a mental health disorder that may
be related to MST.
Once again, reports surfaced that VBA was falling short in
upholding its own guidance that better assures fair adjudication of
claims for MST-related PTSD.\4\ The Inspector General (IG) found that
since VBA ended its practices of special queuing and audits for claims
of PTSD related to MST, progress it made in correcting inequitable
awards has been lost.\5\ In 2018, the IG determined, based on VBA
policy, that almost half (46 percent) of MST-related claims reviewed
were processed incorrectly, and that almost half of denials (49
percent) were not processed correctly meaning that, had the adjudicated
claims been processed appropriately, the claimant may have been awarded
compensation and with it received higher priority for VHA health care
treatment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ M21-1 Adjudication Procedures Manual, Part IV, Subpart ii,
Chapter 1, Section D, topic 5, Developing Claims for SC for PTSD Based
on Personal Trauma.
\5\ VA Office of Inspector General. Denied PTSD Claims Related to
Military Sexual Trauma. VA OIG 17-05248-241. August 21, 2018, p.2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The IG recommended reestablishing specialized queues for MST and
other claims requiring special handling, reestablishing an additional
level of ``special focused'' review for complex claims, and updating
training manuals and claim development checklists for adjudicators. We
request the Subcommittee verify if VBA made changes based on
recommendations in the IG report to ensure these claims are being
adjudicated correctly.
DAV fully supported the IG's recommendations and adopted DAV
Resolution No. 043 at our 2019 National Convention, urging VA to
conduct rigorous oversight of its adjudication personnel and review of
data to ensure the present policy and practices for evaluating
disability claims associated with military sexual trauma, are being
faithfully followed and standardized in all VA regional offices. Last
year, DAV also testified in support of legislation, H.R. 1092, the
Servicemembers and Veterans Empowerment and Support Act of 2019. This
bill would help to ensure that VA adheres to current policy regarding
the adjudication of claims for mental health conditions, including
PTSD, associated with MST. Unfortunately, Congress has not taken any
further action on H.R. 1092 or the Senate companion bill, S. 374.
VA reports that information about MST-related treatment and
disability compensation is provided to every transitioning service
member as part of the Transition Assistance Program and is available
through key DoD resources like the Safe Helpline. Information is also
provided as part of the Separation Health Assessments that VA conducts.
We are pleased that VA engages in extensive outreach efforts to make
sure MST survivors know help is available and that VA has specialized
programs and treatment for recovery, but we want to ensure there are
policies in place for a ``warm handoff'' of MST survivors between DoD
and VA.
Likewise, we are pleased that VA has established a Women's Mental
Health Mini-Residency and National Reproductive Mental Health
Consultation Program. These burgeoning programs cover a broad range of
topics related to the treatment of women veterans, such as
understanding suicide risks in female patients and working with women
whose mental health problems are influenced by hormonal changes. This
type of training helps to increase a clinician's competency to provide
gender-sensitive care to women veterans and should be fully supported
and resourced appropriately.
Another factor that adds complexity to the issue of MST is reported
patient-to-patient harassment on VA grounds. Sexual harassment creates
a significant barrier to care for many women veterans seeking
treatment. According to a recent study of women veterans one of every
five women veterans seeking VA care reports facing harassment
(considered unwanted comments or behavior) from male veteran
patients.\6\ Researchers found that women veterans who reported
experiencing harassment were more likely to have experienced MST and to
miss or delay care because of these incidents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Klap, R., et al. ``Prevalence of Stranger Harassment of Women
Veterans at Veterans Affairs Medical Centers and Impacts on Delayed or
Missed Care.'' Women's Health Issues 29-2 (2019). 107-115.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Stranger harassment can create significant anxiety for veterans who
have previously experienced trauma and in fact be re-traumatizing. This
may occur anytime individuals who have experienced trauma in the past
are exposed to environmental ``triggers'' that remind them of a
traumatic incident, including sexual trauma or harassment. In health
care settings, the potential for triggers can be heightened--i.e.,
exposure to practitioners of the opposite sex or a new clinician, tight
spaces where it is difficult to maneuver or exit easily, having to
undress for a clinical examination in unsecured areas or where privacy
is limited. VA must work to improve how it addresses and remedies
safety, privacy and culture deficiencies reported in annual environment
of care surveys and better assure that entrances to VA facilities are
harassment-free zones and that all clinical space is private, secure
and welcoming to all patients.
VA has responded to complaints by developing the Stand Up to Stop
Harassment! Campaign. The initiative aims to educate patients about
what constitutes harassment and how staff and others can help stop
harassment or intervene as necessary. While more details about the
campaign are forthcoming, DAV is eager to assist in the Department's
efforts to address this problem, including seeking enactment of the
Deborah Sampson Act (H.R. 3224), which includes provisions that require
VA to develop a strategy for responding to and stopping stranger
harassment at VA facilities.
Finally, because some women veterans must receive a significant
amount or all of their gender-specific care in the private sector, VA
should work to ensure that its community care partners are also aware
of the high prevalence of MST in the veterans' population. VA's
Community Care Network (CCN) providers should be required to complete
training in dealing with trauma-exposed veterans--and use full-time MST
coordinators to help assist with such training. CCN clinicians should
also be made aware of VA's national MST-related training webinars
conducted throughout the year and about VA's annual conference, both of
which routinely address gender-specific issues. Veterans will be able
to form more trusting and satisfying relationships with an assigned
primary care provider (PCP) and VA must ensure that it designates PCPs
for each woman veteran in its care.
While progress has been made and there are many excellent programs
and supportive services offered by VA to assist MST survivors in
recovery--oversight is still necessary to ensure timely access to high
quality care for MST-related conditions is available at all sites of
care.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.

[all]
