- CYBERSECURITY CHALLENGES AND CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT AT THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY CHALLENGES AND
CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT AT
THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-45

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-375 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

SUSIE LEE, Nevada, Chairwoman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           JIM BANKS, Indiana, Ranking Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       CHIP ROY, Texas

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2019

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Susie Lee, Chairwoman..................................     1
Honorable Jim Banks, Ranking Member..............................     3

WITNESSES

Mr. Paul Cunningham, Deputy Assistant Secretary and Chief
Information Security Officer (CISO), U. S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     5

Accompanied by:

Mr. Gary Stevens, Deputy Chief Information Security Officer,
Executive Director for Information Security Policy and
Strategy, U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Andrew D. Centineo, Executive Director, Procurement and
Logistics, Veterans Health Administration Procurement and
Logistics Office, U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Ms. Luwanda Jones, Deputy Chief Information Officer,
Strategic Sourcing, U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Nick Dahl, Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Audits and
Evaluations, Office of the Inspector General, U. S. Department
of Veterans Affairs............................................     6

Accompanied by:

Mr. Michael Bowman, Director, Information Technology and
Security Audits Division, Office of the Inspector
General, U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Greg Wilshusen, Director of Information Technology and
Cybersecurity, U. S. Government Accountability Office..........     8

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements of Witness

Mr. Paul Cunningham Prepared Statement...........................    29
Mr. Nick Dahl Prepared Statement.................................    33
Mr. Greg Wilshusen Prepared Statement............................    39

CYBERSECURITY CHALLENGES AND
CYBER RISK MANAGEMENT AT
THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

----------

THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 14, 2019

U. S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Technology Modernization
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Susie Lee [chairwoman of
the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lee, Lamb, Cunningham, Banks,
Watkins, and Roy.

OPENING STATEMENT OF SUSIE LEE, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Lee. Good morning. This hearing will now come to order.
On behalf of Ranking Member Banks and myself and the
subcommittee, thank you all for being here.
In searching this committee's history, we could not find
any evidence that there has been a broad oversight hearing
examining cybersecurity management challenges at the Department
of Veterans Affairs. The Subcommittee on Technology
Modernization is going to chart a new course today.
Cybersecurity is not a new challenge in the Federal
Government. Each year, the Offices of Inspector General are
mandated to audit compliance with the Federal cybersecurity
framework that has been established to protect information,
programs, and assets from threats. Those threats have become
more complex and the potential for harm has only increased
since the Federal Information Security Management Act, FISMA,
was passed in 2002.
In the intervening years, we have also seen how big a
target the health care sector has become for bad actors.
Throughout the world, health care institutions have been
breached and extorted, and data have been held hostage or
stolen. Government health care institutions have not been
immune from this either. Britain's national health service was
a victim of one of the largest ransomware attacks in history.
Almost daily, there are news reports or notifications by
hospitals, insurance companies, and other entities that there
has been a breach and that data may have been compromised.
These attacks and breaches cost millions, and impact the health
care and benefits delivery. They also cause Americans to lost
trust in institutions' ability to protect some of the most
sensitive there is.
At the same time, the reliance on electronic personal data,
the electronic sharing of that data, and the modernization of
systems to support health benefits and public service delivery
is growing. As this reliance on technology increases, so does
the risk. Therefore, it only makes that one of our country's
largest providers of health care and benefits should be at the
forefront of addressing these risks.
VA is in the process of modernizing numerous systems to
adjudicate disability claims, provide educational benefits, and
deliver health care. Information security management should be
a key component of those efforts from the outset. However, my
concern is that assessing risk and developing mitigation
strategies does not have enough attention. Many Office of
Inspector General (OIG) and Government Accountability Office
(GAO) reports on security incidents cite management failures or
lack of internal oversight as a reason behind the incidents.
Too often, strong leadership on risk management and information
security becomes an afterthought or a paperwork exercise done
once a year for the Federal Information Security Modernization
Act (FISMA) audit. Even worse, it only becomes an issue after
the system has been compromised and sensitive data is put at
risk.
Cybersecurity is a challenging and complex issue, and it
requires an ever-changing response. The key is that the
response needs to be a whole-of-government or a whole-of-agency
effort. Every component of an agency needs to be involved, from
the front-line staff employing good cyber hygiene, to
acquisition professionals assessing the risk in the supply
chain, to Information Technology (IT) professionals assessing
the risks of new and legacy technology, and to leadership
engaging in strategic assessments to understand the challenges
and developing the plans to meet them.
The purpose of today's hearing is to hear from VA
leadership about cybersecurity landscape, the challenges in the
approach to risk management. We will hear from the Office of
Inspector General about how the VA has faired in cyber risk
management over the last several years and the outstanding
concerns. We will also hear from the Government Accountability
Office about responding to cybersecurity challenges and best
practices for risk management.
I would like this hearing to serve as a foundation for
other cybersecurity-related oversight that the subcommittee
will engage in over the next year. The better we understand the
challenges and the risks, the better we are able to assess
whether we are making progress and what more needs to be done.
The protection of VA technology and data is not a
hypothetical issue or something that occurs in a vacuum. These
systems and data serve to support the care and the benefits our
veterans have earned. I have heard from veterans loud and clear
about privacy and data security concerns, and those concerns
only become more amplified as more systems become electronic.
We do not want to hold up progress that the VA is making on
technology modernization--as we all know, it is sorely needed--
but we do need to be mindful of the risks that we are taking as
VA moves ahead.
Further, as we encourage veterans to use VA resources and,
most especially, to find the support and care for the wounds,
both visible and hidden, VA must show that it is secure; it can
be trusted; and that it has the tools, policies, and the
leadership to protect veterans' health data and personal
information. This is all a part of a sacred obligation we have
made to those who have served our country.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today and I look
forward to your testimony.
With that, I would now like to recognize my colleague
Ranking Member Banks for 5 minutes to deliver any opening
remarks he may have.
Mr. Banks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JIM BANKS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
There was a time when cyber attacks primarily threatened
national security agencies and financial institutions; that
time has long passed. Today, state-directed cyber attacks,
cyber espionage, and cyber crimes are nearly daily occurrences,
and they threaten every government agency and industry.
Cybersecurity has been a consistent priority across
administrations throughout successive Congresses, and I am
encouraged that cybersecurity policy is increasingly sound.
However, implementation among Federal agencies seems to be
continually uneven and fragmented, and the Federal Government
still often struggles to defend itself.
Many of the technology modernization issues that we often
discuss in other contexts also have major cybersecurity
impacts. Legacy systems carry vulnerabilities, and scarce
resources must be allocated to replacing them or hardening
them. Competition for cybersecurity talent is fierce
everywhere, but a one-size-fits-all personnel system hampers
the Federal Government.
The VA must approach cybersecurity risk management not only
as a government agency, but also as a health care system. The
health care sector recognized the cybersecurity imperative
somewhat later than other industries. The first major cyber
attack on a hospital system was not until 2014 when Chinese
hackers stole 4.5 million patients' non-medical data from
Community Health Systems, Incorporated. It became apparent that
many health care organizations had not sufficiently recognized
or prioritized cyber threats, and they began to play catchup in
their cybersecurity investments.
Health care faces an inherent challenge. Modern patient-
centered care and evidence-based medicine require the real-time
exchange of huge volumes of sensitive personal data. Patients
demand this, but they also expect peace of mind that their data
will not be mishandled or stolen.
The health care sector also contends with the increasing
complexity and connectedness of medical devices. Medical
devices were not always thought of as targets, but the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) and manufacturers have recognized
that their cyber vulnerabilities are similar to those of
industrial control systems.
Overall, VA's cybersecurity posture seems to be mixed. The
Federal Information Security Modernization Act requires annual
audits of each agency's cybersecurity practices. VA has been
carrying a high number of unresolved recommendations for years,
but this is slowly trending in the right direction. Some of the
weaknesses are also documented in the OIG's annual financial
audits and they are unresolvable until VA replaces several
outdated financial IT systems.
I am encouraged that Office of Information and Technology
(OIT) has prioritized hiring cybersecurity talent and I am
eager to see them demonstrate real progress in recruiting and
retaining these personnel. I believe Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) and OIT have only begun to seriously
tackle the issue of vulnerabilities in medical devices.
Thousands of these devices are running outdated operating
systems and some are so obsolete that it is not even possible
to update the software. This issue cannot be allowed to fall
into a bureaucratic impasse. On the other hand, VA has
demonstrated real leadership in developing its Technical
Reference Model, which is a data base of IT equipment and
software that is approved for use. This is a good step toward
ensuring that VA is buying technologies that are safe.
Finally, I would like to address the issue of cybersecurity
in the technology supply chain. Hackers can be virtually
anyone, but when we talk about corrupting the supply chain, we
are almost talking about China.
China is embedded in every aspect of the IT and
communications equipment supply chain, and none of our other
strategic adversaries come even close. China is the largest
exporter of technology hardware globally, as well as a growing
player in the mobile app marketplace, and nearly every U.S.
hardware manufacturer's products contain multiple Chinese-made
components. It is a frightening reality that some foreign
companies are pre-loading malicious software into their
products.
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society
(HIMSS) found in their 2019 cybersecurity survey that malware
in commercial products accounted for 8 percent of significant
cybersecurity incidents in health care systems.
It has been the U.S. Government's policy since the 1990's
to buy commercial, off-the-shelf technology whenever possible,
and this has been an overwhelming success in most respects.
However, while Federal agencies tend to view themselves as
independent entities, our cyber adversaries, especially State
actors, see them as one big, interconnected target. Our
adversaries coordinate all of their governmental, military, and
corporate resources to hack our networks and compromise our
supply chains, but we do nothing of the sort to defend
ourselves; this has to change. We have to go far beyond a
whole-of-government approach to cybersecurity.
I thank our witnesses for being here today. I look forward
to discussing these issues.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Banks.
I will now introduce the witnesses we have before the
subcommittee today. Mr. Paul Cunningham is Deputy Assistant
Secretary and Chief Information Security Officer for the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Mr. Cunningham is also a Navy
veteran.
Mr. Cunningham is accompanied by Mr. Gary Stevens, Deputy
Chief Information Security Officer and Executive Director for
Information Security Policy and Strategy. Mr. Andrew Centineo
is Executive Director, Procurement and Logistics, Veterans
Health Administration, and also an Army veteran. Thank you. Ms.
Luwanda Jones, Deputy Chief Information Officer, Strategic
Sourcing, in the Office of Information and Technology.
Mr. Nick Dahl, Deputy Assistant Inspector General for
Audits and Evaluations, VA Office of Inspector General, who is
accompanied by Mr. Michael Bowman, Director of Information
Technology and Security Audits Division at the Office of
Inspector General, and Mr. Gregory Wilshusen, Director of
Information and Cybersecurity Team at the General
Accountability Office.
We will now hear the prepared statements from our panel
members. Your written statements in full will be included in
the hearing record, without objection.
Mr. Cunningham, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL CUNNINGHAM

Mr. Cunningham. Good morning, Madam Chair Lee, Ranking
Member Banks, and the distinguished members of the
subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak about the
Department of Veterans Affairs' cybersecurity strategy and its
mission to protect the sensitive data of veterans and VA
employees.
I am Paul Cunningham, VA's Chief Information Security
Officer. I am here with Mr. Gary Stevens, VA's Deputy CISO; Mr.
Andrew Centineo, the Executive Director of Procurement and
Logistics under VHA; and Ms. Luwanda Jones, Deputy Chief
Information Officer for Strategic Sourcing.
I want to begin by thanking Congress and the subcommittee
for your continued support and shared commitment to the success
of VA's efforts in delivery secure and effective services to
our Nation's veterans. As a Navy veteran myself, I have seen
firsthand the value and the real impact the VA has on the lives
of so many of our veterans. As chief security professional, I
understand the value that technology brings and how VA's
mission is supported. I am also aware of the treasure trove of
information that VA protects and the lengths our adversaries
will go to gain access.
Secretary Robert Wilkie has committed VA to leveraging new
technologies and best approaches to streamline the Department's
services to our vets. However, new technologies and
advancements bring additional risk to information systems, data
management systems, and privacy.
In accordance with Federal Information Security
Modernization Act of 2014, the Secretary has delegated the
balancing of IT operations and cybersecurity to the Chief
Information Officer, Assistant Secretary Jim Gfrerer. Likewise,
the CIO has designated me as the Chief Information Security
Officer to administer the cybersecurity program on behalf of
the VA.
The Office of Information Security is charged to develop,
implement, and maintain the VA's cybersecurity program and the
risk strategy. The cybersecurity program deploys a centralized
risk strategy that proactively aligns efforts with the National
Institute of Standards and Technology, meets Federal
requirements, and responds to today's threats while promoting
VA's mission. Office of Information Security (OIS) administers
the program through a holistic and robust set of strategies and
policies that leverage directives, assessments, and proactive
monitoring. OIS defines policies in handbooks that outline the
roles and responsibilities of stakeholders, and defines the
framework for implementation.
Based on the OIS guidance, system owners are required to
develop security plans that define the purpose of their
systems, identify the security requirements, and catalogs the
appropriate controls based on the security level of those
systems. OIS uses those security plans in our ongoing
assessments to ensure sites and systems meet established
standards are effective in safeguarding information. System
owners and authorizing officials use assessment results and
other security-related information in their determination if a
system should have or should maintain access to VA's network
and assessments.
OIS oversees a dedicated cybersecurity operational center
that monitors and responds to malicious network activities.
This talented team serves as VA's cybersecurity instant-
response hub, and coordinates with the Department of Homeland
Security in accordance with Federal requirements.
Any gap or vulnerability identified by OIS through
assessments and monitoring are managed through an active plan
of action and milestone, or Plan of Actions and Milestones)
POA&M tracking system. The POA&Ms ensure remediation efforts
are completed, assists in setting cybersecurity priorities, and
provides analysis for policy and reporting.
However, VA's cybersecurity program is more than one
cybersecurity office; it relies on all elements of the
organization to establish local procedures to ensure policies,
protocols, and agreements are followed properly. This includes
limiting access to sensitive information, developing protocols
for procuring third party vendors, and using technical assets
in a secure manner. As we say in the Navy, it is an all-hands
effort.
We do face challenges. New technologies, third party
partnerships, and advancement in operational technology
introduce new security risks, not just at VA, but across the
Federal Government and private industry. VA understands the
need to address the growing challenges in security while
improving access and services to veterans. We are working
closely with our Federal and our commercial partners to improve
our ability to manage risk and maintain compliance with Federal
mandates. We are confident that are cybersecurity program is
positioned to proactively support VA's mission.
Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you again for this opportunity, and we are
happy to answer any questions you may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Paul Cunningham Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Cunningham.
Mr. Dahl, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NICK DAHL

Mr. Dahl. Madam Chair, Ranking Member Banks, and members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Office of Inspector General's oversight of VA's Information
Technology Security Program. My statement focuses on the
security program's purpose and the challenges in protecting the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of VA's systems
and data.
IT systems and networks are critical to VA for carrying out
its mission of providing medical care and a range of benefits
and services to millions of veterans and their families. VA is
responsible for storing, managing, and providing secure access
to enormous amounts of sensitive data, including veterans'
medical records, benefits determinations, financial
disclosures, and education records. The OIG recognizes and
appreciates that this is a complex undertaking.
To the extent that VA does not properly manage and secure
their IT investments, they can become increasingly vulnerable
to misuse and mishaps. Lack of proper safeguards renders these
systems and networks vulnerable to intrusions by groups seeking
to obtain sensitive information, commit fraud, disrupt
operations, or launch attacks against other VA systems.
Security failures also undermine the trust veterans put in VA
to protect their sensitive information, which can affect their
engagement with programs and services.
The Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002,
known as FISMA, required that agencies develop, document, and
implement an organization-wide security program for their
systems and data. This act was amended in 2014 and became the
Federal Information Security Modernization Act.
Annually, the OIG reports on the extent to which VA has IT
safeguards in place consistent with FISMA requirements. Our
most recent FISMA audit revealed that VA has made progress
developing and distributing policies and procedures as part of
its security program. However, VA continues to face significant
challenges in complying with FISMA requirements, due in part to
maintaining an aging and outdated IT security infrastructure.
Our report contained multiple findings and 28 recommendations
for improving VA's Information Security Program. Most of these
recommendations are repeated from previous FISMA audits, as VA
has yet to adequately address them.
Our findings and recommendations focused on the following
areas: configuration management controls, which are designed to
ensure critical systems have appropriate security controls and
to ensure up-to-date vulnerability patches are implemented. In
our vulnerability testing, we have found that critical security
patches have not been consistently installed for various VA
systems.
Identity management and access controls, which are meant to
make certain that password standards are consistently
implemented and to ensure user's access privileges are limited
to only legitimate purposes. The OIG has seen many examples of
default user names and passwords, or the use of easily guessed
passwords, that provide increased opportunities for malicious
users to gain unauthorized access to critical VA systems.
The agency-wide Security Management Program, which is
intended to make sure that system security controls are
effectively implemented and continuously monitored. This
program is also designed to ensure that system security risks
are effectively remediated through corrective action plans. VA
has developed numerous plans of action and milestones to
address identified system security risks; however, we continue
to identify plans for which there is inadequate evidence of
effective action to justify the closure of such plans.
Overall, the OIG's FISMA audit, in addition to a range of
other reports on VA's IT security program, show that VA has
considerable work to do in order to achieve better IT security
outcomes.
VA's fundamental mission of providing benefits and services
to veterans is dependent on deploying secure IT systems and
networks. Until proven processes are in place to ensure
adequate controls across the enterprise, VA's mission-critical
systems and sensitive veterans' data will remain at risk. While
VA has made recent improvements in some aspects of information
management, there continue to be considerable challenges. We
believe that VA's successful implementation of open
recommendations from oversight reports is an important step in
its efforts to address cybersecurity and risk management
concerns.
Madam Chair, this concludes my statement. Mr. Bowman and I
would be happy to answer any questions you or other members of
the committee have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Nick Dahl Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Dahl.
Mr. Wilshusen, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GREG WILSHUSEN

Mr. Wilshusen. Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
at today's hearing.
In providing health care and other benefits to veterans and
their dependents, VA relies extensively on IT systems to
receive, process, and store sensitive data, including veterans'
medical records and other personally identifiable information.
Accordingly, effective security controls are essential to
ensure that VA's systems and information are protected from
loss, misuse, unauthorized disclosure or modification, and are
available when needed.
Today, as agreed, I will provide an overview of the status
of information security across the Federal Government in
general and at VA in particular. I will also discuss security
challenges that VA faces as it modernizes and secures its
systems. Before I do, if I may, I would like to recognize
members of my team who were instrumental in developing my
statement and the work underpinning it.
With me today are Assistant Director Jeff Knot and Analyst-
in-Charge DiMond Spencer. Also contributing were Chris
Businsky, Nancy Glover, Franklin Jackson, Daniel Swartz, Melina
Asencio, Scott Pettis, and Zsaroq Powe. Thank you.
Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks, Federal agencies,
including VA, continue to have deficient information security
programs. FISMA requires IGs to determine the effectiveness of
their agency's security program. To do this, IGs use the five-
level maturity model to assess the implementation of five core
security functions defined by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) cybersecurity framework. Of the
24 Chief Fianacial Officer (CFO) Act agencies, VA was one of 18
agencies where the IG determined that the agency-wide
information security program was not effectively implemented
during Fiscal Year 2018.
Additionally, most CFO Act agencies, including VA, had
deficiencies in most general control categories for their
financial systems in Fiscal Year 2018. For example, VA's IG
reported weaknesses in security management, access control,
configuration management, and contingency planning.
Auditors at 12 agencies designated information security as
a significant deficiency in internal control over financial
reporting for their agency, while IGs at VA and five other
agencies designated the deficiencies as a material weakness,
the most severe kind. Fiscal year 2018 was the 17th year in a
row that VA had reported a material weakness in information
security.
As VA secures and modernizes its information systems, it
faces several key security challenges. These challenges pertain
to implementing security controls over its information and
information systems; mitigating known vulnerabilities in a
timely and effective manner; establishing elements of a
cybersecurity risk management program to identify, prioritize,
and manage cyber risks; and categorizing the work roles of its
IT and cyber-related workforce positions, a key step in
identifying critical cybersecurity staffing needs.
Like other Federal agencies modernizing their IT systems,
VA faces an additional challenge of managing IT supply chain
risks. If unchecked and exploited, these risks could hamper
VA's ability to serve our veterans.
In summary, similar to other Federal agencies, VA continues
to be challenged in implementing an effective agency-wide
program and controls for securing its information and
information systems. As VA pursues efforts to modernize and
secure its IT systems, it will need to successfully address
multiple challenges in order to achieve effective outcomes.
Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks, this concludes my written
statement. I would be happy to answer your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Greg Wilshusen Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Lee. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for 5
minutes for questions, and I would like to start with you, Mr.
Cunningham.
You have a rich history and career in the Federal
information security space, including with the Department of
Energy. When you arrived at the VA in January 2019, what if any
observations did you make about where the VA stands with
regards to its progress in adopting good practices and
prioritizing cybersecurity?
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you, and thank you for the comments
earlier about understanding the challenges that VA has in this
area, as well as across the Federal Government.
It is true, risk and risk management and cybersecurity is a
challenge in a lot of Federal agencies and how they approach
it, obviously, we use NIST as our reference guide manuals; the
risk publications under 1839 and 37 describe how to implement a
cybersecurity program. What I have noticed when I arrived at VA
was that we have an incredibly talented pool of people,
especially in regards to how we monitor the network traffic and
our ability to respond. I also saw a very strong relationship
with Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which was a very
positive thing and where we could partner.
I did notice that there was some siloing or what I looked
to see like remains of silos that may have been in the past,
but I quickly realized that working with operations there was
an open door, which a lot of times in Federal agencies there
might be some conflicts between operations and cybersecurity,
but that was not in place at VA, which was very reassuring.
Also VA's approach to centralize cybersecurity, which is a
little bit different than I have seen in other agencies, but
promoted by NIST as well was a welcome change.
There are still some legacy issues that I have noted,
especially around the FISMA reports in Fiscal Year 2018, or
some of the AI findings from IG, but I also saw some really
clever ideas that were being put in place to promote greater
awareness through the senior leadership. For instance, they
developed an Office of Quality Process and Risk, and they
established a Risk Officer, which was an incredible feat,
because a lot of organizations have difficulty getting the
office set up and being staffed. That was remarkable and it is
a great ally for cybersecurity as a whole to be able to have
somebody that is equal pairing and unbiased feeding to the
Chief Information Officer (CIO) and the Secretary information
regarding cybersecurity risk.
I also saw--we also started looking at realignment to kind
of the core values that we really look at, especially around
FISMA 2014. We started looking at the pure NIST regulations and
where those pockets and pools of money and activities are being
placed. Then we also have a governance structure that is not
siloed for cybersecurity, but I actually have an opportunity
every week to talk with my peers both in operations and H.R.
and Strategic Sourcing that talk about what issues I have, as
well as listen to what issues they have, where we can be of
better service to veterans.
Probably the most important part I noticed was the
commitment from the CIO, as well as the Secretary and Deputy
Secretary. They understand cybersecurity and they are a great
ally.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. It sounds like you are making some
progress, especially within the management level at the VA. Are
there any program office changes that you are planning to make
to ensure proper-level management for cybersecurity?
Mr. Cunningham. At this time, I think we have a three-level
structure in the Office of Information Security, that gives us
the ability to, one, be proactive in building strategy and
policy, at the same time running operations and instant
response. Any changes in there are pretty much cosmetic,
because the activities will pretty much remain the same, maybe
sequential amounts where we have better management and
visibility of it.
With that, I do not see any other changes that I need at
this time. Certainly, how we integrate with operations is
effective. With that, I think we are good.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
I am now yielding to Ranking Member Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Wilshusen, the Federal cybersecurity policy seems to be
increasingly well developed, but its implementation seems to be
as disjointed as ever. We are here today to talk about VA, but
how should VA fit into a whole-of-government approach to
cybersecurity?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, I would certainly agree with you that
policies and procedures that are being developed for Federal
agencies are getting better, becoming more comprehensive, and
you are absolutely correct in that the implementation and
execution of those policies and procedures has been
inconsistent across Federal agencies and I think that is
something that will continue to occur. We will certainly keep
looking at that as we conduct our governmentwide work. But I
think VA, certainly in its role as protecting the systems at
that department, has some areas for improvement.
As the IG has consistently reported over the last several
years, there are a number of particular areas where that
department needs improvement, to include access controls, which
are intended to help detect and limit access to agency systems,
as well as assuring the proper management and configurations of
its systems and the like. Indeed, VA certainly has a key role
in approving the security over its systems and the networks
that it operates and uses.
Mr. Banks. All right. Mr. Cunningham, how does VA fit into
a whole-of-government approach to cybersecurity?
Mr. Cunningham. I think we have--well, we have done a lot
in the last 10 months I have been there. We have been working
closely with the cyber--I am sorry, the Chief Information
Security Officer (CISO) Council, the Federal CISO Council under
Office of Management and Budget (OMB). We also look for
partnering opportunities. For instance, we work with the
Department of Energy, we have several activities that are out
through one of their national labs, and in there we are
partnering with the cybersecurity team to ensure that it is not
just a drop-and-go, but a partnership.
Then we are also working with our internal and external
partners around medical devices, and how we can be a better
partner in establishing regulations and requirements.
Mr. Banks. Okay. How much do we know about the threat
actors targeting the VA? How many of them are nation State
actors, as opposed to cyber criminals, and how many of them are
foreign versus domestic?
Mr. Cunningham. While the Department does not have a
dedicated intelligence community element, like some agencies
do, and however we do have classified access to information and
we share that information with--or we get shared information
from DHS, as well as the intelligence community through high-
side communications.
We do have active state-sponsored threat actors that are
trying to get in, we recognize those where we can. A lot of
times when we see an attack or we see some sort of attempt, we
do not spend a lot of time doing attribution as much as
blocking, because we leave that to DHS and the intelligence
community.
Mr. Banks. All right. Department of Defense (DOD) has what
is called the Unified Capabilities Approved Product List and VA
has its Technical Reference Model (TRM). They both contain
lists of IT and communications equipment that is approved for
purchase and believed to be free of malware and back doors. How
is the TRM developed?
Mr. Cunningham. The TRM, I do not have the exact process, I
believe it is worked through a group, but I will actually pass
that to Ms. Jones.
Ms. Jones. Thank you, sir.
The TRM, we have a dedicated team in OI&T who assess the
products that are being placed on the--in the TRM. We will be
more than happy to at a later date come back and bring the
appropriate people to do a deep dive into the products that are
on that list, how we assess the products.
Mr. Banks. Okay, that would be great.
The DOD OIG has discovered instances of items on the
approved product list containing vulnerabilities, what is your
level of confidence that the TRM does not contain compromised
items?
Ms. Jones. Again, sir, we will bring the appropriate folks
to answer that question, because I just do not want to just say
something off the cuff. We will bring you that.
Mr. Banks. Maybe not confident enough. I have many more
questions, but my time has expired.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Roy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roy. Thank you, Madam Chair. I apologize for being a
few minutes late. We were down on the floor of the House of
Representatives. As you know, we have to multi-task around here
some, but I appreciate you all being here and I appreciate you
all taking the time to address these important topics.
Mr. Cunningham, a question for you, if you do not mind. I
am sure you are aware of the emerging Internet of Things, which
is the interconnection of devices, machines, and objects
equipped with network connectivity. The research firm Gardner
predicts that by next year Internet of Things technology will
be at 90 percent, as you know, I suspect, of new computer-
enabled product designs, and it poses a significant
cybersecurity challenge for VA as it procures and attempts to
secure these devices.
A question for you is, do you believe that the VA is
prepared for this new security challenge, and how do you intend
to mitigate the new risk that the Internet of Things
introduces.
Mr. Cunningham. It is a greater challenge, the Internet of
Things. We can call them Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA), we can call them--I call them operational
technology, whether it is under medical or power, other
sources. How they work and how they communicate with the cloud
is very challenging from a cybersecurity perspective, but one
of the things we do here at the Department is make sure that
anything plugged in is protected, we also do that with our
wireless communications.
Before anything can connect to our internal network or
business networks, those have to go through a vetting process
through procurement. They are also then identified and then
mainly loaded into our network to be able to communicate.
Things that someone might bring in around a Fitbit watch or
other Internet of Things (IOT)-purchased items, consumer-
purchased items, will not be able to get into the dedicated
networks. We do have guest networks that are monitored, but
they are also architectured off, so they do not have access.
They actually have to go out and come back in as if they were
from home, so they are not a bigger threat.
Mr. Roy. Well, in that same vein, VA is attempting a
multitude of systems modernization, we know that, across
various platforms, while contending with a lot of the
bureaucratic constraints that go along with that. The
technology industry is obviously moving at breakneck speed, you
know, I have got an iPhone in my pocket that 10 years ago, you
know, was pretty much brand new. How are you all keeping your
cybersecurity posture current in light of that and, you know,
the issue you were just addressing before, is there--do you
guys have like a sort of task force that focuses on this stuff
and how to stay ahead of the curve, do you work with the
private sector to do that? How are you keeping up?
Mr. Cunningham. We do not have a dedicated task force, but
we do have--we have hired a lot of people from the outside that
are very technically smart in this area, especially when it
comes to getting access via smartphone to bring better services
to veterans. Part of that is we have recently adopted the
Developmental, Security and Operations (DevSecOps) model, which
is very similar to what is out in industry, and that allows us
to be more agile in development where we can actually bring
capabilities, art capabilities early to the customer, and then
continue refining to get the end result that we wanted.
This actually is very useful not only from an operational
perspective, but from a cybersecurity perspective as well. We
are able to embed ourselves in this development process as a
requirement early and at the right phase, so as each new
capability is being added we can redefine and reevaluate the
security postures that we have in place. Each deliverable we
are not waiting until the very end to try to bolt cybersecurity
on. That is kind of one of the terms that we have talked about
in the past where we do a lot of development, at the end we try
to secure it; it costs a lot of money doing it that way. We try
to bake it in or embed it in through the system life cycle of
the product itself.
Mr. Roy. Well, thank you for that.
One quick question for you, Mr. Dahl, in the limited time I
have got remaining. Earlier in your testimony you mentioned the
two Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) cybersecurity
incidents, veterans' sensitive personal information was
improperly placed in a shared drive at the Milwaukee benefits
office, and the security risk level for the beneficiary/
fiduciary field system was set too low. How would the
cybersecurity initiatives VA has recently implemented, such as
continuous monitoring in the operations center, have prevented
these incidents?
Mr. Dahl. Well, this is a big challenge for VA. It is a
large organization, as you know, and it is so decentralized.
When you run into an incident like that in Milwaukee where it
is really people putting information on a shared drive that
they should not have, it is a challenge for Mr. Cunningham
sitting in D.C. to prevent that. They have an action plan, they
have made that read-only, those shared network drives, so that
is a step in the right direction.
The Beneficiary Fiduciary Facilities System (BFFS) setting
that at a moderate rather than a high level, I think they are
in the process of reconsidering what the appropriate level is.
I would hope that when they are implementing these new systems
going forward that they take a harder look at the type of data
that is going to be available on those systems and the people
that are going to be able to access that data, and err on the
side of caution. You know, I know there is a concern about
functionality and setting levels might impact functionality,
but it really is important in this day and age, as you all
know, to protect that sensitive data.
Mr. Roy. Thank you, Mr. Dahl.
I yield back the minute that I have gone over.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Watkins for 5 minutes.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks to the panel
for being here.
Mr. Wilshusen, in your testimony you describe how the VA
categorizes its information security incidents in terms of
entry points and method of attack. Forty one are listed as
other. Was this information not reported or is it unknown?
Mr. Wilshusen. It was reported to the United States
Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) as other, which
could mean that it is unknown. Compared to other Federal
agencies governmentwide, that category is typically around 27
percent of all incidents reported to US-CERT by other Federal
agencies are reported as other. What can indicate particularly,
since this is a relatively large percentage of the incidents,
is that the VA's or the Department's capability to detect or to
categorize and investigate these incidents is limited.
That is important to have a really good understanding of
what type of incident occurred, how it occurred, and being able
to report that up to DHS and US-CERT, because that information
is then used to look at incidents across the Federal
Government, and then being able to help look for opportunities
to share information with other agency to address similar type
of incidents. Not having that information is certainly
detrimental.
Mr. Watkins. Thanks.
Mr. Cunningham, do you have anything to add about the other
security incidents?
Mr. Cunningham. Categorization is difficult. I appreciate
the comments made about the high percentage and the importance
of sharing that information with our partners. Certainly the
CISOs, the Federal CISO Council was looking for ways to refine
and put more fidelity in reporting, and we are on board with
talking with DHS about that in the future to help refine our
ability to categorize those and still meet the reporting
requirements.
Mr. Watkins. Also, your testimony discusses VA's Enterprise
Cybersecurity and Privacy Strategy, which was updated this year
to incorporate government and industry best practices. The
government best practices seem to come primarily from the NIST,
the National Institute of Standards and Technology. What are
the industry best practices and where do they come from?
Mr. Cunningham. As the--it is a larger Federal Government,
there is a committee that has--a privacy committee where they
talk about best practices and we are able to share. Inside VA,
some of the best practices that we are deploying is, one, we
moved privacy under the Office of Information Security. This
means that we are more aligned. I am actually the Chief Privacy
Officer as well, this puts me in a unique position to be able
to support privacy both from a cybersecurity perspective, as
well as an information protection perspective.
I am intimately familiar with the challenges of privacy. I
brief with the privacy team at least once a week about the
challenges that we have and ways that we can either, A,
remediate, educate, or at least elevate the issues that we have
in that arena.
Mr. Watkins. Executive Order 13800, Strengthening the
Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure
which was issued last year is a significant step forward in
Federal cybersecurity. You describe VA's implementation of the
executive order as moving from reactive to proactive cyber risk
management. Can you give me some concrete examples of how you
are doing things differently now?
Mr. Cunningham. The risk management framework focuses
strongly on systems and, if you look at the next level up
around missions, you can see where the cybersecurity framework
outlined in 13800 is of great value, it gives us the structure
to be able to communicate with our operations team around the
value of proactively identifying issues instead of responding
reactively and then having to remediate.
I can tell you that we have done work in setting up our
priority queue and stack, and the CFM (Construction and
Facilities Management) is part of that alignment. Now when we
have our budget plans it ties into--it takes 13800, FISMA, and
IG recommendations as a priority queue and weights that, so we
know we are spending our money with the biggest bang for the
buck to improve our cybersecurity posture.
Mr. Watkins. Ms. Jones, has the VA ever suspended or
debarred a company for violating cybersecurity rules?
Ms. Jones. Sir, the VA uses various contract clauses to
ensure that in our requirements documents that we are not
getting vendors that have been debarred or suspended.
Mr. Watkins. Do you believe the Buy American Act and the
Trade Agreements Act as they are implemented in government
contracting are effective in protecting the supply chain?
Ms. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you.
I yield the balance of my time.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Jones or Mr. Centineo, does the VA--this is following
up on Ranking Member Banks' question--does the VA have
restrictions on the purchase of certain types of or
manufacturers of off-the-shelf equipment?
Ms. Jones. Ma'am, this goes into the clauses that we use,
which are basically there are two basic types: one clause is to
basically State that we are prohibited from any unauthorized
manufacturers or any unauthorized products and services that
the government has basically stated that we will not use in the
Federal, and we also refer in our contract requirements
documents to our 6500, our various cybersecurity policies and
procedures.
Ms. Lee. Is there a specific list for the VA, yes or no, or
is this just the--like the general Federal Government list?
Ms. Jones. The question is not a yes or no, because it is
based upon the clauses. We can bring the acquisition personnel
to provide a deep drive. To the best of my knowledge, there
is--in the Federal Government there is a list or a process that
the contracting officers have to use, and these clauses that we
put in our contracts basically say that you cannot--if there
are prohibited manufacturers or prohibited processes or
products, you cannot bring them into the--we cannot purchase
them.
Ms. Lee. There is not a specific VA list, you are using the
Federal Government list?
Ms. Jones. Not to my knowledge.
Ms. Lee. Okay.
Mr. Centineo, what role does VHA play in supply chain
management?
Mr. Centineo. Madam Chair, the VHA, from a procurement and
logistics standpoint, plays into the bio-medical maintenance
community for medical devices. The Office of Health Care
Technology Management in VHA does a whole-of-agency, as was
referenced earlier, approach to integrating medical devices
with the Office of Information Technology, the local
information security officers, it is also tied in with the
procurement offices, a complete composite enterprise risk
analysis for medical devices.
From a procurement standpoint, they have to be completely
vetted through that process in order to ensure that as we go
out to do procurements they have all been validated that they
meet the cybersecurity requirements.
Ms. Lee. Okay. You know, now that it seems that we are
moving into the world of applications and we had a security--a
privacy roundtable a couple of weeks ago and there seemed to be
some conflicting information about the security of them.
I just wanted to ask, once an app is allowed to connect or
download or access veterans' health data, that data can be sold
under expansive terms of use under these apps, used without
permission or stolen by bad actors. The Washington Post
recently reported that soldiers in an intelligent unit were
told to download an app developed for the unit that could
provide weather updates, training changes, and other logistics.
However, that app could collect a trove of sensitive personal
data, including photos, calendar, location, even email, other
contacts.
Mr. Cunningham or Mr. Stevens, since the VA is promoting
partnerships with app providers, including health apps, what
steps is the VA taking to educate veterans on protecting their
personal data.
Mr. Cunningham. I think you have captured the challenge of
that fairly well. Once it leaves VA's space and how the veteran
uses that information becomes a challenge, and education is our
primary key. We have recognized this problem, we are looking
with our trained department on how we can do it through flyers,
it is certainly promoting videos. Currently, we have a video
around National Cybersecurity Awareness month, that we play in
our waiting rooms. Any chance we can give information to the
veteran about protecting their own data as part of that is
important.
Ms. Lee. Are you taking any steps to vet these apps that
you promote?
Mr. Cunningham. No, that--the ones we do promote are vetted
through our development teams. They have to go through an
analysis based off what they are going to do with that
information, they have to sign a release saying they are not
going to sell that information, and we are looking at what type
of information that they can download.
I will ask Mr. Stevens; do you have anything to add?
Mr. Stevens. I would also add that, for those particular
apps that are accessing the VA data, they have to comply with a
set of design patterns that have been specified that articulate
specifically what they can and cannot do. An app is restricted
within that boundary to only do those things, and that is part
of the rigorous review that would be conducted through that
team.
Ms. Lee. If it is found that an app is improperly using
data, what is the repercussion after your review, after----
Mr. Stevens. If it is found that veteran data has been
compromised in any instance, then there is a defined process
per policy that clearly articulates how to handle that incident
based upon the magnitude of the event to really distill, is it
an event, yes or no, and then go through an iterative process.
Then, depending upon the outcome, we will judge how we respond
accordingly through either, you know, providing the veteran
with particular services that they would need for credit
monitoring or the like.
Ms. Lee. are there any repercussions on the app developer?
Mr. Stevens. I would have to check on that; I do not have
that specifically.
Ms. Lee. Okay, I would like to have some information. That
is a major issue with veterans in terms of their trust on how
their data is used.
Mr. Stevens. Yes.
Ms. Lee. I am running out of my time. I will now recognize
Ranking Member Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Wilshusen, I want to contrast hacking government
networks with compromising the supply chain. The pervasiveness
of Chinese companies in the technology supply chain is well
established, that includes state-controlled firms as well as
those that pretend to be otherwise. It would never be feasible
for the U.S. Government to turn away from commercial
technology, so that is not a solution, but we need a more
effective defense. The answer could be to centralize
responsibility for cybersecurity up and down the Federal supply
chain, and maybe even centralize the supply chain itself.
You audit cybersecurity throughout the Federal Government,
how do we solve the supply chain vulnerability problem?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, I think because with an IT supply
chain, you know, it is important to remember that this occurs
and the risk occurs throughout the entire life cycle of the
assets that we use. I think, first and foremost, it is
important for agencies to first make sure that they have robust
and effective foundational practices for securing and acquiring
their IT assets, and that includes making sure that the
agencies appropriately identify those risks, determine what the
threats and vulnerabilities are within their supply chains, and
that includes, even after we have a system up and running at
our organization and we are relying on other external service
partners to provide these capabilities for us.
It is important to make sure that our fundamental things in
terms of assessing risk, selecting the controls that are
appropriate to meet those risks, assuring doing due diligence
over our suppliers and our service providers, and also then
making sure we have appropriate monitoring capabilities in
place to assure that the appropriate controls are being
implemented.
Also, importantly, it is required that we integrate the
security requirements into our contractual vehicles and into
the acquisition process. It cannot be two separate aspects or
we have one group acquiring the IT assets and another group
that is responsible for securing, they need to be joined so
they have the ability to assure that security is being built
and is being implemented and considered when acquiring our IT
assets.
The other key thing, I believe, is also assuring that we
have a robust software and hardware testing program. As we do
identify and receive software that we test the code to make
sure that there are not back doors hidden into those, into the
software code, and making sure that it is performing the
functions for which it is intended and we intend for that
software to occur.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Dahl, what is your perspective on that?
Mr. Dahl. I will let Mr. Bowman take that question.
Mr. Bowman. I definitely agree that there needs to be a
very thorough vetting process when you are bringing on new
applications and new hardware. Before connecting anything to
the network, there needs to be a robust testing process just to
make sure that the controls are in place, and you need to have
an effective continuous monitoring process to make sure that
your security posture does not change over time.
You know, with any security program, it is a cyclical
process, but you have to continuously evaluate your risks, and
you have to mitigate those risks and continually evaluate the
controls just to make sure your posture remains intact.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Cunningham, anything you would like to add?
Mr. Cunningham. When it comes to supply chain risk
management, NIST talks about it being our high-impact systems,
although in national security systems it is for low, moderate,
and high-impact systems. That is one challenge that we have to
be able to understand that, when we apply it, we have to also
look downstream from moderate and lows and where do we come and
make that risk-based approach, because it is very costly, and
even NIST publication 800161 talks about that challenge.
Specifically what we are doing at the Department, I will
pass to Mr. Gary Stevens about our process there.
Mr. Stevens. Sir, whenever hardware or software gets added
to the environment, it goes through a rigorous process
consistent with the risk management framework, which is an
assessment of those controls at varying degrees of veracity.
That includes both scanning, using Nexus Tools and those types
of things to understand those hardware vulnerabilities. Then
also if code, for example, gets developed internally, we have
internal software assessment processes that we follow, that we
allow the developer to access and use that assessment tool to
iteratively assess that code as it is in the process of being
developed, so they can make corrective actions on an as-
required basis.
The end result of that, either internally developed code or
externally provided hardware/software is a risk perspective on
that particular environment that gets rolled up in a
comprehensive way for an authorizing official to sign off on
that level of risk in whatever level they can, and then accept
that risk.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. My time has expired.
Ms. Lee. I now recognize Mr. Roy for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roy. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Picking up a little bit on this conversation that you are
having on the supply chain issues, Mr. Centineo, if I might
come to you for a minute, and then, Ms. Jones, I will go to
you. Maybe we will go back and forth on this, but how do you
work together to coordinate cybersecurity in the VHA supply
chain? If you guys could talk about that a little bit, which,
you know, you are responsible for, and then the IT supply
chain, which, Ms. Jones, you are responsible for, if I
understand it correctly. Can you give some specific examples on
how you guys interact and how that works?
Mr. Centineo. Sir, the procurement aspects are IT is gone
through the Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction,
which is the Technology Acquisition Center at the Department
level, I have the responsibility at the procurement and
logistics VHA side, particularly for medical devices, as was
kind of briefed a few minutes ago.
There is a very iterative process within the agency that
the Health Care Technology and Management Office within VHA has
a prescriptive process for cybersecurity, to be able to
identify the types of devices that need to be used, then it
works its way into the Office of Information and Technology,
the local-level Information Security Officers, and it is all
managed to make sure that every device that is procured or is a
requirement to be procured has a completed enterprise risk
assessment or risk analysis done before we actually receive it
in the procurement side of the house. We actually just act upon
their output to be able to go procure the items.
The process is managed up through the Specialized Device
Security Division of OIT, so it is collaborative to ensure that
we have matched and worked within the OIT parameters of what
the security requirements are. That is for the biomedical
devices, but the IT side of the house Ms. Jones has for the
Strategic Sourcing.
Mr. Roy. Okay. Anything you want to add, Ms. Jones, to
that?
Ms. Jones. Yes, sir. From an IT perspective, you know, the
CIO is responsible for implementing the Federal IT Information
Technology Reform Act, FITARA, and so one of the things that we
have put in place is Department-wide a FITARA process that,
regardless of what you are purchasing, you have to go through
the appropriate procedures from a FITARA-compliance
perspective.
In addition to that, my office works hand-in-hand with our
Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction Office, who
is really the contracting arm of VA, to ensure that we have the
right the contract clauses, to make sure that we are not
purchasing anything that is prohibited, and also that we have
the right cybersecurity, once again, clauses in our contracts.
I see our office in OI&T as working hand-in-hand with the
entire VA, whether it is VHA, VBA, National Cemetery
Administration (NCA), the whole Department, from an IT Federal
Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA)
compliance.
Mr. Roy. A question for both of you again, whatever order
you want to take it up. How do you all--how is cybersecurity in
the supply chain handled differently between software services
and hardware, can you just touch on that a little bit?
Ms. Jones. If I may, sir, I think that is a more
appropriate question for Mr. Stevens to answer.
Mr. Roy. Okay.
Mr. Stevens. Well, again, I would say that for
cybersecurity as it relates to purchasing hardware/software
either procured through a vendor or internally developed,
regardless of how that procurement chain happens, it still has
to go through the same process, and that is the process I
described earlier, which is a rigorous review of the hardware
and software environment, the technical controls associated
with each aspect of those particular systems, and then that
rolls up into the larger authorization boundary, and that
boundary ultimately has a risk perspective rendered consistent
with whatever the status is of those particular controls in
compliance with the particular NIST requirements. That
perspective gets signed off and the risk identified by the
particular action officer--or, excuse me, authorizing official.
Mr. Roy. Thank you all.
I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I would now like to turn to Mr.
Wilshusen. In the GAO testimony at a previous hearing, it
referenced a report that found that the VA had regressed in
terms of leadership commitment, and, based on today's
testimony, it seems that the VA still failed to take action on
42 of the 74 action items that the GAO identified in 2016. In
the 6 months since that report was issued, has the VA corrected
its course?
Mr. Wilshusen. We are still waiting--and indeed, actually
we just this week received documentation from VA on a number of
those open recommendations from 2016, and we are in the process
of reviewing them. I will know better after we have a chance to
analyze the evidence that was provided to us this week.
Ms. Lee. Okay, and we would love to have an update on that.
Mr. Wilshusen. I will be happy to give that.
Ms. Lee. What is the status of the VA to address the
recommendations that the GAO made over the last 4 years?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, one of the status is, as I mentioned,
we just received the evidence related to many of those, but as
you mentioned, 42 of the 74 recommendations we made back in
2016 are still open and not implemented, in our view.
One of the issues that we have identified in reviewing
evidence that VA has provided to us over the years is that
often it does not seem like it is validating the effectiveness
of its corrective actions, because it has asserted, for
example, that it had implemented 39 of the 42 recommendations
that currently are open, but when we went in and looked at the
evidence provided, it was not sufficient enough for us to
confirm the implementation of that recommendation so we could
close it.
That is one of the challenges I think it faces is just
validating and verifying the effectiveness of its corrective
actions. That is one aspect.
We have also made four recommendations to VA relative to a
cybersecurity risk management program, which we issued a report
earlier this year on that, it is a governmentwide review. VA
concurred with each of those four recommendations and asserted
that it is taking actions to implement them.
As it is in the recommendation we made relative to its
categorization of the work roles of its IT and cybersecurity
workforce positions, we noted that VA had not correctly
categorized, I think it was like around 48, 45 percent of its
IT positions. We made a recommendation for them to review that
categorization in terms of what work roles those positions
perform. It concurred with our recommendation and also asserted
that it is taking corrective action. We have not yet received
evidence of the completion of those actions as of today.
Ms. Lee. With respect to the validation of progress, are
there any institutional changes that you recommend for VA
leadership to help facilitate better results in that respect?
Mr. Wilshusen. Well, one is just to make sure that as the
folks who are implementing the corrective actions is that it is
properly reviewed and that those actions are confirmed perhaps
by an independent party or another person or another group
within the organization.
We had noted that at other agencies, Office of Personnel
Management, as an example, had taken a similar approach where
an independent party within the office had reviewed the actions
taken by the operational folks in implementing our
recommendations in resolving the underlying vulnerability.
Just having a secondary check to verify the effectiveness
of those controls would be useful.
I might also add, in many of our recommendations they are
limited to the scope of our review, but many of the
vulnerabilities that we identify could apply to other similar
systems. Typically, we only look at a few systems when we go in
and examine information security controls, maybe 10, 15, but
whatever vulnerabilities we identify on those systems could
very likely also be in effect and affect other systems.
Organizations would be wise to see if similar systems are also
afflicted by the vulnerabilities that we identify during our
examinations.
Ms. Lee. Okay, thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Cunningham, there is no doubt in my mind that when a
company infects its products with malware, or inserts back
doors or engages in any kind of hacking, it must be immediately
banned from doing business with the U.S. Government. I am going
to ask you a series of questions about companies that have been
proven to have done just that. I want you to tell me whether VA
has ever purchased their products, either before or after bans
were put in place.
Mr. Cunningham, as VA ever purchased equipment from Huawei
Technologies?
Mr. Cunningham. I am going to have to take that back for
the record.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Mr. Cunningham, has VA ever purchased from
ZTE Corporation?
Mr. Cunningham. I will have to take that back for the
record.
Mr. Banks. How about Hytera Communications Corporation?
Mr. Cunningham. I will have to take that back for the
record.
Mr. Banks. Same question, has VA ever purchased from
Hangzhou Hikvision Digital Technology Company?
Mr. Cunningham. I will have to take that back for the
record.
Mr. Banks. How about Dahua Technology Company?
Mr. Cunningham. I will have to take that back for the
record.
Mr. Banks. The last one, has VA ever purchased software
from Kaspersky Lab?
Mr. Cunningham. I will have to take that back for the
record as well.
Mr. Banks. All right, we will look forward to those
questions being answered for the record.
Mr. Cunningham, as I said in my opening statement, it seems
cybersecurity became a focus in the health care sector
relatively late. The Community Health Systems (CHS) hack should
have been a wake-up call, but cyber criminals may still see
health care organizations as soft targets. VA is in somewhat of
a unique position as a government agency and a health care
system. How do you evaluate your cybersecurity risk and shape
your strategy accordingly?
Mr. Cunningham. You are correct in assessing VA as also a
health care provider. We are the largest networked health care
provider in the United States, and we take that role seriously
and we work with our partners on that. I can say that we share
information with our partners and we share it with DHS, so to
the greater good let our detection be their protection and
likewise.
In the question I would say that we have that same struggle
that all have when it comes to hospitals, very well-
intentioned, very smart employees in providing the best service
they can for their customers and, in our case, our veterans,
will sometimes will look for opportunities to streamline the
process to bring in new technology. Where we can and how we can
through technical means and policies we put in place, we
minimize that and, when we recognize it, we take appropriate
action, whether it is through education of the individual or,
if we see a malicious or known policy break, through
administrative means.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Madam Chair, that is all the questions I
have, but I do ask for unanimous consent to enter the U.S.-
China Economic and Security Review Commission's report entitled
``Supply Chain Vulnerabilities from China and U.S. Federal
Information and Communications Technology'' into the record.
Ms. Lee. Without objection. Thank you.
Ms. Lee. I now recognize Mr. Lamb for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lamb. Good morning. Thank you all for coming.
For our GAO witnesses, would you mind elaborating a little
bit on how VA compares to other Federal agencies? I saw in the
report that they are one of 18, I think, of the 24 who have
cybersecurity as a material weakness, are you able to say
anything about, among those 18, sort of where VA sits?
Mr. Wilshusen. I would say based on a couple factors. Where
they are with their information security program is consistent
in many ways with many Federal agencies, but I also think in a
couple various it may be a bit beneath the others, particularly
when it comes to looking at the length of time that it has
consistently reported a material weakness in the security
controls over its financial systems, for financial reporting
purposes. It has been going on 17 years in a row now. A few
agencies, I believe, meet that longevity of that particular
weakness.
In addition, the number of and percentage of its
cybersecurity and IT-related personnel and the work roles that
they perform, the high percentage of positions that were
miscategorized based upon the work roles from the NIST
cybersecurity workforce framework was rather startling in many
respects.
In a couple areas I think it could do a much better job,
but like most Federal agencies, particularly the larger ones,
they have a number of significant challenges to overcome.
Mr. Lamb. Thanks.
Mr. Cunningham, I want to continue Mr. Banks' line about
the supply chain issues a little bit, and if there is someone
else who is better to answer it, you can let us know, but my
questions are a little less specific.
It just seems like the concern about the supply chain is
coming at a good time in some ways for VA, because I have only
been sitting on this committee a little over a year and I have
heard a lot about how we need to do infrastructure upgrades, we
need to buy new computers, new systems, routers, networks, all
this kind of stuff, especially looking down the road toward the
records modernization that we are going to have and how that is
going to really rely on having the bones of a modern system
that can run it.
What is VA doing right now proactively, regardless of what
has happened in the past, what are you doing proactively to
ensure a safe supply chain for everything that is going to be
purchased say for the next 4 or 5 years?
Mr. Cunningham. I would put in that VA is compliant with
DHS's recommendations around binding operational directives
when it identifies at-risk vendors or solutions, and we also
support GSA in their efforts to identify where are the best
sources to buy from that have been vetted.
In that regard, I would say that we are struggling like
many other Federal agencies to understand where our department
resides in either blacklisting a particular organization or
company and not--that is not exactly in the VA's mission to
determine whether a company is allowed to do work with the
Federal Government or not, we will leave that to general
counsel, and certainly to DHS and the intelligence community to
tell us where we should not go or where we should not operate.
Mr. Lamb. Okay. In other words, is it safe to say you are
sort of following the advice that is being issued across the
Federal Government? You are not getting like specific--you are
not getting input from these agencies that are specific to VA
or to health care-type data or systems?
Mr. Cunningham. Correct. We are following the Federal
regulation in that, if we feel that there is a vendor we prefer
not to use because of past experience, then it is certainly
inside the roles of the procurement team, as well as the
authorizing official and the system owner, to not acquire that
equipment.
Mr. Lamb. Okay. Last, I saw in the news I think within the
last week that veterans' health data is going to be available
through Apple Health on iPhones now, do I have that right?
Mr. Cunningham. That is correct.
Mr. Lamb. Are there security implications of that? Does
Apple sort of assume the role of the protector of that data at
that point, or how have you thought through that?
Mr. Cunningham. We are looking at ways to protect that
information, so it is ensured that it is tunneled all the way
from the time it leaves VA's boundary until it arrives in the
veteran's personal device. There are agreements with Apple on
acceptable use of that data and protecting of that data.
Mr. Lamb. Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I was concerned when I looked at the
VA's budgetary submission for 2020. The 2019 budget contained
$381 million for information security, while the 2020 budget is
$362 million. Mr. Cunningham, could you tell me why there is a
$19 million reduction?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, one, I think there are opportunities
we have seen already where we can consolidate some of our
activities to be more effective, definitely where we can
partner or even ask for support from our other VA partners, as
regards to especially if it is a specialized cybersecurity
service that we are providing to a particular pillar inside the
Department. We are looking at ways to be more effective
identifying where the money is going and what activities are
being tied to in that regard.
Ms. Lee. Great. We like saving money.
One question I have, why is security not listed as one of
OIT's three strategic goals in this budgetary proposal?
Mr. Cunningham. I would have to ask the team that put
together who is not here today.
Ms. Lee. Okay.
Mr. Cunningham. I will have to get it back for the record.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Cunningham or Stevens, this is in respect to the
breaches in Milwaukee and Long Beach and the BFFS. Something
that concerned me was that VA's internal assessments determined
that these were not technically breaches and, therefore, did
not require that veterans be notified of the incidents. Is the
VA considering updating what it defines as a breach, so that
veterans affected by these incidents can and will be notified?
Mr. Cunningham. From a privacy perspective, we had no
evidence that the information was taken outside of VA's bounds
or that personnel that were not read in or accountable through
user agreements to protect that data had access. In that
regards, we look at it that while we can notify individuals,
that would be--you know, looking at it, do you show--if we show
that it has not left the building, do we show that has been
compromised? By definition, we look at it that it has not.
Where the benefit of notifying an individual that their
information was looked upon by somebody who had authorization
or signed agreements to protect the data we did not see as
being reportable.
Ms. Lee. This is for the GAO. Is the VA's definition of
breach that we just heard here, is that in accordance or is it
consistent with the rest of the Federal Government?
Mr. Wilshusen. Usually, a breach is referred to as one
where it is a violation of policy or practice that could put
information and services at risk.
Ms. Lee. Okay. The policy that you have, do you think that
that is in line with what veterans are expecting with respect
to the security and the privacy of their data?
Mr. Cunningham. I think as it is presented, it has not left
the VA, it has not been in possession by those that are bound
to maintain the security of that information, I believe, as a
veteran, I would understand that there are protocols that are
broke and things do happen, but provided that the information
was not leaked or lost, then I would understand that that is
part of operations and I hope they would do better in the
future to make sure that does not happen or occur.
Obviously, you put it closer to exploitation and that would
trouble me, but also I understand that that is part of
operations and if they are improving, as a veteran, I am
satisfied with that.
Ms. Lee. Just to wrap up, in your assessment of your
position in overseeing cybersecurity and understanding that
what the definition of secure is, what do you identify,
especially in light of the reports that we have and the
recommendation, what is your assessment of what a win will be
in terms--what is success in cybersecurity?
Mr. Cunningham. If you are asking--are you asking me----
Ms. Lee. Overall, in general, you have received
recommendations from OIG and GAO, recognize many deficiencies,
and so you--it seems like you are making progress, so what is
success to you, is my question.
Mr. Cunningham. Certainly. Thank you for the clarification.
I look at it that, if we can look at the measures and
metrics of how proactive we are in blocking, how proactive we
are in identifying potential risks and then funding them, and
then looking at over time what actually does occur to see if we
predicted correctly. Certainly we cannot goldplate every system
to the degree that I would be comfortable saying that we are
100-percent sure that it will not occur, but how can we make
sure that we show due diligence in identifying those. That
comes into the postmortem on how resilient we are and then
identifying, when we do have a breach, what were the causal
factors and were those things tied to what we already knew and,
if we knew that, why did not we take that as a priority.
Ms. Lee. Okay. Thank you.
My time is up and I am going to--I think we are ready to
adjourn.
I would like to thank all of the witnesses for your
participation today. You know, as it comes to the VA providing
care for our veterans, our men and women, especially with
respect to data privacy--and this is the most sensitive
personal data and, more importantly, it is a trust
relationship--in making sure that we are doing all we can to
honor that our trust that our veterans give to us, especially
with respect to this data.
This, as we do the electronic health record modernization
and dealing with the legacy systems that present some serious
challenges with that aging technology, as well as the standards
that you have in place and making sure the protocol is being
followed, certainly is a challenge. I thank you for being here
and for your effort to address this, as well as OIG and GAO to
keep us informed, and hopefully we can continue to work
together in a cooperative spirit to make sure that we are
protecting the data of our veterans, not just internally, but
also, as we discussed today, with respect to applications as
they become more and more widespread and used by our veterans.
Thank you. This is hopefully the beginning of a back-and-
forth conversation and we will continue to work together,
especially as we provide the oversight in the modernization
efforts.
All members have 5 legislative days to revise and extend
their remarks and include extraneous material.
This hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:31 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Paul Cunningham

Good morning Madam Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today in support of the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) cybersecurity initiatives to protect Veterans' and VA
employees' sensitive data. I am accompanied today by Gary Stevens,
Deputy Chief Information Security Officer, Executive Director for
Information Security Policy and Strategy, Office of Information and
Technology (OIT), Mr. Andrew Centineo, Executive Director, Procurement
and Logistics, Veteran Health Administration (VHA) Procurement and
Logistics Office, and Ms. Luwanda Jones, Deputy Chief Information
Officer, Strategic Sourcing, OIT.
I want to begin by thanking Congress, and specifically this
Subcommittee, for your continued support and shared commitment to the
success of VA cybersecurity program. VA's mission of improving health
care delivery to our Nation's Veterans and those who care for them
while being responsible to safeguard their private information is
conducted because of your unwavering support.

Introduction

The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Office of Information and
Technology (OIT) has the great responsibility of safeguarding Veteran
information and VA data, ensuring VA's networks and infrastructure are
resilient to threats, and maintaining a secure operational environment
that supports business needs and mission outcomes. OIT's Office of
Information Security (OIS) is the primary office that carries out these
responsibilities. OIS' mission is to protect the Personally
Identifiable Information (PII) and Protected-Health Information (PHI)
of Veterans, their families, and VA employees, as well as VA
information systems and infrastructure. Security and privacy are
integral to the Veteran experience. For this reason, VA believes that
exceptional service to our Veterans can only be achieved in a secure
digital environment. This belief guides a cybersecurity strategy that
rises to meet the highest standards while focused on the protection of
the Veteran.
VA has a complex cybersecurity environment, with over 1.6 million
connected devices across approximately 2,500 facilities ranging from
offices to data centers to VA hospitals, benefits regional offices, and
beyond. Additionally, Secretary Robert Wilkie has outlined a
Department-wide modernization strategy to transform and enhance how VA
serves Veterans. VA is transforming the Veteran experience, providing
them increased access to services and information. Migrating from
legacy systems and allowing Veterans to access this information
requires VA to further extend its digital footprint, introduce new
technologies, and increase interoperability and data sharing. However,
these improvements also introduce unique cybersecurity, privacy, and
third-party risks. VA's cybersecurity strategy and posture aim to
address these risks while enabling and improving business processes and
shifting VA to a proactive stance in an ever-changing cyber landscape.
VA's cybersecurity posture consists of a holistic and robust set of
strategies, programs, and capabilities. VA's 2019 Enterprise
Cybersecurity and Privacy Strategy (ECPS), borne out of its Enterprise
Cybersecurity and Privacy Program (ECSP), articulates the Department's
current cybersecurity strategy and future cyber and privacy goals.
These goals include enhanced risk management, secure interoperability,
exceptional customer service, secure and resilient business processes,
and a strong cyber and privacy workforce and culture. The Program,
which was developed in 2015 and fully implemented in 2017, governs the
Strategy and shifts VA to a proactive cybersecurity posture with
programs and capabilities including the following:

Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM);

Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance (GRC) tool;

Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM);

Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM); and

Cybersecurity Operations Center (CSOC).

FY 2019 Enterprise Cybersecurity and Privacy Strategy (ECPS)

For Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, VA updated its ECPS to align with its
Department-wide modernization strategy and to further mature its
cybersecurity posture. The updated ECPS will adopt industry and
Government best practices, account for changes in the cybersecurity
landscape, and build a proactive and forward-looking cybersecurity
posture. VA's updated ECPS consists of the following five goals: (1)
Enhance enterprise cybersecurity and privacy risk management; (2)
Ensure secure interoperability both within and outside VA; (3) Deliver
exceptional customer service;(4) Enable secure and resilient business
operations; and (5) Cultivate a VA cybersecurity and privacy workforce
and culture. Together, they strengthen cybersecurity at VA while also
improving business processes, and by extension, the service VA provides
to Veterans.

(1) To enhance enterprise cybersecurity and privacy risk
management, VA will emphasize cybersecurity and privacy in
enterprise-wide risk management processes. VA has implemented
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Risk
Management Framework (RMF) to manage the Department's
cybersecurity risk at three organizational levels: information
system, mission area/business process, and organization. The VA
is leveraging cybersecurity best practices, from NIST, to
address threats to medical devices, supply chain processes,
financial services, and sources of protected Veteran
information. Additionally, the framework drives VA decisions
about cybersecurity and privacy investments.

(2) To ensure secure interoperability both within and outside
the Department, VA must protect data regardless of location.
Access methods must be secure and flexible, protecting data
while enabling VA business processes. VA is leveraging shared
security and privacy capabilities and collaborating with
Federal and commercial partners and third-party providers to
meet and enforce Federal security and privacy requirements. For
Veterans, interoperability means streamlined access to data and
services -- but not at the expense of security and privacy.

(3) In pursuit of its permanent goal to deliver exceptional
customer service, VA is integrating its cybersecurity policies
and standards into business processes. With this integration
approach, security and privacy are an enabler, not a barrier,
to efficient business processes, facilitating Department-wide
adoption of a rigorous cybersecurity posture.

(4) To enable secure and resilient business operations, VA is
improving cyber hygiene across the Department. Good cyber
hygiene limits threat exposure, accelerates adoption of
protective cyber technologies, and enhances cross-
organizational incident response processes.

(5) VA continually aims to cultivate a VA cybersecurity and
privacy workforce and culture. VA is recruiting, training, and
retaining a talented cyber and privacy workforce through its
cyber retention pay and benefits, career progression tools, and
training opportunities. VA is renaming Development Operations
(DevOps) -- a program office established this year to shift VA
to an Agile development mindset -- to Development Security
Operations (DevSecOps). This change also reflects and embodies
VA's security-first mindset as a cyber-conscious organization
because protecting Veterans' information is not only a
technical concern but a human and customer service issue.

VA plans to execute its updated ECPS by aligning the strategy with
NIST RMF and Cybersecurity framework (CSF) policies and standards, as
well as with internal stakeholder business processes. VA ensures
enterprise-wide awareness and adoption of the strategy by aligning
cyber policies and activities with business requirements and processes.
With a robust cybersecurity posture baked into business processes, the
Department can be sure that security and privacy are the baseline for
every service provided to Veterans.

Enterprise Cybersecurity Program (ECSP)

VA's ECPS is governed by the ECSP, the Department's sanctioned
cybersecurity program. VA established ECSP under the authority of an
official memorandum issued in April 2018. The memorandum was issued in
response to Executive Order (EO) 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity
of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure. The transition to ECSP
marked a shift from reactive to proactive cyber risk management.
ECSP orients VA to adopt a more proactive approach to manage cyber
risk by emphasizing cybersecurity projects that are aligned to the NIST
CSF. ECSP incorporates leading practices and implements guidance from
the NIST CSF to mature VA's cybersecurity posture, capabilities, and
culture. ECSP also bolsters VA's proactive cybersecurity posture
through the ECSP Prioritization Tool, which allows leadership to
prioritize and address the highest-priority cybersecurity concerns.
This allows the Department to make informed and defensible decisions
about cybersecurity activities.
Finally, ECSP provides mechanisms to support external reporting
requirements and maintain an acceptable level of overall cybersecurity
risk compliance as required by the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014.
VA's goal is for ECSP to become a sustainable, world-class
cybersecurity program that protects VA information systems, and most
importantly, Veterans' information. With a successful ECSP guiding VA's
cybersecurity activity, Veterans can trust that ease of access does not
mean compromised security and privacy.

Supply Chain Risk Management (SCRM)

VA must secure and manage risk related to its supply chain
processes. Third party suppliers and external Federal and commercial
partners must comply with VA's security and privacy policies to access
VA data and information systems. OIT's Office of Strategic Sourcing
(OSS), which modernizes VA's sourcing practices for IT products and
services is collaborating with VA's contracting offices to ensure we
are ordering from approved resellers of an OEMs products to avoid gray
market equipment and we utilize Trade Agreement Act (TAA) compliancy in
our contracts. We are also working with VA contracting offices to
enforce prohibitive language is referenced in contracts templates
preventing contractors and vendors from hiring or teaming with
contractors and vendors that have been deemed suspended.
VA also requires that all users of its network meet security
requirements specified in each contract. Access is strictly controlled
by whether users have a `need to know' information in the course of
their duties. VA assesses cybersecurity risks associated with medical
devices during the procurement process. Through OSS and OIS, VA
continues to integrate cybersecurity and privacy with procurement,
acquisition, and supply chain processes in conjunction with the
Technology Acquisition Center (TAC) and other business partners across
the Department.

Information Security Continuous Monitoring (ISCM)

VA established the ISCM program to provide Department-wide
oversight and governance of ISCM activities according to Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) requirements. ISCM consists of a combination of
technological, operational, and management capabilities that
consistently assess the security posture of VA information systems.
These capabilities allow for data-driven risk management rather than
compliance-driven risk management. VA is collaborating with DHS to
remain in lockstep with Federal statutes, guidance, and updates to the
program.

Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)

VA is implementing DHS' CDM program to better safeguard information
technology (IT) assets. CDM allows the Department to better grasp its
universe of assets, users, and network activity, which in turn allows
VA to efficiently and effectively monitor for, identify, and mitigate
potential risks.
The CDM program delivers capabilities in five distinct areas: (1)
Facilitate continuous monitoring of assets, users, networks, and data
through the CDM dashboards; (2) Identify assets on VA's network through
Asset Management;(3) Identify and monitor users on the network through
Identity and Access Management; (4) Identify what occurs on the network
and how to protect it through Network Security Management; and (5)
Manage and protect data on the network through Data Protection
Management.
On November 1, 2019, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
achieved a major milestone by finishing the implementation of tools for
hardware asset discovery giving VA visibility to assets connected to
the network. This installation culminated a 4-year project that
involved personnel from VA and the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) as part of the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)
program administered by DHS. As the VA continues to enhance its CDM
capabilities, the Department begun a 30-month effort with DHS called
the Request for Service (RFS) 15 which allows VA to enhance our
Identity and Access Management (IAM) tools and strategy, allowing VA to
better manage users on our network, including those with special access
to sensitive systems. Other efforts with DHS and internally at VA are
addressing CDM capabilities in order to know what is happening on the
network and protecting our data.

Cybersecurity Operations Center (CSOC)

VA's CSOC consistently monitors, reports, and responds to cyber
threats and vulnerabilities. The CSOC conducts enterprise network
security monitoring for the Department. The CSOC is divided into five
sub-programs: Cyber Threat Intelligence, Cyber Technical Services,
Cyber Incident Response, Cyber Security Analytics, and Cyber Business
Intelligence. Coupled with an improved understanding of IT assets
through CDM, consistent monitoring allows the Department to proactively
detect, identify, and respond to suspicious activity, mitigating
potential cyber risks, and protecting Veterans before their data is
ever in danger.

Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA)

FISMA, signed into law in December 2014, defines a framework to
protect Government information, operations, and assets against threats.
FISMA requires the VA to develop, document, and implement a Department-
wide program to secure the information systems that support its unique
operations and assets. The law requires annual reviews of information
security programs to keep risk at or below specified acceptable levels.
VA submitted its Fiscal Year 2019 second quarter (Q2) CIO FISMA
report to DHS and OMB on April 16, 2019. In the subsequent Risk
Management Assessment, VA was evaluated as ``Managing Risk'' overall,
with only the ``Respond and Recover'' category rated ``at risk.''
Additionally, VA has met seven of the ten Cross Agency Priority (CAP)
goals defined in the President's Management Agenda: Software Asset
Management, Authorization Management, Mobile Device Management,
Privileged Network Access Management, High Value Assets (HVA) System
Access Management, and Data Protection. CDM will allow VA to meet the
remaining three CAP goals.
Moving forward, VA continues to focus efforts on improving access
control, governance, privacy and data protection, continuous
monitoring, and configuration management processes and capabilities. VA
also continues a shift from a reactive to proactive approach to its
audit experience, reviewing previous audit findings to determine and
enact appropriate remediation measures and improve audit scores in the
future.

Department of Defense (DoD)/VA Collaboration

Seamless and secure interoperability is one of five imperatives
under VA's modernization strategy. VA strives to streamline the Veteran
experience by achieving seamless interoperability between VA and DoD,
as well as other Federal and commercial partners. However,
interoperability must also be secure; VA must augment standardized and
secure designs, interfaces, and processes to promote secure access to
authoritative data.
To this end, VA is collaborating with DoD to jointly deploy
standards and controls based on NIST and Committee of National Security
Systems (CNSS) guidelines. VA's GRC tool and Enterprise Mission
Assurance Support Service (eMASS) join VA and DoD under a shared RMF to
facilitate joint cybersecurity activities. Finally VA, in coordination
with DoD, is building a capable cybersecurity monitoring team. In the
future, VA plans to explore paths to mutually designating jointly
shared systems as National Security Systems (NSS). VA and DoD are
working shoulder-to-shoulder to strengthen privacy and security for
Veterans.

Workforce Management

In response to a shortage of cyber and privacy personnel across the
Federal Government, VA has emphasized the development of a world-class
technology workforce as one of its six focus areas. VA has implemented
special programs and incentives to attract, recruit, and retain
talented cyber and privacy professionals, cyber retention pay and
benefits, and other internal and external training and reskilling
opportunities. Most importantly, VA has found that candidates and
employees are attracted to and continually inspired by the Department's
mission. Employees understand the impact they have on Veterans. As a
cyber-conscious organization, VA will continue to emphasize the
immeasurable impact of cybersecurity on Veterans. By protecting Veteran
data and VA information systems and ensuring secure services, cyber and
privacy employees directly serve Veterans every day.

Quarterly Notice to Congress

On a quarterly basis, VA reports to Congress any breaches that
occurred in the previous quarter, as mandated by Public Law 109-461
Veterans Benefits, Health Care, and Information Technology Act of 2006.
For each data breach, the report identifies the Administration and
facility responsible for processing or maintaining the sensitive
personal information involved in the data breach and the status of any
remedial or corrective action. The report is signed by the Secretary
and transmitted to the Chair and Ranking Member of both Senate and
House Committees on Veterans' Affairs. This continuous reporting
promotes transparency and cooperation between the Department and
Congress. Within VA, reporting improves situational awareness and leads
to an improved data security posture. For Veterans, this means that
their personal information becomes even safer.

Conclusion

The complex issues before VA represent an opportunity for the
Department to renew its commitment to protecting Veteran and employee
data. The Department is modernizing its cybersecurity strategy to meet
new Federal guidance and to keep pace with today's ever-evolving
technology landscape. While expanding access for Veterans, VA is
concurrently strengthening access control between the Department and
its external partners. VA has established programs to constantly and
consistently monitor cyber activity and identify gaps and new
opportunities to mature its posture. VA is working shoulder-to-shoulder
with DoD and our Federal and commercial partners to ensure seamless and
secure interoperability that maintains the privacy and security of our
Nation's heroes and VA's employees. Recruiting, developing, and
maintaining a talented cyber and privacy workforce remains a priority
and motivates human capital management efforts. VA continues to
maintain compliance with federally mandated requirements such as
Binding Operational Directives, Executive Orders, and Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) memoranda. VA understands the challenge of
maturing its cybersecurity posture while also improving access and
services that Veterans want and deserve. With the above strategies,
policies, and programs, the Department has risen to that challenge, and
continues in its mission to protect and secure the information of, and
services for, our Veterans. Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and Members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before the
Subcommittee today to discuss one of VA's top priorities. I am happy to
respond to any questions that you have.
______

Prepared Statement of Nick Dahl

Madam Chair, Ranking Member Banks, and members of the Subcommittee,
thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Office of Inspector
General's (OIG's) oversight of VA's information technology (IT)
security program. I am accompanied today by Mr. Michael Bowman,
Director of the OIG's Information Technology and Security Audits
Division. My statement focuses on the security program's purpose and
the challenges in protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of VA systems and data. The OIG's conclusions expressed in
this statement are based on recent oversight reports that touch on
aspects of VA's development and management of information security and
IT systems.

BACKGROUND

IT systems and networks are critical to VA for carrying out its
mission of providing medical care and a range of benefits and services
to millions of veterans and their families. VA is responsible for
storing, managing, and providing secure access to enormous amounts of
sensitive data, such as veterans' medical records, benefits
determinations, financial disclosures, and education records. The OIG
recognizes and appreciates that this is a complex undertaking. Ensuring
the secure operation of the systems and networks that contain this
sensitive data is essential, especially considering the wide
availability and effectiveness of internet-based hacking tools. Lack of
proper safeguards renders these systems and networks vulnerable to
intrusions by groups seeking to obtain sensitive information, commit
fraud, disrupt operations, or launch attacks against other VA systems.
The OIG has a long history of reporting on security incidents at VA in
which sensitive information, including personally identifiable
information (PII), has been lost, stolen, or improperly secured,
potentially exposing countless veterans and their families to the loss
of privacy, identity theft, and other financial crimes.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Review of Alleged Unsecured Patient Data base at the VA Long
Beach Healthcare System, March 28, 2018; Review of Alleged Breach of
Privacy and Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information at
the Milwaukee VARO, September 15, 2016; Review of Issues Related to the
Loss of VA Information Involving the Identity of Millions of Veterans,
July 11, 2006.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Fiscal Year (FY) 2020, VA requested a total IT investment of
$4.3 billion, of which $362 million is to fund information security in
connection with enterprise operations and maintenance.\2\ Those
investments must be carefully deployed and monitored. To the extent
that VA does not properly manage and secure their IT investments, they
can become increasingly vulnerable to misuse and mishaps. Security
failures also undermine the trust veterans put in VA to protect their
sensitive information, which can affect their engagement with programs
and services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Department of Veterans Affairs Fiscal Year 2020 Funding and
Fiscal Year 2021 Advance Appropriations, Volume II: Medical Programs
and Information Technology Programs
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

MAJOR CYBERSECURITY CHALLENGES REPORTED BY OIG

In the OIG's 2019 Major Management Challenges, which will be
released later this month, information management is highlighted. It is
not a new problem; the OIG has identified information management as a
major management challenge since 2000. The OIG specifically noted VA's
challenges in ensuring effective information security program and
system security controls. The OIG will continue to monitor VA's
progress in addressing those challenges.
The OIG's independent contractors that perform the annual audit of
VA's consolidated financial statements have reported that they will
once again identify IT security controls as a material weakness in the
findings also being released later this month.\3\ VA relies extensively
on IT system controls to initiate, authorize, record, process,
summarize, and report financial transactions, which are then used for
preparing its financial statements. Many of VA's legacy systems have
been obsolete for several years.\4\ Because of their obsolescence,
legacy systems are more burdensome and costly to maintain, cumbersome
to operate, and difficult to adapt to VA's continuously advancing
operational and security requirements. Given the risks associated with
using outdated systems, internal controls over these operations take on
even greater importance to ensure the integrity, confidentiality, and
reliability of critical data while reducing the risk of errors, fraud,
and other illegal acts. The OIG has reported IT security controls as a
material weakness for more than 10 consecutive years.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of
deficiencies, in internal control, such that there is a reasonable
possibility that a material misstatement of the entity's financial
statements will not be prevented, or detected and corrected on a timely
basis. The OIG's annual audit of VA's consolidated financial statements
is pending publication and will be released in November 2019.
\4\  For example, VA's core financial accounting system, FMS, is
coded in Common Business Oriented Language (COBOL), which is a
programming language developed in the late 1950's. VA's system employed
at the medical centers--Veterans Health Information Systems and
Technology Architecture (VistA)--was built in the late 1970's. Both
systems are considered to be significantly outdated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the OIG has identified and reported on a myriad of
significant deficiencies in IT security that are highlighted below.
These reports help demonstrate the range of issues that VA has faced
and the persistence of problems that can have serious consequences for
veterans and the Department's programs and operations.

Federal Information Security Management Act Compliance

The Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA)
requires that agencies and their affiliates (such as government
contractors) develop, document, and implement an organization-wide
security program for their systems and data.\5\ For the 20th
consecutive year, the OIG has reported on the extent to which VA has IT
safeguards in place consistent with the Act's requirements. The Fiscal
Year 2018 audit revealed that VA has made progress producing,
documenting, and distributing policies and procedures as part of its
security program. However, VA continues to face significant challenges
in complying with FISMA requirements due in part to maintaining an
aging and outdated IT security infrastructure. \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Title III, The Federal Information Security Management Act of
2002, E-Government Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347 (December 17, 2002).
\6\  Federal Information Security Modernization Act Audit for
Fiscal Year 2018, March 12, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Fiscal Year 2018 FISMA report, published by the OIG in March
2019, contained multiple findings and 28 recommendations to the
Assistant Secretary for Information and Technology for improving VA's
information security program. These findings and recommendations
focused on the following areas:

Configuration Management Controls are designed to ensure
critical systems have appropriate security baseline controls and up-to-
date vulnerability patches implemented. The OIG's findings included
that VA systems and key data bases were not timely patched or securely
configured to mitigate known and unknown information security
vulnerabilities. Additionally, VA did not sufficiently monitor medical
devices and ensure they were properly segregated from other networks.

Identity Management and Access Controls are meant to make
certain that password standards are consistently implemented across the
enterprise and that user accounts are monitored to enforce the
limitation of access privileges to those necessary for legitimate
purposes and to eliminate conflicting user roles. The OIG's FISMA audit
revealed that password standards were not consistently implemented and
enforced across multiple VA systems, including the network domain, data
bases, and mission-critical applications. In addition, multifactor
authentication for remote access had not been fully implemented across
the Department.\7\ Further, inconsistent reviews of networks and
application user access resulted in inappropriate access rights being
granted, as well as numerous generic, system, and inactive user
accounts not being removed or deactivated from the system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\  Multifactor authentication grants users access only after
successfully presenting two or more pieces of evidence (or factors):
knowledge (something the user and only the user knows), possession
(something the user and only the user has), and inherence (something
the user and only the user is, such as fingerprint or eye-scanning
biometrics).

The Agencywide Security Management Program makes sure
that system security controls are effectively and continuously
monitored, and system security risks are effectively remediated through
corrective action plans or compensating controls. The OIG's findings
included that security management documentation, including the risk
assessments and System Security Plans, were outdated and did not
accurately reflect the current system environment or Federal standards.
Also, background reinvestigations were not performed timely or tracked
effectively, and personnel were not receiving the proper level of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
investigation for the sensitivity levels of their positions.

Contingency Planning Controls ensure that mission-
critical systems and business processes can be restored in the event of
a disaster or emergency. The OIG determined that backup tapes were not
encrypted prior to being sent to offsite storage at selected facilities
and data centers. The OIG team also noted instances of unplanned
outages or disruptions where services were not recovered within
prescribed Recovery Time Objectives. Of addition concern, these
instances did not prompt contingency plan reviews or updates in
accordance with defined policy.

The Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information and
Technology concurred with 25 of 28 OIG recommendations and provided
acceptable action plans for implementing open recommendations.\8\
Overall, the OIG's FISMA audit shows that for VA to achieve better IT
security outcomes, the Department must take actions that
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  While the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary did not concur
with three recommendations, the OIG believes these recommendations
warrant further attention from VA and will follow up on these issues
during the Fiscal Year 2019 FISMA assessment.

Address security-related issues contributing to the IT
material weakness being reported again in the Fiscal Year 2019 audit of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA's Consolidated Financial Statements;

Improve deployment of security patches, system upgrades,
and system configurations that will mitigate significant
vulnerabilities and enforce a consistent process across all field
offices; and

Enhance performance monitoring to ensure controls are
operating as intended at all facilities and that identified security
deficiencies are communicated to the appropriate personnel so they can
take corrective actions to mitigate significant security risks.

Other VA IT Security Concerns

Other focused OIG reviews and audits, described below, also provide
examples of the risks of ineffective or improper IT security.
Mishandling of Veterans' Sensitive Personal Information on VA
Shared Network Drives \9\ The OIG conducted a review in response to a
complaint from a Veterans Service Officer (VSO) working at the
Milwaukee VA Regional Office (VARO) that veterans' sensitive personal
information was stored on shared network drives and was likely
accessible to other network users. Sensitive personal information--any
information about an individual that is maintained by VA and can be
linked to that individual--is protected by law and VA policy.\10\
Without proper protection, veterans are at significant risk of
unauthorized disclosure and misuse of their sensitive personal
information. This has the potential to expose veterans to fraud and
identity theft. Also, if a breach of sensitive personal information
were to occur, VA would incur the expense of notifying and offering
credit protection services to individuals whose information was
involved. VA could also lose credibility with veterans who trust that
their sensitive personal information is being appropriately secured.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Mishandling of Veterans' Sensitive Personal Information on VA
Shared Network Drives, October 17, 2019.
\10\  Federal laws require appropriate administrative, physical,
and technical safeguards to protect personal information and limit the
uses and disclosures of that information without the individual's
authorization. VA policy requires VA information system users who
access sensitive personal information as part of their official duties
to avoid its unauthorized disclosure and prohibits other users from
accessing the information without a business need.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG team found that veterans' sensitive personal information
was left unprotected on two shared network drives, where it was
accessible to VSO officers who did not represent those veterans. Senior
Office of Information and Technology (OIT) representatives told the
team that other authenticated network users with access to the shared
drives also could have accessed that information regardless of their
business need. The OIG determined that mishandling this sensitive
personal information was a national issue because the problem was not
limited to the Milwaukee VARO. Authorized users, regardless of their
location, who remotely connected to VA's network could have had access
to the same shared network drives.
The reasons for the mishandling of sensitive personal information
included the following:

Certain users were knowingly or inadvertently negligent
in their use of shared network drives to store veterans' sensitive data
despite VA security policy prohibiting such activity.

No technical controls were in place to prevent negligent
users from storing sensitive personal information on the shared network
drives.

The lack of oversight by OIT and Veterans Benefits
Administration (VBA) personnel resulted in failures to discover and
remove any sensitive personal information stored on shared network
drives.

The OIG recommended that the Assistant Secretary for Information
and Technology and the Under Secretary for Benefits provide remedial
training to users on the safe handling and storage of veterans'
sensitive personal information on network drives. The OIG also
recommended that OIT establish technical controls to ensure users
cannot store veterans' sensitive personal information on shared network
drives and implement improved oversight procedures, including facility-
specific procedures, to ensure veterans' sensitive personal information
is not being stored on shared network drives.
The Assistant Secretary for Information and Technology and the
Under Secretary for Benefits concurred with all three recommendations
and provided corrective action plans that are responsive to the
recommendations. The OIG will monitor progress until all proposed
actions are completed.
Security and Access Controls for the Beneficiary Fiduciary Field
System Need Improvement \11\ The OIG conducted an audit to determine if
the Beneficiary Fiduciary Field System (BFFS) had the necessary
controls to protect data integrity and safeguard protected, personal
fiduciary and beneficiary information.\12\ VBA deployed BFFS in May
2014 to replace the aging Fiduciary Beneficiary System and manage data
on beneficiaries, including names, mailing addresses, social security
numbers, medical record information, and financial information. BFFS
also stores information on fiduciaries--individuals appointed to manage
veterans' finances.\13\ The OIG audit assessed system controls related
to security management, user access, and the separation of duties
within the system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  Security and Access Controls for the Beneficiary Fiduciary
Field System Need Improvement, September 12, 2019.
\12\  BFFS is the information technology system used to manage the
caseload for VA's Fiduciary Program. The Fiduciary Program manages
payments for veterans and other beneficiaries who, due to injury,
disease, or age, are unable to manage their financial affairs and are
thus vulnerable to fraud or abuse.
\13\  The fiduciary information stored includes credit and criminal
histories.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG team found that OIT inappropriately set the security risk
level for BFFS at moderate instead of high. This happened because risk
managers did not follow established standards and did not consider the
existence of protected health information (PHI) and PII stored in the
system's data base. The lower risk level reduced the system's security
and access controls and potentially jeopardized the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of sensitive information related to
beneficiaries and fiduciaries. The OIG team also found that some system
users could access records not needed to perform their duties. More
than 1,600 fiduciary hub personnel have nationwide access to BFFS
data.\14\ This is far beyond the number needed to address those limited
instances in which information must be shared between hubs. Moreover,
VBA does not have a process for reviewing these employees' access
privileges. As a result, hub personnel can view records regardless of
the physical location of beneficiaries and fiduciaries, which violates
access requirements and increases the risk that beneficiary or
fiduciary information could be misused. Additionally, VBA officials did
not enable audit logs for all records and fields within BFFS out of
concern that it would reduce the system's functionality. However, when
combined with a user's ability to access records nationwide, this
creates an unnecessary risk that unauthorized access to beneficiary
PII, PHI, and other sensitive information will go undetected.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\  The Fiduciary Program operates from six geographical hubs
spread around the country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG made four recommendations to improve the BFFS security and
access controls to protect data integrity and safeguard protected,
personal fiduciary and beneficiary information. Recommendations
included reevaluating the risk determination for BFFS, improving
controls over end users' access levels, fully enabling audit logs to
ensure VBA can accurately and comprehensively track access to records
within BFFS, and improving separation of duties for VA users. OIT and
VBA concurred with the recommendations, and the OIG will monitor
progress until all proposed actions are completed.
VA's Management of Mobile Devices Generally Met Information
Security Standards \15\ The OIG conducted an audit to determine whether
OIT is implementing policies and procedures to mitigate information
security weaknesses associated with mobile devices being used in VA's
network infrastructure. OIT manages over 50,000 mobile devices that
store, process, and transmit veterans' information, and therefore
require protection at all times.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\  VA's Management of Mobile Devices Generally Met Information
Security Standards, October 22, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The OIG team found OIT's security practices for mobile devices
generally mitigated security control weaknesses within VA's network
infrastructure. However, the OIG team identified vulnerabilities
associated with configuration management. Specifically, OIT did not
enforce blacklisting, a process used to prevent the execution of
malicious, vulnerable, or flawed applications. Because OIT has not
implemented blacklisting, users can download applications that are not
authorized on VA mobile devices, which increases the risk of lost VA
data. Additionally, the OIG found that OIT did not validate adequate
mobile device security training by users, effectively monitor installed
applications, or control the automation of updates for its mobile
devices.
The OIG made three recommendations to the Assistant Secretary for
Information and Technology to mitigate information security weaknesses
associated with mobile devices being used in VA's network
infrastructure. Recommendations included enforcing blacklisting or
formally assessing and documenting the approach of using training as
the mitigating control, using configuration management tools to prevent
premature or late updating, and validating that users are completing
the required annual mobile device training. OIT concurred with all
three recommendations and provided responsive corrective action plans,
which OIG staff will monitor until successfully completed.

ONGOING OVERSIGHT INITIATIVES

By continuing to identify lapses, make recommendations, and monitor
implementation of corrective action plans, the OIG's goal is to help VA
strengthen areas of IT security that will more effectively safeguard
veterans' personal information and secure their benefits. The OIG has
planned and ongoing work that will provide additional oversight of VA's
efforts.
The OIG is currently working on the Fiscal Year 2019 FISMA
assessment to determine VA's compliance and expects to release the
results in the Spring of 2020. This annual audit evaluates select
management, technical, and operational controls supporting 49 major
applications and general support systems hosted at 25 VA facilities,
including VA's four major data centers. As previously discussed, the
Fiscal Year 2018 FISMA audit showed that VA is making progress in some
areas, however challenges remain in implementing components of its
agencywide information security risk management program that will meet
FISMA requirements.
OIG auditors are also conducting work to determine whether VA has
implemented key elements of the Federal Information Technology
Acquisition Reform Act (FITARA) regarding Chief Information Officer
(CIO) Authority Enhancements (Section 831). FITARA was enacted by
Congress in 2014 to modernize and strengthen Federal IT acquisitions
and operations, significantly reduce wasteful spending, and improve
project outcomes. Specifically, this audit evaluates the extent to
which the CIO met requirements to (1) review and approve all IT asset
and service acquisitions across the VA enterprise and (2) participate
in VA's IT planning, programming, budgeting, and execution, including
governance, oversight, and reporting.
Furthermore, the OIG is monitoring facets of VA's Electronic Health
Record Modernization project, implementation of the MISSION Act, and
other IT initiatives that will require substantial planning and
resources to ensure they are properly protected and secured. As VA
moves forward with these projects, the OIG will track the progress made
and determine the most efficient and useful ways to oversee and report
on VA's ongoing work.

CONCLUSION

VA's fundamental mission of providing benefits and services to
veterans is dependent on deploying secure IT systems and networks. VA's
information security program and its practices must protect the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of VA systems and data.
The recurrence of IT security problems indicates the need for
vigilance. Until proven processes are in place to ensure adequate
controls across the enterprise, the IT material weakness will persist--
putting VA's mission-critical systems and sensitive veterans' data at
risk. While VA has made recent improvements in some aspects of
information management, there continue to be considerable challenges.
The OIG believes that VA's successful implementation of open
recommendations from oversight reports is an important first step in
its efforts to address ongoing and emerging issues.
Madam Chair, this concludes my statement. We would be happy to
answer any questions you or other members of the Subcommittee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Greg Wilshusen
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
