- DATA PRIVACY AND PORTABILITY AT VA: PROTECTING VETERANS' PERSONAL DATA

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DATA PRIVACY AND PORTABILITY AT VA:
PROTECTING VETERANS' PERSONAL DATA

=======================================================================
HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY
MODERNIZATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-994                     WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

SUSIE LEE, Nevada, Chairwoman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           JIM BANKS, Indiana, Ranking Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       CHIP ROY, Texas

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2020

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Susie Lee, Chairwoman..................................     1
Honorable Jim Banks, Ranking Member..............................     3

WITNESSES

Mr. Paul Cunningham, Deputy Assistant Secretary and Chief
Information Security Officer (CISO), U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     5

Accompanied by:

Ms. Martha Orr, Deputy CIO for Quality, Performance and Risk,
Office of Information and Technology (OIT), U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

Ms. LaShaunne G. David, Director for Privacy Service, Office
of Information Security, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Mr. Nick Culbertson, CEO and Co-Founder, Protenus................    17

Ms. Tina Olson Grande, Executive Vice President, Policy,
Healthcare Leadership Council..................................    19

Mr. Ramsey Sulayman, Associate Director, National Legislative
Service, Veterans of Foreign Wars..............................    20

Mr. Harold F. Wolf, III, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS)..    22

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Mr. Paul Cunningham Prepared Statement...........................    33
Mr. Nick Culbertson Prepared Statement...........................    36
Ms. Tina Olson Grande Prepared Statement.........................    37
Mr. Ramsey Sulayman Prepared Statement...........................    48
Mr. Harold F. Wolf, III Prepared Statement.......................    50

DATA PRIVACY AND PORTABILITY AT VA:
PROTECTING VETERANS' PERSONAL DATA

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2020

U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Technology Modernization
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Susie Lee [chairwoman of
the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lee, Cunningham, Banks, and
Watkins.
Also present: Representatives Takano and Roe.

OPENING STATEMENT OF SUSIE LEE, CHAIRWOMAN

Mrs. Lee. Good morning. This hearing will come to order.
Before we get started, I want to say something briefly
about the announcement by the VA earlier this week in delaying
the go-live of the electronic health record project in Spokane,
Washington. I have long said that getting it right is far more
important than hitting a date on a calendar and, if there needs
to be a delay to get the system to a place where veterans'
lives are not at risk and the VA staff are ready to use it,
then that is the right thing to do.
However, I am concerned that, as we move closer to the go-
live date, we have been told repeatedly that there were no show
stoppers in the implementation, that testing was going great,
and things were on track. I get that in software development
and testing conditions can change rapidly, but I require that
the VA be as transparent and accountable for its actions. There
are many questions that remain and the subcommittee needs
answers in order to continue its oversight of the $16 billion
project, especially as the President's budget proposes a
speedup of the rollout.
Therefore, the subcommittee will be scheduling a hearing on
this topic in the coming weeks and will request to hear from
decisionmakers at the VA, but now on to other aspects of VA's
management of its technology portfolio.
The Department of Veterans Affairs has long struggled with
aging legacy IT systems and the need to invest in new and
innovative technology is necessary if the VA is going to
continue delivering quality health care and benefits to our
Nation's veterans. However, implementing new technology is not
simply a matter of buying new software or new tools, the VA
must also ensure that its policies and business rules keep pace
with the changing technology and, most importantly, ensure that
veterans are confident in its ability to protect their highly
sensitive information.
I acknowledge that this is a difficult task, especially in
the rapidly changing technology landscape. In the health care
sector, the gray space in how we manage, use, and exchange data
is growing more quickly than policymakers can keep up, but it
is critical that we try. The VA is well situated to be a leader
in this space. The electronic health record modernization
initiative, coupled with this 4-year, $1 billion Department-
wide technology refresh, gives the VA the opportunity to set
standards in rules from the outset. The requirements will not
only benefit veterans, but might also serve as a nationwide
example of balancing privacy with interoperability and big-data
innovation with confidentiality.
Health information and consumer data can be used to great
benefit. VA's robust research and innovation programs have the
potential to revolutionize care, reach more veterans, engage
them in new spaces, and empower them with their own health
care. Veterans can use their data to manage their care, find
economic opportunity, and access the benefits they have earned;
however, these advances are not without risk. The
attractiveness of big data for monetary and marketing purposes
is clear. In the first half of 2019, nearly 32 million health
care records were breached and, as we examined at our hearing
cybersecurity issues last October, that data is also attractive
to bad actors that may seek to commit crimes or cause harms, as
well as companies looking to monetize veterans' health
information.
We cannot assume that data is safe or secure, nor do we
want to keep data static to avoid any risk. However, with the
changing technology landscape, we need to be deliberate in our
assessment and decisions about how data is used, who gets to
access it, where that access occurs, and why.
I want to hear from the VA about the process of vetting
partners and vendors that participate in technology initiatives
or develop apps. It seems to me that when the VA provides an
app in its app store or promotes an app, a wearable device, or
a medical technology, we expect the VA to assess the value of
that technology or the benefit of that app and determine that
the benefit to veterans outweighs the data security and privacy
risk. I would like more information from the VA about this
process and what it entails.
However, there is another critical question. What
protections exist or should exist in the space beyond the VA?
If a veteran chooses to download health information from the VA
and share it with a third party, may that third party use
that--or sell that information for other purposes? What
responsibility does the VA have?
I am also concerned about the VA's increasingly widespread
use of apps and potential risks to privacy that they pose. When
a veteran downloads an app from the VA's app store, how much
personal information does the VA receive, what is the process
used to determine what is minimally required?
In the lead-up to this hearing, the subcommittee has
studied some of VA's apps. Many require significant elevated
permissions and access to a user's data or device. For example,
I have a chart behind me of apps and their permissions. Here we
go. The Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) Coach requires
full network access, the ability to read all of your contacts
and view any file on your phone. Concussion Coach allows access
to a user's entire calendar. These permissions may be excessive
and unnecessary invasion of a veteran's privacy, and may put
the veteran at risk for identity theft.
Why do these apps need access to location, a user's photos,
calendars, contacts, and other information? Are these
permissions necessary for its function? Does requiring
excessive permissions lower the app usage rates and decrease
their efficacy?
In speaking with veterans and Veterans Service
Organizations, I have heard repeatedly that transparency
regarding data is a key concern. Here, we are also concerned
about the VA's activity. The privacy policy for ACT Coach is
988 words, it is right here in the blue, of legalese with
clauses about incidental or consequential damages and a non-
exclusive license in consideration of your acceptance. Can we
expect anyone to realistically read these and understand their
terms?
I would like this to be a conversation where we can assess
the data landscape at the VA and in the larger health IT space,
and understand where protections exist or do not exist, and
whether we need more guardrails on that data highway. We need
to understand if the VA is doing enough to protect veterans'
privacy or if more needs to be done. Most importantly, we need
to ensure that future decisions on strengthening, keeping, or
perhaps even loosening privacy rules are made in an educated
manner with input from all stakeholders.
Today, we have two panels, one with VA officials, who are
here now, and another with experts from health informatics,
technology startup, and Veterans Service Organizations space. I
look forward to engaging on these important topics and I thank
all of the witnesses for being here.
I would now like to recognize my colleague Ranking Member
Banks to deliver any opening remarks he has.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JIM BANKS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First of all, I want to thank all of our witnesses on both
panels for joining us here today. This is a distinguished group
of VA and private sector privacy experts.
On the other hand, I have to say that I am extremely
disappointed that there is no VA witness here today to discuss
electronic health record modernization, especially in light of
the Department's recent decision to take more time to prepare
for the implementation in Spokane. Dr. Roe, Mr. Watkins, and
Mr. Roy and I felt strongly that the Office of EHR
Modernization should be represented here today and we requested
a minority witness, which the VA did not provide.
I wholeheartedly, though, support Secretary Wilkie's
decision to delay. I said in our previous hearing that I was
cautiously optimistic that a March 28 go-live was still
achievable, but developments to the contrary over the last
several months are undeniable. I am glad, though, that we will
have an opportunity to question VA very soon about how exactly
the additional time will be used to make the implementation
more effective.
Turning to this morning's topic, there was a time when VA
was a closed system that could exercise complete control of
veterans' personal and health data; even then, privacy breaches
happened. Many of us remember 2007 when a laptop and external
hard drive containing 26 million veterans' records were stolen
from a VA employee's home. Even though the records were
eventually recovered untouched, the incident led to then
Secretary Nicholson's resignation.
Today, small-scale privacy breaches are common in VA, as
elsewhere. They are usually attributed to email phishing scams
and careless document handling at individual medical centers.
However, VA has not been a closed system for many years. As in
sophisticated private sector health systems, personally
identifiable information and protected health information are
increasingly stored in the cloud and provided to external apps.
I want to say up front that I believe the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) privacy rules need
an update and I am glad to see the Department of Health and
Human Services soliciting comments on how best to do it. When
the privacy rule was written 20 years ago, there were far fewer
entities accessing protected health information. There was a
good reason to allow insurance companies and claims processors
to access patient's data without written authorization every
single time; there is no way our health system could function
otherwise.
Today some of HIPAA's permitted purposes to access
patient's records when applied in new context may become
loopholes. A health care provider's business associate
agreements with its partners stipulate how patient data will be
used, but patients rarely have any idea what those agreements
say. Similarly, health care providers' notices of their privacy
practices are often vague.
The health technology landscape is evolving quickly. Mobile
apps have already taken over the software marketplace and in a
few years most health records will be stored in the cloud as
well. It would be foolish to resist change and try to return to
an earlier technology environment when fewer entities handle
protected health information, privacy safeguards have to evolve
as well.
As we discussed in our cybersecurity hearing in November,
the health care sector has become a hacking target somewhat
later than other parts of the economy. Unfortunately, for most
Americans personally identifiable information and often their
financial information has been exposed in a list of data
breaches that are too numerous to name.
Earlier this week, Attorney General Barr unveiled criminal
charges against the perpetrators of the Equifax hack of 145
million Americans' personal information. Unsurprisingly, they
were members of the People's Liberation Army. It would be naive
to think that China and other nation-State cyber criminals are
not already targeting protected health information. Protections
for health information must remain strong in the realm of
cybersecurity as well as privacy. They can never be allowed to
deteriorate as protections for personally identifiable
information clearly have into a State of widespread
vulnerability.
The question before us is whether VA has a unique role in
protecting health information apart from HIPAA and other laws
governing the entire health care sector, and apart from Health
and Human Services (HHS). Without a doubt, VA must make smart
strategic decisions with respect to its technology partners;
however, I am skeptical that VA can or should drive the
regulatory environment unilaterally. I look forward to
exploring those issues with our witnesses here today.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Banks.
I will now introduce the witnesses we have on our first
panel. Paul Cunningham is the Deputy Assistant Secretary,
Information Security, Chief Information Security Officer and
Chief Privacy Officer at the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Mr. Cunningham is accompanied by Martha Orr, Deputy CIO for
Quality, Performance and Risk, Office of Information and
Technology, and LaShaunne David, Director for Privacy Service,
the Office of Information Security.
We will now hear the prepared statements from our panel
members. Your written statements in full will be included in
the hearing record, without objection.
Mr. Cunningham, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL CUNNINGHAM

Mr. Cunningham. Good morning, Madam Chair Lee, Ranking
Member Banks, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today about the
Department of Veterans Affairs' mission to protect personal
sensitive information of our Nation's veterans. As the VA Chief
Information Security Officer and Chief Privacy Officer, I am
pleased to represent the Department here today. I am here with
my colleagues, Ms. Martha Orr, Deputy Chief Information Officer
for the Office of Quality, Performance and Risk, or QPR, and
Ms. LaShaunne David, Director of VA Privacy Service.
First, I would like to thank the subcommittee for its
continued support of VA and commitment to veterans. Because of
your cooperation and commitment, veterans can continue to trust
VA to protect and serve their interests. As the Chief Privacy
Officer, I lead VA's efforts to secure and protect veterans'
personal information.
As a veteran, I have seen the value and impact VA has on so
many that faithfully served. We can only provide that value
through trust. That is why I am personally vested in protecting
veterans' information from exploitation and misuse.
Secretary Robert Wilkie is committed to promoting
innovation, transformation, and technology to enhance the
veteran experience. However, large organizations like VA face
challenges as they modernize their IT environments. With new
technologies come new risks. VA's privacy program must adapt
and remain vigilant protectors of veterans' information as an
environment of greater and faster access to data emerges.
In the course of accessing VA benefits and services,
veterans voluntarily share their personal information to the
Department. To protect this data, VA establishes acceptable use
policies, implements security controls, and proposes
consequences for any violation of policy or agreement. We
follow strict rules governing how the Department creates,
stores, transfers, and destroys sensitive data. QPR's
Enterprise Record Service oversees these activities and Office
of Information Services (OIS) VA Privacy Service helps
safeguard that data by partnering with QPR to conduct privacy
risk assessments, compliance monitoring of systems that contain
personally identifiable information and protected health
information.
The Department also implements a role-based access control
system, which means that it only grants access to those who
need the information to perform essential job duties or provide
benefits or services. Each system is closely evaluated,
equipped with appropriate access controls, and monitored for
abnormal activity. When data is improperly accessed, VA takes
appropriate action to limit further compromise and determine
the root cause of the incident. If it is determined that human
error or improper behavior is a causal factor, VA will take
additional actions, including remedial training or revoking
access to the user.
VA is expanding access to information for veterans,
especially through new digital technologies and platforms.
However, ease of access should not mean less privacy or
confidentiality. VA only collects information when necessary to
provide care and services. VA will never sell or share
veterans' information, and will only disclose information with
veterans' consent or as authorized by law. Violations of these
policies will result in consequences from possible dismissal to
criminal charges.
VA closely guards veterans' information; however, we often
must share data with our third party partners to provide
exceptional health care and benefits. In these cases, VA
stipulates the term for acceptable use of VA systems and any
veteran's information. Our partners must meet these
requirements and protect our data as closely as we do.
As with any organization that handles sensitive
information, there is always risk. This risk can be reduced
through effective policies, training, and technical controls;
however, these safeguards will not fully prevent an incident
from occurring, especially when humans are involved. Should an
incident occur, VA will respond to and determine the severity
of the incident, and be transparent and forthcoming in
reporting to Congress. Together, these policies and activities
ensure that veterans' information is kept safe on every
platform, in every system, and even when shared. With this
strategy in place, VA is making sure veterans' information
remains safe and secure, which is an important part of the
exceptional service that veterans so rightly earned.
Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you again for this opportunity. I am ready
to answer your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Paul Cunningham Appears In The
Appendix]

Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Cunningham. I will now recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Just getting off to a start with some background
information. Who owns the veterans' data, Mr. Cunningham?
Mr. Cunningham. Veterans own the veterans' data. VA is
charged with protecting that data in performance of providing
the benefits and services under our mission.
Mrs. Lee. Does the VA treat health data differently than
benefit or vocational data?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes, we do. Personal identifiable
information, PII, is protected under the Privacy Act; however,
when it comes to medical records or health information, it
falls under HIPAA.
Mrs. Lee. Is there a difference between ownership and
stewardship of data, and what is that difference?
Mr. Cunningham. There is a difference. The difference
resides in, at the end of the day, the veteran can decide who
has access to that data. For instance, they turn their records
over to VA to be custodians, and they also trust that VA is
looking out for their interests in deciding who has further
access under the laws and regulations.
However, a veteran can provide consent to other third
parties outside of VA's purview to gain access to their
information, in some cases--in those cases we have no real
authority or control over that.
Mrs. Lee. Do you have concerns about that? I mean, are
there areas along here where you are looking at what the VA can
do to make sure that veterans really understand what that
means?
Mr. Cunningham. Certainly that is a challenge that we are
concerned about. At the end, veterans do not work for VA, it is
hard to impose regulations or requirements for them for annual
training. We send out notifications or in our fliers, we give
pamphlets, when they are visiting our sites and waiting for
appointments, there are public announcements that talk about
how to protect your data or how you should be concerned. It is
difficult, as across the industry or across the United States,
to make sure that people really understand, when they click an
app and accept that app, do they fully understand the full
access that they have and how that information is going to be
used downstream.
Mrs. Lee. What are the requirements for outside parties to
access VA data?
Mr. Cunningham. For third parties that are accessing VA
data, they must meet the same standard as a VA system. As they
connect to our networks, they also get scanned and checked.
Mrs. Lee. I sent a letter to the VA on January 7th, 2020,
asking about the VA's knowledge of the Ascension Health
Partnership with Google and about how the VA oversees its
community care provider, their third party data sharing. When
can I expect a response to that letter?
Mr. Cunningham. I will ask our congressional liaison to
follow up on that.
Mrs. Lee. Okay. Ms. Orr, what role does the VA have when a
third party, whether it is a medical device, community
partnership, Veteran Service Organization (VSO), enters the
veteran health care space?
Ms. Orr. The role that the VA would have I think goes back
to your question about custodian and doing what we can if the
data is in our purview to protect it.
Mrs. Lee. Back to you, Mr. Cunningham, what are the VA's
policies regarding the monetization of veterans' data by third
party partners?
Mr. Cunningham. The Department's position is it is not to
be sold. Third party access through our networks, they have to
agree to those standards. As through--there are also any sort
of contracts that apply or any sort of contractors applying to
our networks or using our networks' data, they have to agree to
acceptable use, which includes not selling that information.
Mrs. Lee. Does the VA have the capability, technical,
organizational capability to monitor compliance with these
restrictions, and have there been any examples where there has
been a violation of that contractual agreement?
Mr. Cunningham. I am not aware of any instance where we
have been informed that a third party has taken VA-managed data
and sold it. In cases where--I mean, we certainly review the
records and the performance of a contract, as it is required in
the contract law in Federal Acquisition Regulations System
(FARS), and if there is an issue, it is identified and
appropriate action is taken. Again, I am not aware of any case
where an approved third party has sold VA's information.
Mrs. Lee. You do have the ability and the technical
capability and the organizational capability to monitor this
performance for such breaches?
Mr. Cunningham. Outside the----
Mrs. Lee. Or are you being informed by a veteran who has
been--like, how do you find out if that has happened?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, certainly, if a third party was doing
it outside of the contract or in a lot of cases these third
parties are health care corporations that understand the value
of protecting that data, but if that is occurring, they are not
informing us and we are not policing their networks. With that
said, if a case does come forward where an individual says
their information was sold from a third party that is endorsed
by the Veterans Department of Veterans Affairs, I would say
that we will take swift action to investigate it and take
appropriate actions accordingly.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. I am over time. I now yield to Mr.
Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Cunningham, I want to return to an issue from our
cybersecurity hearing last year. I asked you then whether the
VA had ever purchased equipment from a list of Chinese
technology companies and you took those questions back for the
record. The VA provided answers from those questions just last
week that, based on searches of the Federal Procurement Data
System, the FPDS, there were a few contracts for equipment from
Chinese companies that are now prohibited. I want to know more
about those circumstances and that discussion should probably
happen between us in private at some point soon.
I have to say that the VA's answer gives me absolutely no
confidence. FPDS is a public data base that contains at best a
scant amount of details about what was actually purchased. If
the VA is relying on FPDS to know whether blacklisted Chinese
IT equipment was bought, I do not believe anyone in the
Department knows what is really going on.
Mr. Cunningham, my question is, is there a more
authoritative record or is FPDS truly what you are relying on?
Mr. Cunningham. I stand behind the response that we
provided to you. I will be glad to have another opportunity to
come talk to you specifically about how we manage our assets
and in particular these blacklisted companies.
As far as the response, we stand beside that as being the
best way for us to provide the definitive answer to you.
Mr. Banks. Okay, that is good to hear, but can you tell me
more about why did the VA's official response cite FPDS and no
other sources of information?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, again, we were answering the question
that you asked, was there purchase of blacklisted companies
inside VA. We used the source that was most relevant to us and
we feel we answered that question completely. Again, I would be
glad to come back and talk more in depth about our processes of
asset acquisitions, as well as how we manage our assets.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Section 889 of the Fiscal Year 2019
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) is coming into force
in August. I strongly supported it in the Armed Services
Committee, which I am a member of as well. As I am sure you
know, it stops Federal agencies from contracting with any
entity that uses blacklisted telecom equipment or services. Is
the VA prepared to comply with that law?
Mr. Cunningham. Yes, we are.
Mr. Banks. How does the VA know whether a company is using
blacklisted equipment or services? Now, I want to point out
that the law applies to existing contracts as well as contracts
in the future.
Mr. Cunningham. It will take some time to go back through
our contracts and work with our third parties to identify where
this has occurred. Like you, I believe that there is probably
equipment being used by our third parties because it was not
restricted at the time they purchased it for use. We need to
make sure that in contract language it is prohibited and it is
removed if it is on our contracts.
Mr. Banks. The HIPAA privacy rule was written before mobile
apps and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) existed. Do
you think the HIPAA privacy rule is sufficient to stop
technology companies from monetizing protected health
information?
Mr. Cunningham. There is not a clear statement in HIPAA
regarding that. I think there is opportunity for us to expand
on HIPAA laws to include how electronic records are managed,
stored, and then downstream support from third parties or
subcontractors.
Mr. Banks. Does the VA individually or specifically have
any role in stopping technology companies from monetizing
veterans' health records--health care data?
Mr. Cunningham. In contracts--and we kind of talked about
this before--in order for them to access our networks, they
have to meet the same agreements and standards that VA has, and
that VA's policy is not to sell or share information outside of
the roles that they are designed to do. In that case, if you
are talking do we have the technology to monitor third parties,
we do not, it is outside that contract. If they do it, we can
definitely look at doing a review and figuring out how we are
going to remediate that, whether it is remove them from
contract or hold them liable for losses.
Mr. Banks. Okay. With that, I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Banks.
I now recognize Mr. Roe for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roe. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Data privacy is an important issue in the VA and, as the
ranking member mentioned, especially with the data breach with
Equifax. Obviously, it became clear to most Americans it was a
huge problem, and it is a problem throughout the entire health
care and private sector. I am glad we are able to have this
discussion, I have learned a lot already. However, I repeatedly
asked that today's hearing be focused at least on part the
electronic health record modernization and include a witness
from that office. I am encouraged and I appreciate, the chair
and I discussed before the hearing started, that they are now
going to have a meeting, we are going to have a meeting very
soon, and I appreciate that.
Bill and I were in Seattle and Madigan recently, and then
been to Spokane twice to see the rollout and there are issues
there, which we will discuss later. Ranking Member Walz, my
friend Ranking Member Walz, now Governor Walz, and I created
this subcommittee with the intent of overseeing the EHR to be
the core of its responsibility. I now recognize that parties
can change along with the events, but even before Secretary
Wilkie communicated his decision to delay the Cerner
implementation in Spokane, this was already a pivotal month in
that project. One of the delays that DOD incurred was security,
that held up the DOD rollout. I expected us to be here either
questioning VA about the Cerner deployment and what it was
going to look like on March 28th or about what the delay would
entail.
I firmly believe Secretary Wilkie's decision to delay was
the right call. I also believe strongly that the committee now
needs to ramp up, not ramp down, its oversight of the project,
and I look forward to that hearing, Madam Chair.
I am going to go over several things quickly. I was just
looking, I appreciate the chair's putting up on the whiteboard
here, this is disturbing to me. When you look at the app here,
the PTSD Coach, and I punch an ``Allow,'' well, what I allow to
happen when I punch the PTSD Coach, which I may not know, is
access to my contacts in my phone and ``Other,'' whatever that
is, my storage, and along with the Concussion Coach. I give my
calendar up, my contacts, photos, media files, microphone, I
mean, on and on. The PTSD Coach has access to the mike on this.
I find that very disturbing, because you might inadvertently
hit that and not know. This disclaimer, obviously written by a
horde of attorneys, nobody reads.
I think we have got to simplify this. Certainly I think a
lot of people, including me, could make a mistake and access to
your entire phone could be here and it could be your financial
information, other information on here. I think we have to be
very, very careful with that and revise. I can not imagine why
the PTSD Coach needs access to my microphone or my contacts or
my schedule. Anyway, that said, I think we need to rethink that
out.
Mr. Cunningham, the VA sent out a notice of privacy
practices, which I have here, in September, and it caused a lot
of confusion with the veterans. I got a call when--Bill was
pointing out when we were in Seattle about this--from a
constituent--and I am sure many of my colleagues did too--
apparently the notice was written in a confusing way. It seemed
to conflate VA's longstanding privacy practices under HIPAA
with a change made by the MISSION Act that allows information
about drug and alcohol use, HIV, sickle cell anemia to be
shared with community care providers unless a veteran opts out.
Can you explain what the VA meant with that?
Mr. Cunningham. So----
Mr. Roe. Here it is. It is a lengthy, front-and-back,
eight-page--I just read it just a minute ago, a good bit of it
on here, so I could see why a veteran was confused when they
got this.
Mr. Cunningham. It is certainly not the intent to confuse
veterans; it is the intent to inform veterans. I am sure it has
gone through numerous reviews for readability and, if we missed
the mark on that, we can go back and find another way as well
to relay what we are trying to convey.
Mr. Roe. I guess probably a lot of people, Mr. Cunningham,
why did I get this? I think, you know, and then when they read
it, they thought, well--I mean, if you read on here, it is
about your organ transplant, health care oversight, coroner,
funeral services, national security workers, I mean, on and on.
I guess a veteran would be asking, what in the world did I get
this for?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, I think it is important that, you
know, for the MISSION Act, it opened up new avenues for the
veteran, and we were trying to inform them on what that new
avenues means and what information we were sharing in support
of those new avenues and new capabilities. In so, if we
confused them, you know, my sincere apologies. I am glad to
take it back and see if there is a better way for us to convey
when we go and add new capabilities, new benefits, and share
information with new venues, that we make sure that the
veterans understand what we are doing on their behalf.
Mr. Roe. Yes, my time has expired. I think we just sort of
overwhelmed them with too much information.
I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Roe.
Mr. Cunningham, along this point with respect to the
notification for veterans, you made the statement that veterans
are not employees of the VA, so you do not have control.
However, I do think that there is a trust relationship that
veterans understand that, if there is something being promoted
or endorsed or, you know, endorsed by the VA, that there is a
trust relationship there.
I do think that there is a higher level of accountability
and responsibility to making sure that veterans understand in a
clear, concise, easily understandable way. And what we are
seeing again and again is it seems that we are getting caught
up in all the legalese without this clear--you know, like I
would expect that if you download an app and you are about to
release all of your contact information that there is like a
clear warning, you understand what you are doing here. I hope
that we can look at that moving forward, because what is
happening right now, we are hearing from our veterans in the
field that there is, you know, ultimately a lack of trust,
especially when it comes to this incredibly sensitive
information.
Ms. Orr, I wanted to ask you, before--does the VA--and this
goes back to the apps, primarily because when a veteran
downloads their data into a third party app, HIPAA no longer
applies, and so I want to know, does the VA vet apps before
recommending them or putting them on the app store?
Mr. Cunningham. I would like to take a first glance at
this. VA apps that are--apps that are on the VA store have been
reviewed by VA. We see them as a value to the veteran and we
look to make sure that they are meeting our acceptable use
policy. In most cases, they are attaching to an API, that means
that they are getting information from VA as part of that
service to the veteran through that application.
I will ask Ms. Orr----
Mrs. Lee. What are the criteria for that app to pass this
vetting process?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, we are looking at where is the
benefit for the veteran. Again, is it accessing our networks
and does it meet those standards that we briefly talked about
earlier? Then what is the intent of the company in providing
that act. If they are selling that information, obviously, we
would not endorse that sort of application.
We do want veterans to look at those applications and know
that VA is supporting those applications and reviewing them to
get on that app.
Mrs. Lee. Are there any requirements in terms of the app
security, you know, including access to the VA-controlled data?
Like, what are the criteria for that?
Mr. Cunningham. VA-controlled data--and we would probably
have to look at each app as it goes through, and we can come
back and give you a more detailed decision process tree on
apps, but in general we are looking to make sure that, if they
are accessing personal information, personal identifiable
information, or PHI, that they meet the same standards that we
have, that they have to be protected and they have to agree to
that standard in order to access the API.
As far as non-PII-related applications--for instance, there
might be an application that says where is the closest hospital
and we want to make sure that veterans clinics and hospitals
are on that application and it is out for the public, that in
itself is not reviewed that close, but we see the value of it
for the veteran and we would hope that they would look at that
as a service that we are providing them.
Mrs. Lee. Okay. Well, we will look forward to having some
more information along those lines.
I just wanted to ask, so given what we have heard today and
your processes, are there any areas of concern? Are there any
areas--how can we be helpful? What can we do to help the VA to
make sure that veterans' data is secure?
Mr. Cunningham. At this time, I do not think we are asking
for any specific legislation or resources. You know, patience
as we are trying to solve this bigger problem around this
greater access of data. I thought this morning's comments were
on mark and described the challenges that we have in this
environment, especially as they relate to how do we make the
risk-based decision. If we go strictly by compliance and if
zero tolerance is what we are going for, we are going to miss
out on a lot of opportunity that technology brings and even
life improvement opportunities if we are not being able to
share information with our third parties that are trusted, to
the extent that we are trying to bring better value, better
customer experience to the veteran, and that also includes
security and privacy in that risk decision.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Banks for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair. I will be quick.
Mr. Cunningham, I want to read you part of the VA's terms
of services for its API platform. Quote, ``When records
regarding an individual are obtained through a VA API, you may
not expose that content to other individual or third parties
without specific explicit consent from the individual or his or
her authorized representative, or as permitted by applicable
law,'' end quote.
Mr. Cunningham, is consent from the veteran always required
or only required when there is not a law permitting the
disclosure?
Mr. Cunningham. If it is in line with what--for the APIs,
it would be that they would have to consent to that data,
unless it is provided by veterans--or Veterans Affairs, in
regards that we have contracted with a third party to provide a
specific app for Veterans Affairs.
If it is a VA-built application, then we would not ask
necessarily in every case that the veteran would have to click
to it. However, if it is outside of our management, it would
require the veteran to approve it.
Mr. Banks. What exactly does a third party mean here and is
it non-VA software? How about another API?
Mr. Cunningham. If you are building an application and you
are wanting to get data from an information source, in this
case the one that VA actually owns, you are going to be
accessing an API, and I would have to bring some of our more
experienced API developers in here to talk to you about that
exchange. In principle of that, before they can connect, they
have to get approval between the VA and that third party that
is requesting information, and in that case third parties can
be a separate organization outside of VA's purview.
Mr. Banks. It sounds like VA's partner that is using the
API is responsible for getting the consent from the veteran.
What role does the VA have in making sure that happens
correctly?
Mr. Cunningham. If it is on our application, our app store,
we do verify that they are asking it. We do test and walk
through it as if we are a veteran to ensure that it is there.
Other than that, if a third party is providing an app to a
veteran and it is outside of VA's purview, we have no real
control of validating whether they are asking for that consent
or how they use that information in agreement with that
veteran.
Mr. Banks. Okay, that is all I got. I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you.
I now recognize the chairman of the committee, Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairwoman Lee.
Mr. Cunningham, welcome. I recognize you are from the
Office of OIT, but since you are the one from VA before us
today, I would like to echo what Chairwoman Lee said earlier
about the VA needing to be more transparent with us. It is very
important that as we continue to move forward through the
integration process that VA is as transparent as--you know, not
just as possible, just plain transparent.
Here is the thing. I was told last week by Secretary Wilkie
that everything was on track with the electronic health record
modernization rollout, but yet on Monday I am told that the go-
live was going to be postponed with no definitive time line
about how long it will be delayed.
You know, just with that as a sort of preface, what does VA
need to get things back on track; is there anything that you
need?
Mr. Cunningham. As far as EHRM and Cerner, that is outside
of my purview. From my understanding that we have what we need.
We are partnered with DOD, we are sharing information, and the
decision to delay was more a tactical one and not necessarily a
resource-limiting issue.
Mr. Takano. Okay. I realize that you are not the point
here, but if you could take back to the Department, I want to
know when you and others were first made aware that the EHRM
go-live would be delayed. Just, you know, you do not have to
answer that--if you know now, please, you yourself can answer
that question, but I just want to know when this became
apparent, because last week the Secretary himself said this was
all moving forward and did not anticipate any issues. Go ahead.
Mr. Cunningham. I will be glad to take that back.
Personally, myself, I was aware of it yesterday.
Mr. Takano. You became aware of it yesterday?
Mr. Cunningham. That is correct.
Mr. Takano. Okay. All right, thank you.
Madam Chair, I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Watkins for 5 minutes.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Cunningham, I want to ask about VA's partnership with
Apple Health. My understanding is that iPhones have memory
chips that are physically separate for different kinds of
information, how does that work in practice and what
cybersecurity protections does that provide?
Mr. Cunningham. I am not an Apple engineer and I think that
might be outside my scope of experience. I would say that on
premise, on theory, having a separate chip that manages data
from the Apple applications themselves is wise in design.
Mr. Watkins. Apple says it does not control any of its
user's data that it transmits on its iPhone. When the company
says that, it seems to be referring to third party apps. In
other words, the iPhone is just a vessel for other apps, but
Apple Health is actually one of the few apps that the company
directly owns.
What privacy protections specific to the VA are in place
when veterans access VA medical records on Apple Health?
Mr. Cunningham. For Apple Health, like any other third
party that is accessing veterans' information, would have to
meet the same standards for privacy and HIPAA.
Mr. Watkins. Your testimony discusses a privacy threshold
analysis, which is a tool the VA uses to ID privacy issues in
new IT systems or projects. Can you explain what this is, how
it works, and give some examples of privacy issues that you
have identified in the past and how you have resolved them?
Mr. Cunningham. National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) has a set of controls as it relates to
privacy, as well as cybersecurity. Those controls are part of
the system development and their system security plans. They
are assessed in development, as well as in operations, and
provided to the authorizing official to make a determination on
whether the system meets the standards and what are the
associated risks if not meeting the standards through either
mitigating controls or possible POA&Ms or plan of actions,
milestones to resolve them.
How it works and some additional information, I will ask
Ms. David if she would like to answer that.
Ms. David. Sure, yes. The privacy threshold analysis is
actually the vehicle for assessing systems, programs,
operations for privacy impacts. It is a templated document that
goes through the life cycle of the effort itself and discusses,
for example, privacy risk, those risk mitigations, any other
connected systems. Basically, any and everything having to do
with point-in-time activity and then as the effort develops.
It is a living document that gets revisited throughout the
life cycle of the effort, and it also takes into consideration
records, records retention, uses, and things of that such.
Mr. Watkins. Understood, Ms. David. What are your specific
privacy concerns?
Ms. David. Generally, the privacy concerns would be how
information is being shared. Is it being shared in accordance
with routine uses, which are outlined in, for example, a system
of record notice. The privacy concerns would also be how the
information, based on its level of sensitivity, how it is being
protected so that the protections are commensurate with the
sensitivity of the information. Then also how information is
handled in, for example, the incidence of a potential breach.
We talk about that, as well.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you. Thanks to the panel. I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Roe for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roe. Thank you. Just to show you some of the confusion.
Very quickly, Mr. Cunningham, I was reading, ``When we offer
you the opportunity to decline the use or disclosure of your
health information, patient directories, unless you opt out of
the VA Medical Center patient directory when being admitted to
a VA healthcare facility, we may list your general condition,
religious affiliation, and the location of where you are
receiving care. This information may be disclosed to people who
ask for you by name. Your religious affiliation will only be
disclosed to members of the clergy who ask for you by name.
``Note. If you do object to being listed in the patient
directory, no information will be given out about you unless
there is other legal authority. This means your family and
friends will not be able to find what room you are in while you
are in the hospital. It also means you will not be able to
receive flowers or mail, including Federal benefits checks,
while you are an in-patient in the hospital or nursing home.
All flowers and mail will be returned to the sender.''
That means if somebody thinks they are not going to get
paid, they are always going to opt in. I think those are the
kind of things I think that cause some confusion with veterans.
My suggestion is, Madam Chair, do not opt into anything.
That would be my--after listening to this. Maybe go back to
carrier pigeons, because you do not have any privacy anymore.
There is no such thing as privacy. As a physician, I got, this
is years ago, because of access insurance companies had to very
sensitive information, I would sometimes even limit what I put
in a medical record, because I was afraid even then, before the
access to hackers and all that people have. With these opt-ins,
you have just opened the book on your life. I mean, as an OBGYN
doctor, I got told some very private things, which I just had
to leave between my ears because I was concerned with the
privacy. That leads to my question.
How does the VA decide which technology company it will
collaborate with? Are there particular companies that the VA
would be uncomfortable with? Or what specific privacy practices
do the Department consider a red flag, because we know that the
Chinese--we know this. The People's Liberation Army (PLA) is
always looking for a back door into somewhere, which may lead
to someplace else. How do you guys make that decision?
Mr. Cunningham. Well, I think, one, we have to balance the
availability and access. I mean, certainly, there is many
veterans that benefit from the applications and the APIs that
are being provided today.
Mr. Roe. Yes.
Mr. Cunningham. Quicker information. How we figure out who
we work with, we do not have a black list of companies. We do
not pick winners and losers in the market. We have an API that
provides information when it is requested in the proper
protocol. In there, we are verifying that the proper protocol
is there. Obviously, if there is a known--I do not think there
is a litmus test for what organizations are in or out.
Certainly, we can talk a little bit more and go back for the
record and provide more detail on what is the decision tree
that we use in connecting with APIs. I hope that answers your
question.
Mr. Roe. Yes. I think, obviously, they have to bring a lot
of advantages to people. I use them. We all do, that you can
find a restaurant, or gas, whatever you may be using it for. I
got that.
The question is that is an advantage. I look at a risk/
benefit ratio. What are the risks you take? How can this
information--I think both the chair and the ranking member have
asked this question. How is this information shared? Is it
accessible? How can it be used? Is it sold? I mean, when you
purchase something on Amazon, I like to backpack. Well, I will
have four tents on here today that Amazon is trying to sell me.
Those are questions that I guess we as a society need to
answer. Is VA protecting it, and really looking at who you
partner with?
Mr. Cunningham. We are looking at who we partner with. We
look at who has connections to our APIs. What do they plan on
using that information for? They have to sign acceptable use
agreement. We police--when we find out that there is
information that is being wrongly used, we police
appropriately.
With that said, what information are we talking about? If
we are talking about health care information, obviously there
is a higher standard of security that goes along with it. If
you are talking about access to files, pictures, calendars on
your phone, most users probably have, I am just estimating,
probably 30 or 40 applications on their phone at any given
time. They also carry two phones. How many of those
applications are also providing that same sort of data and
access to the information that they reside on their phone.
Mr. Roe. My time is up. I did not say we were smart. I am
just saying----
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you.
Mr. Roe. I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. Thank you. I just want to thank all of
the witnesses for being here today. I would now like to--you
are excused and I will call up the second panel. Thank you.
We can take a brief recess while we set that up.
(Recess.)
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. I will now call this back to order. I
would like to introduce the witnesses on our second panel. Nick
Culbertson is CEO and co-founder of Protenus. Is that right?
Protenus. And is an Army veteran. Tina Olson Grande is the
executive vice president for policy at the healthcare
leadership counsel and chair of the confidentiality coalition.
Ramsey Sulayman is the associate director, National Legislative
Service for Veterans of Foreign Wars and is a Marine Corps
veteran. Harold Wolf is the president and chief executive
officer of Health Care Information and Management System
Society (HIMSS).
We will now hear the prepared statement from our panel
members. Your written statements in full will be included in
the hearing record. Without objection, Mr. Culbertson, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes. You can put your volume. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF NICK CULBERTSON

Mr. Culbertson. There. Does that work? Great. Thank you,
ma'am. I appreciate the opportunity to present. I am here today
under three prefaces. I am a former, as you mentioned, a former
non-commissioned officer in the United States Army. I was also
treated as part of the Veterans Affairs. I sit here now as a
entrepreneur and CEO of Protenus, which specializes in health
data security.
I think the data privacy is in constant juxtaposition with
data sharing. We have heard much of that throughout testimony
today. I think it is really important that this issue be
addressed.
Our research has shown that every year data breaches have
increased. Just last year alone, 41 million medical records
were breached in the United States and that is only what we
know about or what has been discovered. The more we share data,
the more of a threat we create to our patient's data,
particularly our veterans' data.
I have had experience with both the limitations of data
being a challenge, but also seeing how the data sharing creates
more of a challenge. My story goes back to when I was last
stationed in Afghanistan. I was assigned to use this device
called the MC-4 that was supposed to take patient data from
combat casualties that I could wirelessly send to a flight
medic, that would then transfer that information all the way
back to retirement and VA. It was a seamless integrated network
that data would persist from DOD all the way to VA.
Unfortunately, we got trained many hours on this device,
and then we took it into the field and then found out it did
not work. We had to manually rewrite the medical notes to our
flight medics and pass it off on pieces of paper that would fly
away in the wind.
I think that program is still being developed. I hope that
it continues to persist. After I got out of the military, I
sought treatment through VA for my wrist that I fractured in
the military. I was a little bit shocked to hear from my VA
physician that since my wrist had healed and there was no x-ray
in my record, my wrist was never broken in the first place, and
so I could not get my document updated to show that I had
broken my wrist, and make sure that I had long term care for
that. I had to seek physical therapy through private practice,
through private insurance, which is unfortunate.
On the other side of things, I have seen how health data
becoming more accessible and shared creates more of a risk and
more of a concern. As a medical student at Johns Hopkins, I saw
how Hopkins rolled out the Epic integration, similar to what VA
is doing now with Cerner on a different scale.
Decades ago, the only person who had access to your medical
record was the physician at the foot of your bed. Now anyone
throughout the hospital system, any business associate, any
partner health system, any other Epic clients can now access
that data. Technology has created this great increase in access
that helps improve patient care and outcomes, but at the same
time drastically increases the risk.
I think that--my belief is that while technology has
created greater access, it also--there is an opportunity to
create better assurance and better privacy with technology
alone. I do not think this can be addressed just through policy
and regulation. I think that we need to have security devices
put in place, specifically with the VA as well.
Our company developed an artificial intelligence that
understands how any end user is accessing PHI and whether they
are using it appropriately. And we send proactive alerts to
privacy risk compliance officers that identify those threats so
that they can deal with them in relative real time proactively,
rather than waiting for something to happen.
I know that this is an incredibly needed technology because
of the amount of violations that we find. We estimate that 1 in
300 workforce members in health care violates privacy per
month. Unless a monitoring solution is put in place, or unless
regulations are appropriately addressed or policies are put in
place, that only will continue and get worse.
I thank you all for taking the time to address this and I
am looking forward to the conversation.

[The Prepared Statement Of Nick Culbertson Appears In The
Appendix]

Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Culbertson. I now recognize Ms.
Grande.

STATEMENT OF TINA OLSON GRANDE

Ms. Grande. Thank you. Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member
Banks, and Members of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs
Subcommittee on Technology and Modernization, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Tina Grande. I am executive vice president of
policy for the Healthcare Leadership Council, and chair of
HLC's Confidentiality Coalition.
HLC is an association of chief executives representing all
disciplines within American health care. The Confidentiality
Coalition advocates for policies and practices that safeguard
the privacy of patients and health care consumers, while
enabling the essential flow of patient information.
The subcommittee's examination of how the Department of
Veterans Affairs manages veterans' health data is especially
timely, as new technologies continue to be introduced to the
market. For every promising health information technological
development, there is a risk of its misuse.
There is a glaring oddity in our current health data
regulatory scheme that certain health data is subject to robust
Federal privacy protections, while other health data is not. As
long as this disparate treatment exists, the challenges faced
by an organization such as the VA to harness new technological
innovations, while maintaining the privacy and security of
data, will remain formidable. Any approach to health data
privacy should preserve the existing HIPAA framework, which
applies to treatment, payment, and health care operations for
all patients, including veterans. New legislation should apply
only to health data not governed by HIPAA.
New innovations, while beneficial, have resulted in more
and more health data falling outside the protections of HIPAA.
This will be the case when the technology or services are not
offered by or on behalf of a HIPAA covered entity, but rather
by developers or technology companies directly to the consumer.
For example, a consumer may download a third party health
app to their smartphone that sends a summary report to their
doctor. As long as the doctor did not hire the app developer to
provide its services to patients, the data in the app is not
protected by HIPAA, even if the app is recommended by the
patient's doctor.
Under HIPAA, covered entities are required to provide
individuals with a notice that describes the entity's privacy
practices, the purposes for which it uses and discloses
protected health information, or PHI, and the individual's
privacy rights and how to exercise those rights.
This transparency is an important protection that is
particularly relevant as businesses seek to monetize health
data. At the same time, the HIPAA framework recognizes that
health information is not a commodity, the flow of which is
determined by the highest bidder. Great care was taken when
establishing the HIPAA framework to balance various competing
interests. This same approach should be taken in addressing
non-HIPAA health data.
Any new privacy framework should be consistent with HIPAA
definitions. Conflicting or inconsistent terminology could have
unintended consequences that could seriously and adversely
impact the ability of health care organizations to aggregate
and share health data for important care delivery and
population health purposes.
Equally important, security safeguards should be
commensurate with the safeguards required by the HIPAA security
rule. Robust security requirements for non-HIPAA health data
are critical, not only for sophisticated businesses that
collect vast amounts of data, but also for startups, developing
new products and services, which should be incorporating
security by design practices in their product development
process.
The promise of interoperability is another reason to ensure
harmonization between laws governing PHI and non-HIPAA health
data. And to have national standards for health information,
privacy, and security. Interoperability cannot come to fruition
if these organizations are subject to and constrained by
different standards that do not align or potentially even
conflict with one another. This is particularly critical for
veterans who may seek care in community health systems in
addition to the VA health system.
We believe it is essential to replace the current mosaic of
sometimes conflicting State privacy laws, rules, and
guidelines, with strong, comprehensive national standards.
In closing, HLC and the confidentiality coalition commend
the subcommittee for seeking to address the challenges faced by
the VA in managing veterans' health data. We believe a balanced
approach, compatible with and modeled upon the existing HIPAA
framework, and that provides protections for non-HIPAA health
data, similar to that provided for PHI under HIPAA, is the best
way to address these challenges and provide a comprehensive,
consistent, and transparent health information privacy
framework for the health data of those in service and beyond.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Tina Olson Grande Appears In The
Appendix]

Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Ms. Grande. I now recognize Mr.
Sulayman.

STATEMENT OF RAMSEY SULAYMAN

Mr. Sulayman. Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and
members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of
the Veterans of Foreign Wars and its auxiliary, thank you for
the opportunity to address our members' concerns about data
privacy and portability, and VA's responsibility to protect
veterans' privacy.
The commercialization of date crept up on Americans and
pounced like a tiger. You have covered the data breaches that
revealed information, vulnerabilities, and systems and
institutions we presumed were secure. Health care data breaches
often occur through malicious attacks, as well as non-malicious
errors, such as the loss of the laptop.
Rarely do we focus on self-disclosed and user generated
data, which accounts for a staggering amount of information on
the average American. One's Facebook profile, Instagram
picture, Spotify playlist, supermarket discount card, Fitbit
data, pictures taken by a Ring door cam, internet service
provider data. Yes, the one site that your friend told you
about that you looked at just for a second, just that one time.
All of that information is available and brokered.
Companies scrape the internet for more photos and
information on people who have no idea that this is happening,
and certainly never consented. You have covered earlier the
permissions that veterans are required to consent to use VA
apps.
Veterans live in this information and technology ecosystem
and the same concerns apply. However, because veterans have
access to a comprehensive suite of services from the VA,
everything from health care to home loans, veteran sensitive
information is concentrated in one location, the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
The requirement to consent to terms that are broad, rarely
understood, and without alternative is a major concern. Changes
in ambitious products at VA, the integration of health records
with DOD, the Million Veteran Project, MISSION Act, and
implementation present great opportunities, but data security
challenges.
VA partners with entities outside its IT ecosystem, and
this seam is where vulnerabilities also lie. Veterans expect VA
to set the tone and place data security and privacy as a
foundational priority. You have already touched on past
breaches and security lapses, such as the 2006 theft of a VA
laptop that exposed the data of 26 and a half million veterans
in active duty military.
2015 OIG report detailed Chinese nationals accessing the VA
network from China. In October 2019, OIG report detailed
security lapses, including placing veterans' PHI and PII, their
personally identifiable information and personal health
information, on thumb drives and personal computers. The 2019
OIG report on VA's ability to meet the Federal Information
Security Modernization Act requirements noted significant
challenges.
This leads us to believe that data security management and
protocols may not be at the level necessary. VA's transfer of
information to entities outside its ecosystem through record
sharing and simple IT processes like the single VA log on
through ID Me are of concern. As noted in our written
testimony, end user license agreements leave questions of
access to and retention of veterans' information open. You also
touched on that earlier in your questions and comments.
It is not a question of understanding the terms. It is a
question of what are the alternatives. Most often, there are
none.
We also noted the instance of Ascension's partnership with
Google on a massive health data project, known as Project
Nightingale, where Google collected sensitive health data as a
HIPAA compliant business partner of the health system, without
the explicit opt in of patients.
As Ascension often marketed toward veterans and encouraged
them to use Ascension with the Veterans Choice Program, it is
unclear whether veteran medical records shared with Ascension
as part of community care programs ended up in Google's hands.
Let me be clear that just because I use an iPhone SE still
does not make me a Luddite or a conspiracy theorist. I just
really like small phones. Great good can come from data
sharing, especially health data, and VA is in a very unique
position. Access to health care data means that providers can
apply artificial intelligence and machine learning to make
diagnosis faster and better, as well as treat more effectively.
Nick testified to the artificial intelligence capabilities
of his platform. The trove of veterans he identified health
data offers game changing research possibilities. These worthy
goals must be pursued. To Dr. Roe's point about risk versus
benefit, though, the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the U.S. (VFW)
believes in these foundational priorities.
The use of veteran's information should require informed
consent and a plain language explanation of exactly what the
veteran is consenting to, what will be used and collected, and
how that data may be used. VFW and the other VSOs are more than
willing to consult with VA on making VA communications easily
understandable to veterans.
Our executive director, BJ Lawrence, has directly offered
that assistance and the offer stands. The VFW also believes
that the minimum amount of veteran data should be collected
through VA platforms, including by third party partners. VA and
contractors should not pass on any more information than is
necessary to their subcontractors or partners. Information
should be retained for the minimum amount of time necessary,
and then deleted. Veteran information should be de-identified
where possible.
I thank you for your attention to this important matter and
look forward to answering any questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Ramsey Sulayman Appears In The
Appendix]

Mrs. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Sulayman. I now recognize Mr. Wolf
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HAROLD F. WOLF, III

Mr. Wolf. Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Hal Wolf. I am the
president and chief executive officer of the Health Care
Information and Management System Society (HIMSS). HIMSS is a
global non-profit advisor and thought leader supporting the
transformation of the health ecosystem through information and
technology, with a membership that includes more than 80,000
individuals and hundreds of partners and organizations.
We appreciate the committee holding today's hearings and
addressing the role of Congress and the Department of Veteran
Affairs in ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, security,
interoperability, and availability of veterans' personal data.
As significant advances in technological innovation in
health care have allowed us to capture data and use information
in unprecedented ways, we must ensure the proper processes are
in place to protect the privacy and the security of the
patient's most sensitive information without losing the
potential benefit of its use.
Our health care ecosystem has come to rely on an increasing
number of tools and capabilities, which depend upon secure
access to and use of patient data. The industry's fundamental
goal is improved outcomes at a lower cost per episode. To meet
this goal, we must have technology-enabled data collection and
interoperable data sharing. Given the large population
receiving services through the Department of Veterans Affairs
health care system, it is not a stretch to see that the VA is
facing the same pressures as the rest of the industry to use
data-driven capabilities to help them better manage the health
and the healthcare of their patient population.
We believe the recently proposed Federal regulations,
including the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
interoperability and patient access rule, and Office of the
National Coordiantor for Health Information Technology (ONC)
information blocking rules will advance interoperability and
support safe and secure access to health information and data-
driven tools that allow for more provider and consumer choice
in care and in treatment.
Now, any discussion around access to patient's health data
inevitably leads to questions around who owns the data, who can
access the data, what can be done with the data once it is
granted, and what are the stewardship responsibilities over the
data?
It is imperative that our mind set shifts to the access and
the appropriate usage of data that is needed or information
that benefits patient or individual health outcomes. Generally
speaking, data ownership refers to the entity or individual who
owns or originates the data. However, the data may not be in
the originator's possession when needed or having already been
passed on. Most decision support tools, for example, use data
from multiple entities that may begin to use more than just
clinical data, such as social determinant information to make
recommendations to the user.
Data access simply refers to being granted permission of
the data in some way or possession. This might include the
ability to read, edit, or copy data for a variety of purposes.
Its data usage and how the data could be transformed into
information, storage of the data is permission for primary and
secondary use, both short and long term. Rules around primary
and secondary usage of data are where significant attention
needs to be focused.
Data stewardship largely focuses on providing a secure and
trackable environment. Cybersecurity is an important component
of data stewardship. In order to ensure both veterans and
broader patient populations receive the best possible care,
providers, patients, and caregivers must be able to access the
right information at the right time. Access rights with clear
usage guidelines are mission critical.
HIPAA remains an integral part of our Nation's information
security and privacy infrastructure for both veterans in the
broader patient populations. With regard to the public dialog
on possible HIPAA changes, HIMSS is focused on encouraging the
safe portability of data.
I would like to thank Chairwoman Lee and Ranking Member
Banks for this opportunity to testify today, and all members of
the subcommittee for prioritizing such a critical issue. Thank
you and we look forward to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Harold F. Wolf, III Appears In
The Appendix]

Mrs. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes
for questions. Mr. Wolf, given when we talk about data
management, data privacy, what should we really be looking at
in how should the VA measure its success regarding patient
protection?
Mr. Wolf. A wonderfully complex question. I think we hit on
a number of the challenges earlier. The initial point of data
protection is the data that you have stewardship over at that
particular moment and how you must protect it, but more
importantly, how you use it in the care treatment and the
pathways to ensure that the best possible treatment and
recommendations are happening to the individual patient and we
are getting the best recommendations to the clinicians that are
there.
We have to be able to look at that multi-tiered safeguard
that was already been brought forward. Am I storing the
information that I have possession of at that time with all of
the appropriate safeguards? To whomever I am passing that
information, we need to know their security on their side and
where that information can and cannot go.
The points about secondary use of information or its
potential sale, those are huge issues. They really need to be
legislated on a full scale basis. The VA can do what it should
be doing in terms of protecting the information. But it also
becomes an important congressional pieces.
Mrs. Lee. How should the VA measures its success?
Mr. Wolf. I think you measure your success, first of all,
by are there any breaches that are occurring? That is the
simple part of it. The second is measuring its success in its
review of secondary apps or organizations that the information
is passed to. Then, of course, in the end, how is that
information being used to better the treatment of the patients
that it has accountability for.
That relies on understanding the use of the applications
and how it is transmitted, and whether there is success
protocols on value-based care being delivered.
Mrs. Lee. Great. Thank you. Ms. Grande and Mr. Sulayman,
could you please give me an example of in your experience in
mind, what a worst case scenario would be with respect to how
the VA treats its patient's data?
Ms. Grande. Sure. A worst case scenario, we could
consider--I think there could be many. I think largely falls
outside of the non-HIPAA covered data that is identifiable, it
is sensitive. It is related to detailed health care information
that an organization who is not bound by HIPAA or strict State
privacy laws either sells, monetizes, or mishandles information
that A) the patient or consumer has no knowledge of because
there is simply no--they are not aware that their information
is not protected. Because consumers generally do not
distinguish between, ``I am at a place where I have got HIPAA
coverage,'' and--we just know we have our health information.
We have trusted hospitals and health plans and pharmacies
with our information, because largely HIPAA has worked pretty
well. I think a terrible scenario would be information that is
sensitive about our health care has been bought, sold, used,
analyzed without our knowledge, and has trickled downstream for
a number of years, and comes back to potentially discriminate
against us in the long run. I think that that is a real risk
that is occurring in a largely unregulated market that has
access to identifiable information about us.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Sulayman. I would tend to agree with Ms. Grande on that
point. I mean, I think that HIPAA provides a framework, and it
provides penalties, and it provides some clear guidance on what
is and what is not acceptable. As I mentioned in my testimony,
in both the written and the oral, the user generated data that
we have, I mean the information that is collected off of the
apps that you were talking about, you know, with the privacy
policies written by committees of lawyers, ``hordes of
lawyers'' I think is how Dr. Roe referred to it, having that
information leak out and then being collated with other
information that is out there.
I mean, I think that that is really the danger just large
across the entire--for the entire population, but for veterans
especially if you are talking about Traumatic Brain Injury
(TBI), PTSD, other sensitive information. Having that sort of
health information be able to be gleaned from the purchases
that you make through a doctor's use of the Zelth (phonetic)
platform, for instance. You bought compression socks and
syringes, so a machine looks at that and says, ``A diabetic.''
That sort of amalgamation of information that you didn't even
know was out there and is not covered by HIPAA is the main
danger.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Banks for 5
minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair. This question is for
anyone who wants to answer it. Do you believe the HIPAA privacy
rules--the rule is adequate to govern apps that receive
patients' protected health information?
Ms. Grande. I am happy to start. I think that is a very
complex question. The HIPAA privacy rule was promulgated many
years ago. It was crafted very meticulously for a health care
caregiving and payment system. As such, it was applied very
specifically to that type of system that is directly in contact
with patients, their payment, their claims.
When we are looking at HIPAA as a potential framework for
tech companies, who do not necessarily fit into the very
precise definitions for a covered entity, and may not be
functioning as a business associate, because they are not
working directly for a covered entity, maybe sandwiching those
companies into HIPAA as a new covered entity, it is very
complicated and I do not think it is going to be easy at all.
You could look at potentially a larger national privacy
framework that would apply to those companies. Our
recommendation is that when it comes to health information,
that it harmonize with HIPAA. The last thing we want to do is
to bottleneck important health information, because it stops
because you have got two different privacy laws that are in
play that could conflict or be confusing.
If, for example, the Veterans Affairs Committee is
considering new privacy legislation as it relates to veterans'
health information and non-HIPAA covered data, we would suggest
that you also work with other committees of jurisdiction that
are overseeing the commercial and Medicare and Medicaid
markets, so that as veterans flow in and out of the commercial
and the VA system, their information is not getting
bottlenecked because you have got two separate privacy laws at
play.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Let me move on to another question. This
is for anyone who wants to answer it as well. If you agree that
Apple and Google essential control software distribution
through their app stores, what is their responsibility to
police the apps they allow into their stores, not only for
cybersecurity but also for privacy protection?
Mr. Sulayman. I will take a stab at this first. I think
that if you walked into a brick and mortar store and a product
lopped your hand off when you went and grabbed for it, you
would agree that the store is probably responsible for being
negligent and offering that.
I think that by and large, the tech sector's abdication of
responsibility for the products that they carry in their
virtual stores is something that really needs to be looked at
and addressed. I mean, if you are carrying something that is a
purveyor of malicious software or yesterday there was a report
about three email clients that scrape data off phones, just by
virtue of loading them and consenting through the data and
privacy policy, the thing that you do not read and click
accept. You know, one of them scrape the data and send it back
to Rakuten, an online shopping platform.
Literally, same sort of consent that you have with some of
these apps: your microphone, your contacts, your pictures.
Literally anything and everything that they want.
Now, the response was, ``We only collect certain things.''
Again, it is not transparent. I think having the transparency
and having the accountability, there needs to be some
verification system that what you are downloading through a
trusted platform is, indeed, trusted.
Mr. Banks. I will move on to another question. Or anybody
else? Yes.
Mr. Culbertson. Could I just add onto that, that I think
health data should--we could take a step further, that really
should not be compared to other types of data that you might
find on an iphone, just because of how valuable it is and how
immutable it is.
Just because we say something is appropriate or suitable
for an iphone app, I think we should even go beyond that for
health data.
Mr. Banks. Very good. I do not have a lot of time yet, so I
will yield back and save questions for later.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. This question is for Mr. Culbertson.
How should the VA compare to private industry in areas of data
privacy, consumer protection, and security?
Mr. Culbertson. Well, I think if we ask that question today
and we look at the top five offenders of HIPAA violation
according to the Office of Civil Rights, the VA ranks among
those top five. I think with this opportunity to modernize
technology, I think there is an opportunity to correct that
image.
I know that what health systems outside of the VA are doing
now, back to the question you asked for Mr. Wolf in terms of
demonstrating a good privacy program, is not only are we
looking at whether good policies are in place, do we have a
business associate for every partnership, are we ensuring
appropriate transfer of date according to HIPAA and other
regulations.
Health systems are also auditing proactively every access
and accounting for all of those disclosures to ensure that they
are being appropriately used under treatment and payment
operations.
I think there is an opportunity here to match that higher
level of standard and additionally go beyond.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. Mr. Sulayman, should the VA be
responsible for educating veterans on protecting their privacy?
Mr. Sulayman. I think that is a great question, ma'am. I
think that the obvious answer is yes, particularly as it
related to any data that the VA is using or has in their
possession.
I mean, if you are talking about just general education, I
think it would be helpful and certainly falls within the VA's
purview on many of the programs that it manages. Certainly for
IT and health care data, that as we said, the plain language
explanation of what is being collected, how it is being used,
what will be done with it, and any opt in or opt out options
are something that the VA should clearly define.
As I had said, we are happy to help the VA review that
process for readability and understandability for your average
veteran.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. Ms. Grande or Mr. Wolf, how far should
that VA obligation to protect data extend?
Mr. Wolf. Well, I will take a pass. I think that the--
coming back to this issue about the VA and the consistency of
its needs and protecting the data has to be consistent with all
of the other health systems that exist in the U.S.
The harmonization point around HIPAA is a critical point as
well. You do not want to create bifurcated environments. The
reality is, of course, is that a person who is receiving care
through the VA may well be also receiving care from other
entities. The free passage of that information is critical for
their own health, as well as future use of information.
The simple point is that the VA has to be extraordinarily
vigilant, as does every health care system on the use of that
information and where it goes. Not just within its domain, but
when it is passed, you have a responsibility to pass it to a
quality organization.
The testing and the variability, if you would, of the
application that is receiving, falls to the responsibility of
the VA, as it should with every health system.
Ms. Grande. I agree completely. The VA does have a
responsibility for those it oversees as it relates to their
health information and how it is being used. I think consumers
just simply do not distinguish between information that is
protected by their hospitals, health plans, pharmacies, and
that which is not.
I think there had got to be more of an education, just
nationwide for consumers about how their information is
protected and not--and the ramifications of it, if it is not.
Mr. Wolf. I would just tag on in our last 30 seconds that
it is very important for establishing criteria, if you would,
around where that information is going to go and how it is
going to be used. There is a baseline assumption on the part of
every consumer that they are protected. Even if they are
looking at these incredibly long agreements, their underlying
assumption is that their information is under proper
stewardship.
Ms. Grande. Concur.
Mrs. Lee. I agree. I actually believe that veterans even
have a higher level of expectation when it comes to the VA as
well. I am going to recognize Mr. Banks for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair. Ms. Grande, is HIPAA's
minimum necessary principal intention with the 21st Century
Cures Act penalties for information blocking?
Ms. Grande. Well, I know that the Office for Civil Rights
sort of hinted around that in their HIPAA Request for
Information (RFI) that came out last fall. We certainly will be
commenting on that when the notice of proposed rulemaking comes
out in short time.
Our member organizations do believe that the minimum
necessary standard is appropriate, that sharing only what is
necessary to promote better health outcomes is the right way to
manage health information.
For example, in some of these scenarios where you have got
to hand over your photos, your calendar, your contacts, that
flies way beyond the minimum necessary standard under HIPAA. I
think our member organizations have all agreed that that is way
too much information to be sharing.
That said, though, there is value in analyzing large data
sets to find treatments and cures. That is one of the wonderful
aspects of advances in technology so we can speed up treatments
and cures. I think motive matters and really focusing on the
motives behind what is trying to be done needs to be paid a lot
of attention to.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Let me move on. So far, our HIPAA
conversation has been mostly about covered entities business
associates that happen to be technology companies or apps. Your
testimony, Ms. Grande, you highlight the lack of legal
protections when patients opt to provide their health data to
an app. Should HIPAA or something very similar be extended to
these apps, or should it be something different?
Ms. Grande. Well, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) does
have some authority in the non-HIPAA space. It is not there is
no legal protection, but I think many feel that the FTC's
limited authority is a problem and that the FTC should have
more authority over the non-HIPAA space.
In terms of legal protections in the non-HIPAA space, we do
believe that regulation is necessary, that the information
blocking rule out of ONC and the interoperability rule out of
CMS, which both of which we very clearly support the move
toward interoperability. It is necessary and imperative to
improve health outcomes.
At the same time, there are provisions in those two rules
that require health plans and providers to direct protected
health information under HIPAA into an API and third party app
of a patient's choice. That does get back to the fact that
people do not distinguish what is under HIPAA and what is not.
If there is any way we could look at some kind of authority
within those agencies where we could do a better job, perhaps
some sort of a certification process, or something whereby you
have at least a semblance of good data stewardship going on
with these third party apps, we would recommend that. We do
believe that there is a role for Congress in this place to
ensure that penalties and enforcement that are meaningful are
brought to the forefront.
Mr. Banks. Let me finish with this final question for you,
Ms. Grande. What are some specific privacy considerations for
the medical device industry, especially concerning medical
devices that are integrated with apps?
Ms. Grande. If a medical device is not operating as a
business associate, and many of them do, so therefore come
under HIPAA, they are really working closely with doctors,
hospitals, those that are in the HIPAA environment. I think,
again, it gets to the point that while we do support regulation
outside of HIPAA, but in this particular case, it is especially
important to note that it really needs to harmonize so that you
are not creating a new barrier to information flow that really
matters for a beating heart, an insulin pump, things that are
maybe tacked on through an app or something that helps support
that, that may not be within the purview of a covered entity
and therefore a business associate relationship. It has got to
harmonize. You do not want to----
Mr. Wolf. Terribly close to the Food Drug Administration
(FDA)----
Ms. Grande. Yes. Then you have got the FDA is really
starting to look at some of this now too. Right.
Mr. Culbertson. Could I just add on that one complication
here is that data that may exist within the app that is not
covered under the covered entity, once it touches data that
came from that covered entity, then falls under that purview. I
think that is a lot--that is a nuance that a lot of app
providers do not really take into consideration.
Mr. Sulayman. If I could just take 20 seconds to echo the
comments that both you and the chairwoman made earlier, HIPAA
was created in an era when it was paper records, when analyzing
data sets was extremely difficult, when my Mac LC-3 with 80
megabytes was really impressive. It really has not taken into--
it was not created and did not take into account the
environment that we are in now. The harmonization of HIPAA and
not blocking the flow of information, and allowing all of the
good things that can happen with the analysis of big data sets
and artificial intelligence and machine learning to health care
issues is very important. We also need to remember that this
was created 23 years ago in an entirely different world that
was not foreseen at the time. Amazon was still just a
bookseller that everybody thought was going to fail.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Banks. Thank you. I yield back.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. We are now going to adjourn. I wanted
to thank all of the panelists for being here. Thank you,
ranking member. What do I have to say here? Here is my
statement. Hold on. There is something I need to say.
First of all, thank you at the VA for sticking around for
this testimony, and I certainly think there is space for us to
continue to look at this issue, especially as technology is
accelerating and making sure that we are looking out for
innovation and patient results and care results, but also
taking into effect protecting our veterans from what could
potentially long down the road be used for workforce
discrimination, all sorts of things that could happen that
would have incredibly negative impact, not just on the health
care of our veterans, but on their entire life and employment,
et cetera.
I hope that this will be an ongoing conversation as this
subcommittee continues oversight of the VA's innovation or
technology modernization efforts.
All members will have 5 legislative days to revise and
extend their remarks and include extraneous material. This
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Paul Cunningham

Good morning Madam Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about the Department of Veterans Affairs'
(VA) mission to secure and protect the personal and sensitive
information of our Nation's Veterans. I am Paul Cunningham, the Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Information Security, Chief Information
Security Officer (CISO) and Chief Privacy Officer. I am accompanied by
Martha Orr, Deputy Chief Information Officer, Office of Quality,
Performance, and Risk (QPR) within the Office of Information and
Technology, and LaShaunne David, Director of VA Privacy Service within
the Office of Information and Technology.
I want to thank Congress, and especially this Subcommittee, for its
support of VA's work to ensure Veterans' privacy. Because of your
steadfast cooperation, Veterans can continue to trust that their
information is safe and secure. As the Chief Privacy Officer, I lead
the VA's privacy program that protects Veterans' personal information.
This aspect of VA's mission is personal to me. As a Veteran of the U.S.
Navy, I fully share the concerns of my fellow Veterans who receive VA
benefits, care, and services. For this reason, I am personally
committed to ensuring Veterans' information is protected from
exploitation and is handled with care.

Introduction

VA Secretary Robert Wilkie has pushed forward a Department-wide
modernization strategy to transform the Veteran experience, including
increased access to services and information and interoperability with
the Department of Defense (DoD). To achieve this, VA must extend its
digital footprint, introduce new technologies, and increase data
sharing. However, such efforts bring new privacy and security
considerations. VA understands that with IT modernization must come
modernized privacy and security policies. VA's Assistant Secretary for
Information and Technology and Chief Information Officer (CIO), Mr.
James Gfrerer, and OIT are responsible for striking this balance among
information technology (IT) modernization, IT operations, and privacy
and security. Specifically, OIT's Office of Information Security (OIS)
manages security and privacy policy and related activities Department-
wide, while OIT's QPR division manages the VA Records Management
program, which provides oversight of VA's compliance with those
policies.
VA's mission is to provide Veterans the care, benefits, and
exceptional service they have earned. In the course of that mission,
Veterans voluntarily share their personal information with the
Department. This information may include personally identifiable
information (PII) such as an address or Social Security Number or
protected health information (PHI) such as data captured during health
care visits as well as PHI and PII information collected as part of
their application benefits. Veterans may also provide information about
their families or caregivers. An important part of VA's mission is to
ensure we are good stewards of Veteran data.
VA has a robust set of policies and regulations governing privacy,
access control, data and records management, and data sharing. It
employs a rigorous framework of clauses and agreements that enforce
these policies within VA and with our partners. VA also boasts strong
incident response protocols to address any violation of these policies.
In general, VA has policies and Business Associate Agreements that
govern its activity or relationship with partners; conducts activities
to enforce the policies; and imposes consequences for any violation of
policy or contract agreement. With this strategy, VA effectively
ensures the privacy of Veterans and the security of their personal
information.
VA and many similar large organizations face challenges. As the
Department moves to adopt and implement new technologies, its privacy
and security policies and practices must keep pace and change
accordingly. Emerging issues in technology require that VA continually
emphasize the importance of privacy for our Veterans, the Department,
and our Federal and commercial partners. As the Department rises to
meet these challenges, VA remains a vigilant protector of Veterans'
information.

Privacy Policy and Compliance

As part of VA's efforts to create a more seamless experience for
Veterans, VA has increased ease of access to information on such sites
as VA.gov. VA does not solicit personal information and only asks
Veterans for information necessary to provide care or services. VA
directly communicates to Veterans about the PII it collects and how
that information will be used. The Department's policy regarding the
privacy and security protection of Veteran data is accessible to
Veterans on VA.gov and includes information about how VA collects,
stores, uses, and discloses Veterans' information. It also details
Veterans' legal rights and information about how VA complies with
Federal regulations and user agreements. Like all Federal agencies, VA
must comply with the Privacy Act, which provides protections for
Veterans' personal information.
An example of proactive and tailored implementation of privacy
policy is VA's Webpage privacy. VA maintains a general Webpage privacy
policy, known as the ``General Policy,'' that applies to all VA.gov
Webpages. Some pages have additional guidance, called ``Limited Privacy
Policies,'' which are compatible with the General Policy. VA's Websites
generally do not require registration or request personal information,
but some portals require Veterans to input PII to register for access.
When Veterans do provide information, VA will not disclose that
information to outside parties except at the request of the Veteran or
as authorized by law. Additionally, VA.gov will never sell or rent
personal information to outside parties. Violation of any part of this
policy within the Department would result in corrective actions
including possible dismissal and could result in a criminal charge
against the offending employee or contractor. These policies ensure
that Veterans' digital experience remains as secure and confidential as
a visit with their care provider.
VA also has a review process in place to ensure that
Administrations and staff offices integrate privacy compliance into
their development and use of IT systems. The VA Privacy Service
implemented the Privacy Threshold Analysis (PTA), a tool to help
identify potential privacy issues within each new IT system or project.
In certain cases, VA staff may be required to complete a Privacy Impact
Assessment, which helps Veterans understand what information VA is
collecting and how the information will be used and stored. This
process ensures that system owners and privacy officers work in tandem
so that any new IT system or project addresses all privacy concerns for
the Veteran. As VA modernizes old systems and develops new systems,
this specific review process establishes a Department-wide
consideration of privacy.

Access Control

VA has policies and practices to ensure that access to Veterans'
information is strictly controlled. VA implements a role-based access
control system, which means that the Department grants access only to
those employees or contractors with an official need to know to perform
essential job duties or health care functions. Often, VA must allow
contractors or other third parties to access Veteran information in
order to provide care or services; in these cases, the party enters
into a clear, comprehensive, and strict agreement with VA about how it
may or may not use that information. System owners under each of VA's
Administrations must determine the level of access control to implement
for the system containing VA data. Systems are not authorized to
operate until a designated authorizing official reviews and determines
the control configuration is acceptable. To maintain access to
sensitive information, non-Department entities must protect VA data
from access by any other outside party.
To enforce these policies and use agreements, system owners conduct
regular audits for compliance with the Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA) and routine checks to ensure the system is
compliant. Additionally, audit logs contain information about who
accesses the system, when the system was accessed, and what data were
accessed.
Should data ever be improperly accessed, VA will act to restrict
access to the system and initiate an incident review process to
determine what happened. When the improper access was a result of human
error or improper behavior, VA will take corrective actions which could
range from remedial training to revocation of access. VA requires that
all personnel including contractors undergo mandatory privacy and
security awareness training and sign a National or Contractor Rules of
Behavior agreement. The Department takes appropriate steps to enforce
these agreements.

Data and Records Management

VA's Records Management policy governs the storage, transfer, and
destruction of sensitive data within the Department. Sensitive
information may only be stored on and transferred between approved
systems or repositories or those which are governed by the appropriate
access controls. Contractors and other third parties must also comply
with VA requirements regarding media sanitization, and destruction must
often be supervised by a Federal employee. From collection to
destruction, Veterans' information is handled with the greatest
possible care.
VA's QPR Enterprise Records Service oversees activities related to
the creation, maintenance, and use of records and ensures compliance
with National Archives and Records Administration VA Records Management
policy and Federal regulations that allow the release of limited
Veteran information under the Release of Names and Addresses (RONA)
program. When required by law, VA also provides information to the
Veteran and the public in responding to requests submitted under the
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). Protecting Veteran data during this
release is an extremely high priority. VA's OIS Privacy Service
oversees activities related to safeguarding the PII and PHI of Veterans
and employees. VA OIS Privacy Service's duties include:

conducting privacy risk assessments and ongoing
compliance monitoring of VA systems;

overseeing information storage and VA's system of
records;

tracking access to PHI; and

delivering privacy training, orientation, and ongoing
awareness campaigns.

Should the VA OIS Privacy Service identify issues or receive
complaints in the course of its oversight and monitoring, it will
investigate and take corrective actions to enforce the Department's
privacy policies in coordination with similar VA stakeholders and, when
necessary, legal counsel.
QPR's Privacy and Records Assessment Division (PRAD) and its
Administration partners perform onsite assessments on privacy and
records management compliance at VA facilities and staff offices.
Assessment findings that cannot be remediated onsite are reported to
facility leadership for action. Issues that are not corrected as part
of this ongoing continuous monitoring effort are further elevated to
senior leadership as potential risk issues that could impact overall
compliance. QPR's Risk Management Division will assign risk analysts to
make determinations on the level of risk and determine overall required
remediation actions.

Data Sharing and Portability

VA closely safeguards Veterans' information, but often must share
data with partners to provide health care and exceptional service to
Veterans. In general, VA does not share Veterans' information with non-
Department entities, except when sharing is necessary to provide care
or services to the Veteran or in accordance with routine uses as
described in applicable system of records notices. In these cases, VA
agrees with its partners about acceptable use of VA's systems and any
Veteran information contained in those systems. That contract or
agreement contains VA's requirements related to data protection and
media sanitization, which the partner must meet to access Veterans'
information. Once granted access to VA and/or Veteran information, it
must protect that information as closely as VA does. These requirements
are in place to ensure that Veterans' personal information is guarded
just as closely, even when shared.

Conclusion

VA continues to improve the Veteran experience by consolidating
health and benefits information in convenient digital platforms and
increasing Veterans' access to their health records and data. However,
VA understands that accessibility and sharing must not come at the
expense of safety, security, and confidentiality. Additionally,
emerging challenges in technology call for increased attention to data
protection and privacy.
In response to these challenges, VA maintains a comprehensive
security and privacy program. The Department strives to achieve the
highest standards for safeguarding the sensitive information of our
Nation's Veterans. We comply with Federal regulations, maintain an
organizational structure focused on data protection and records
management, and facilitate ongoing privacy assessments, reviews, and
monitoring based on strict access controls.
Madam Chair, Ranking Member, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank
you again for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Department
about the privacy safeguards we employ on behalf of the Veterans we
serve and the exceptional service we strive to provide in the process.
______

Prepared Statement of Nick Culbertson

Good morning, my name is Nicholas Culbertson and I'm the CEO of
Protenus. I bring testimony today to the Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Subcommittee on Technology Modernization with three different
perspectives: that of a former non-commissioned officer of the US Army,
that of a patient treated by Veteran Affairs, and that of a former
medical student turned CEO of a healthcare compliance analytics and
health data privacy firm called Protenus.
In these roles, particularly in my current one, I have learned that
health data privacy and security requirements are in constant
juxtaposition of the need for health data sharing, interoperability,
and innovation. On one hand, we need to make health data accessible to
help improve direct patient care delivery speed and effectiveness as
well as spur novel innovations, further accelerating the quality and
capabilities of our healthcare industry. On the other hand, the more
accessible health data becomes, the larger the threat surface becomes,
exposing health data to privacy and security breaches, as well as
misuse of data and fraud.
The tension between protecting health data and sharing health data
is not something that should be addressed lightly. We need to share
data and we need to protect it. Any standard that tips favor in one
direction will either stifle innovation or compromise the integrity of
arguably one of the most valuable types of data in the world. I want to
thank the Subcommittee for its efforts to consider setting a higher
standard for health data privacy while modernizing VAs electronic
health record system and hearing my testimony on the topic.
In 2009, I prepped for my last deployment to Afghanistan with the
20th Special Forces Group where I served as a Special Operations Medic
and Advanced Tactical Practitioner. As an SF Medic on pre-deployment, I
was trained to use a tactical palm-pilot device and laptop system,
known as the MC-4, that was intended to capture SOAP notes and other
medical documentation on the battlefield. The intent of this program
was that medical documentation could be electronically transferred to
flight medics during a rushed MEDEVAC and that documentation would
persist in the soldier's medical record all the way from theatre to VA.
I was disappointed to learn, however, that despite the time we spent on
training, this program did not work and the notes I drafted never left
the expensive device I carried in theatre. Instead, I had to re-draft
documentation that was filed manually and, hopefully, not lost during a
soldier's trip through recovery.
As a veteran, I experienced the challenges associated with health
data lost due to a lack of interoperability between the DoD and VA.
After I left the military, I sought physical therapy from VA to
continue treatment on my wrist that I fractured on my last deployment.
Despite being certain of my broken wrist diagnosis, having seen the
Xrays of the fracture myself, my VA physician told me that my wrist was
never broken because there was no documentation for it and no copy of
the Xray image in my file. As a result, I had to seek physical therapy
through private insurance.
As a civilian, I have seen how the digitization of medical records
has greatly accelerated patient care and innovation. While in medical
school at Johns Hopkins University, I was fortunate to be able to
participate in research using electronic medical records during Hopkins
transition from multiple electronic health record systems to one
central system that currently spans the entire enterprise. While this
upgrade made it easier to share health information, the magnitude of
sharing is quite expansive. Not only do immediate care team members
have access to a patient's record, but also any workforce member across
the enterprise can now access any patient's record. Partner, affiliate,
other business associates can also access patient data through health
exchanges or other data-sharing programs. Both this increase in
exposure and Hopkins's goal of being an innovation hub for health data
allowed the opportunity to launch the startup that I now run.
At Protenus, we've developed artificial intelligence that
proactively audits how every end-user accesses and uses electronic
health information to ensure health systems are compliant with
regulations designed to protect patient privacy. With our technology,
we've seen first-hand how access to health data can be abused, causing
harm to the health system and patients alike. And we've also seen how
access to health data, when governed correctly, can spur amazing
innovations that ultimately help improve patient care overall.
I've seen, first-hand, the limitations and risks associated with
antiquated health technology systems. I've also seen how using
technology in healthcare can create a slew of privacy and security
challenges. So, privacy or innovation? The answer is both. We must find
a way to promote innovation through accessibility and sharing. But we
also must ensure that we do everything we can to protect health data
from falling into the wrong hands. This is especially true of our
veterans who deserve the best we can offer. The best we can offer
combines both innovation and privacy.
This is an opportunity for VA to set a higher standard. As
technology continues to improve and create better access, so too must
our standards for security and privacy continue to meet that standard,
as well.
______

Prepared Statement of Tina Olson Grande

Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and Members of the House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Technology and
Modernization (Subcommittee), thank you for the opportunity to testify
today.
My name is Tina Grande. I am Executive Vice President of Policy of
the Healthcare Leadership Council (HLC) and Chair of the
Confidentiality Coalition (Coalition).
HLC is a coalition of chief executives representing all disciplines
within American healthcare, including hospitals, academic health
centers, health plans, pharmaceutical companies, medical device
manufacturers, laboratories, biotech firms, health product
distributors, post-acute care providers, home care providers, and
information technology companies. It is the exclusive forum for the
Nation's healthcare leaders to jointly develop policies, plans, and
programs to achieve their vision of a 21st century healthcare system
that makes affordable high-quality care accessible to all Americans.
The Confidentiality Coalition, founded to advance effective patient
confidentiality protections, is composed of a broad group of hospitals,
medical teaching colleges, health plans, pharmaceutical companies,
medical device manufacturers, vendors of electronic health records,
biotech firms, employers, health product distributors, pharmacies,
pharmacy benefit managers, health information and research
organizations, patient groups, and others. The Coalition's mission is
to advocate for policies and practices that safeguard the privacy of
patients and healthcare consumers while, at the same time, enabling the
essential flow of patient information that is critical to the timely
and effective delivery of healthcare, improvements in quality and
safety, and the development of new lifesaving and life-enhancing
medical interventions. I have attached to my testimony information
about the Coalition, HLC and the membership of each.
Through the breadth and diversity of our membership, HLC and the
Coalition are able to provide a broad-based and nuanced perspective on
any legislation or regulation affecting the privacy and security of
health consumers. We work closely with key legislators and regulators
to help strike the right balance between protecting privacy and
allowing the appropriate sharing of health information to ensure safe,
high-quality, and coordinated healthcare.
We understand that the Subcommittee is examining how the Department
of Veterans Affairs (VA) manages veteran's data, including
interoperability, privacy and security issues, in light of the
challenges posed by changes in technology and the increasing
monetization of data.
This examination is especially timely as new technologies are being
marketed every day that allow for not only the generation of new data
not previously available, but the ability to transmit and share data
more easily, and to use it for purposes as varied as targeted
advertising to developing artificial intelligence (AI) tools for the
early detection of cancer and other debilitating diseases. For every
promising health information technological development there is the
risk of its misuse, and as the value of data increases, so does the
incentive to misappropriate it. The more consumers are able to control
and direct the sharing of their health data, the greater the likelihood
of the data finding its way into the hands of third parties not
committed or bound to protect it.
The Coalition's members having been grappling with these same
challenges as they seek to use data to improve healthcare outcomes,
quality and efficiencies, and to facilitate data sharing among
patients, healthcare providers and other healthcare organization.
Congress too, through the 21st Century Cures Act, has sought to address
some of these challenges by directing the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS) to implement regulations to advance
interoperability, support patient access to their electronic health
records, and eliminate information blocking.
While these steps are laudable and essential, there remains the
glaring oddity in our current health data regulatory scheme that
certain health data is subject to robust Federal privacy protections
while other health data is not. As long as this disparate treatment
exists, the challenges faced by an organization such as the VA to
manage health data in a way that harnesses new technological
innovations while maintaining the privacy and security of all this data
will remain formidable, if not insurmountable.
My testimony, therefore, focuses on how this regulatory gap should
be addressed, and the principles that we believe the Subcommittee and
others in Congress should consider in seeking to ensure that all
consumer health data is appropriately protected while at the same time
being available as seamlessly as possible for necessary healthcare
functions and activities.
Health data that is governed by the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA), including data held by VA covered
entities, is protected by a framework that has for over 20 years
provided individuals with strong privacy rights and protections.
HIPAA's well-established rules and guidance, together with its robust
and consistent enforcement by HHS, has made it a trusted and accepted
national standard for the protection of personal health information. It
has also provided HIPAA covered entities and their business associates
with a clearly delineated framework and parameters within which to
operate. Therefore, any approach to health data privacy should preserve
the existing HIPAA framework, and new legislation should apply only to
health data not governed by HIPAA.
We support the development of new health information technologies,
whether at the consumer level in the form of mobile health apps and
wearable devices, or at the enterprise level, such as sophisticated new
tools that aggregate and analyze vast quantities of data that can
transform healthcare. These new innovations in health information
technology are not only empowering consumers to be more engaged in
managing their health outside of traditional healthcare settings, but
are enabling healthcare organizations to develop new treatments and
cures that will deliver enormous benefits to patients and greatly
improve our healthcare system.
These innovations have also resulted in more and more health data
falling outside the protections of HIPAA. This will be the case when
the technology or services are not offered by or on behalf of a HIPAA
covered entity, but rather, by developers or technology companies
directly to the consumer. For example, a consumer may download a third
party app to their smartphone that tracks diet, exercise and weight,
and uses the app to send a summary report to their doctor before their
next appointment. As long as the doctor did not hire the app developer
to provide its services to the doctor's patients, the data in the app
is not protected by HIPAA, even if the app is recommended by the
patient's doctor.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See The Department of Health and Human Services Office of Civil
Rights Guidance documents, Health App Use Scenarios & HIPPA. February
2016 (``Developer is not creating, receiving, maintaining or
transmitting protected health information (PHI) on behalf of a covered
entity or another business associate. The doctor's recommendation
implies her trust in the app, but there is no indication that the
doctor hired the app developer to provide services to patients
involving the handling of PHI. The consumer's use of an app to transmit
data to a covered entity does not by itself make the app developer a
[business associate] of the covered entity.'')
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, consumers may not fully appreciate which of their health
data is collected by an entity subject to HIPAA, and so protected by
HIPAA, and which is not. To the extent personal health information is
not already covered by HIPAA (``non-HIPAA health data''), privacy and
security rules comparable to HIPAA should apply to it. This is not only
vital to maintain consumer trust, but also necessary to honor the
rightful expectations of all consumers that their health information,
among the most sensitive of personal information, is appropriately
safeguarded, and that they may exercise the same types of privacy
rights with respect to it as they enjoy with respect to data covered by
HIPAA. As the Subcommittee continues to assess the management of
veterans' health data, we are pleased to share the Confidentiality
Coalition's ``Beyond HIPAA'' Privacy Principles that outline our views
on the protection of non-HIPAA health data. A copy of these principles
is attached to my testimony.
The Coalition believes that any Federal legislation to protect non-
HIPAA health data should do so in a manner that harmonizes with the
existing HIPAA framework. This includes HIPAA's implied consent for the
use and disclosure of health information for treatment purposes, and
minimum necessary information for payment and health care operation
purposes. It also includes the requirement to obtain an individual's
written authorization to use or disclose their protected health
information (PHI) for marketing purposes or to sell their PHI. HIPAA
authorizations put individuals on notice that, once disclosed, their
data may no longer be protected by HIPAA. They also require HIPAA
covered entities to be transparent and disclose if their marketing
communications are funded by the entity whose product or services are
being marketed. In addition, covered entities are required to provide
individuals with a notice of privacy practices that describes the
entity's privacy practices, the purposes for which it uses and
discloses PHI, and the individual's privacy rights and how to exercise
those rights. This transparency is an important protection that is
particularly relevant as businesses seek to monetize health data.
At the same time, the HIPAA framework recognizes that health
information is not a commodity, the flow of which is determined by the
highest bidder. Great care was taken when establishing the HIPAA
framework to balance various competing interests--the privacy rights of
the individual, the public interest served, the need for information to
be used for essential health activities consistent with consumer
expectations, and the burden on covered entities - and HHS repeatedly
cited this balancing approach when it first issued its Privacy Rule \2\
and in subsequent modifications to it. This same approach should be
taken in addressing non-HIPAA health data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See, for example, 65 Fed. Reg. 82462 (December 28, 2000) at
82464 (``The rule seeks to balance the needs of the individual with the
needs of the society''); 82468 (``The task of society and its
government is to create a balance in which the individual's needs and
rights are balanced against the needs and rights of society as a
whole''); 82471(``Neither privacy, nor the important social goals
described by the commenters, are absolutes. In this regulation, we are
asking health providers and institutions to add privacy into the
balance, and we are asking individuals to add social goals into the
balance''); and 82472(`` The need to balance these competing
interests--the necessity of protecting privacy and the public interest
in using identifiable health information for vital public and private
purposes--in a way that is also workable for the varied stakeholders
causes much of the complexity in the rule'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Harmonization, including alignment with HIPAA concepts, definitions
and standards, is critical to provide consumers with the assurance of
consistent protection of all their health information, and to ensure
the appropriate exchange of health information by health organizations,
whether covered by HIPAA or not, is not impeded. For example, even as
seemingly technical an issue as the definition of de-identified data
could have potentially major ramifications if the HIPAA definition is
not used. This is because data that is considered de-identified under
HIPAA may not be considered de-identified under a new law and so
potentially not covered by it. The unintended consequence of this is
that it could seriously and adversely impact the ability of healthcare
organizations to aggregate and share health data for important public
policy purposes such as developing evidence-based standards, quality
metrics and standards, medical research, and management of healthcare
delivery, to name only a few.
The same can be said for other HIPAA definitions and concepts,
including permissible uses and disclosures without explicit
authorization, the requirement to be transparent about uses and
disclosures in the form of a notice of privacy practices, and the right
of individuals to access and receive portable copies of their
electronic health records, among other things. Aligning any new
legislation to govern non-HIPAA health data with the HIPAA definitions
and requirements will also provide consumers with a more coherent and
seamless privacy framework, allowing them to more easily understand how
their health data is protected and exercise their privacy rights.
Equally important, security safeguards should be commensurate with
the safeguards required by the HIPAA privacy and security standards.
These require reasonable and appropriate administrative, technical, and
physical safeguards to protect the confidentiality of all protected
health information, and the integrity and availability of electronic
health information. Like the HIPAA Security Rule, any security standard
should be technology neutral, scalable, and allow for a flexible risk-
based approach. Robust security requirements for non-HIPAA health data
are critical not only for large and sophisticated businesses that
collect vast amounts of data, but also for smaller companies and
startups developing new products and services, which should be
incorporating security-by-design practices in their product development
process. Whether their personal health data is covered by HIPAA or not,
consumers should know that those to whom they entrust this data will
keep it secure in accordance with well-vetted and accepted national
security standards.
The Coalition strongly supports efforts to increase
interoperability to facilitate the appropriate sharing of health data
among healthcare organizations, as well as the access and availability
of electronic health records to consumers themselves. This is another
reason to ensure harmonization between laws governing PHI and non-HIPAA
health data and to have national standards for health information
privacy and security. The great promise of interoperability - using
technology to engage patients, deliver meaningful insights to help in
the identification and diagnosis of disease, and guide treatment
decisions--depends on the ability to appropriately share health data
among HIPAA covered entities and others for these purposes. This
promise cannot come to fruition if these organizations are subject to,
and constrained by, different standards that do not align or,
potentially even conflict, with one another. This has proven to be a
challenge for the appropriate sharing of patient substance use disorder
information. The investment of effort at the outset when crafting
legislation so as to avoid this type of misalignment will yield
significant dividends in the form of improved healthcare outcomes and
quality of care, not to mention a more seamless and workable privacy
framework for veterans, healthcare organizations and service providers.
This is particularly pertinent today as the Administration seeks to
execute on the requirements of the 21st Century Cures Act to improve
health information interoperability with the goal of promoting greater
data sharing among patients, healthcare providers, payers, researchers,
and other healthcare entities. As the Office of the National
Coordinator of Health Information Technology stated in its recently
released draft 2020-2025 Federal Health IT Strategic Plan:

[N]ew technologies, along with existing claims and EHR data, mean
that the volume of health and health-related data being generated and
available for improving care quality has never been greater.
Collecting, organizing, analyzing, interpreting, and applying this
``big data'' to clinical decisionmaking is both a challenge and a
significant opportunity.\3\

\3\ See The Department of Health and Human Services Office of the
National Coordinator of Health Information Technology document, 2020-
2025 Federal Health IT Strategic Plan. January 2020
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the same reasons, as healthcare organizations make the
transition to a nationwide, interoperable system of electronic health
information, we believe it is essential to replace the current mosaic
of sometimes conflicting State privacy laws, rules, and guidelines with
strong, comprehensive national standards.
In closing, the HLC and Coalition commend the Subcommittee for
seeking to address the challenges faced by the VA in managing veterans'
health data in a world where the value of this data has never been
greater, the risks posed to it more serious, or the opportunities for
its beneficial use more abundant. We believe a balanced approach,
compatible with and modeled upon the existing HIPAA framework, and that
provides protections for non-HIPAA health data similar to that provided
for PHI under HIPAA, is the best way to address these challenges and
provide a comprehensive, consistent and transparent health information
privacy framework for the health data of those in service and beyond.
Attachments

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Prepared Statement of Ramsey Sulayman

Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and members of the
subcommittee, on behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign
Wars of the United States (VFW) and its Auxiliary, thank you for the
opportunity to address the issues of data privacy and portability and
our members' expectations of the Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA)
responsibilities to protection their privacy.
As the Department of Defense (DOD) and VA move toward a joint
electronic health care record (EHR), veterans' information will become
more accessible for VA and DOD providers and their community partners.
This is a good thing. The concentration of personal data in a joint
electronic health care record also makes the record more desirable for
nefarious actors from foreign governments, non-State actors, and
criminals acting as part of organized crime groups or individually. In
2018, the White House Council of Economic Advisers estimated that
cybercrime cost the United States' economy between $57-109 billion. A
person's health record contains a vast amount of personally
identifiable information that can be used for ill.
While the loss or compromise of veterans' health care data
certainly comes with an economic cost, it also carries the non-
quantifiable costs in the loss of dignity, trust, and confidence. In
creating an EHR that can communicate and easily exchange data with
other government agencies, as well as commercial health care systems,
insurers, and private providers, VA must ensure that veterans'
information remains secure when it leaves the VA ecosystem. VA must
also ensure that control of data remains with VA and the veteran, and
define the expectations for data retention and control with community
partners. VA is responsible for ensuring that sufficient protocols are
in place to guard against an unthinkable trusted insider intrusion or
even simple unauthorized access.
The VFW is not opposed to commercial off-the-shelf solutions; there
is no need for VA to reinvent the wheel when it comes to technological
solutions. Creating information technology (IT) solutions is not the
VA's core strength. Therefore, the strongest possible privacy
protections from third-party vendors must be in place. Very specific
policies and procedures must be in place that address data collection,
data use, transfer of information, and information retention, in
particular through End User License Agreements (EULA). EULA are the
terms of service that must be accepted, often unilaterally, for a
veteran to use an app or website. EULAs generally incorporate a privacy
policy that specifies the four criteria above. As mentioned, EULAs are
often ``take it or leave it'' terms. The difference between the effects
of a EULA on a commercial site and a EULA on a VA site is that veterans
who opt to ``leave it,'' risk losing access to benefits and services
earned through service. VA has a monopoly on administration of
veterans' health care and benefits. Whereas monopolies in the
commercial market are largely outlawed, so consumers are able to seek
service from a competitor if they ``leave it'' in the private sector.
Beginning with EULAs, VA must ensure that partners collect the
minimum amount of information, have the shortest retention time
possible, and provide clear opt-in criteria. Opt-in was not a slip of
the tongue. Veterans and service members should have to opt-in to data
collection rather than opt-out; the strictest criteria and the most
minimal collection should be the standard. We will address health care
data sharing, which the VFW supports as an opt-out, later in this
testimony. Data collection must be limited to only necessary and
pertinent data. Tracking a veteran's data from usage of specific sites
is not necessary to the conduct of that veteran or service member's
business with VA or DOD.
As an example, VA is in the process of consolidating all its
veteran facing websites into its updated VA.gov portal. To access their
VA.gov portal, veterans are prompted to sign up with ID.me, without a
reliable alternative. The use of the ID.me login credentials places
veterans in the unique position of having to accept the terms of
service and privacy policy in the EULA in order to log on and access VA
benefits earned through service. The ID.me process is much easier and
reliable, for example, than acquiring a DSLogon account or other VA log
on if the veteran is not enrolled in the VA health care system or with
the Veterans Benefits Administration, or is no longer active in the
Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS) or the Defense
Financial and Accounting Service (DFAS). While the ID.me EULA and
privacy policy specifically states that no veteran information will be
sold by ID.me, it also specifically states that data may be transferred
to partner websites that have a different privacy policy over which
ID.me has no control. In other words, to use ID.me services, a
veteran's information may be transferred to a trusted ID.me partner.
However, the EULA does not guarantee ID.me's partners will not sell or
utilize that data for a commercial purpose, including aggregating it
with other sources that may personally identify the veteran.
The security of veterans' health information is of paramount
importance. As health care technology advances and more details become
available through diagnostic and genetic testing, that information will
become more concentrated in locations like the EHR. The VFW urges VA to
place the highest priority on security and utilizing the strongest
possible technological solutions to safeguard veterans' health data.
Project Nightingale, a joint commercial venture between Google and
Ascension Health, the Nation's second-largest health care system,
underscores some of these issues surrounding data collection and
utilization. Google partnered with Ascension to digitize the health
records of Ascension's patients and then apply tools such as artificial
intelligence (AI) to look for patterns. While some of these patterns
related to early prediction of disease or better treatments for
existing conditions, one of the goals of the program was also to see
where more revenue could be squeezed out of care. While the attempt to
use health care data to generate new revenue streams is of concern, the
larger philosophical concern is that patients' private health care data
may migrate to Google without the prior consent of patients. Ascension
could provide these records because, under the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPPA), Google is a
business associate of Ascension helping Ascension execute
administrative functions necessary to the provision of health care. I
use Ascension as an example because Ascension very actively marketed
its services to veterans participating in the VA Veterans Choice
Program. Ascension is a fine health care system noted for its quality
of care, but what is important for VA and veterans is that a veteran
who uses Ascension (or any other health care system that has external
partners with big data programs) does not automatically have his or her
health care information vacuumed into a program to which he or she did
not consent by virtue of existing business partners or covered entity
relationships between health care providers, systems, or insurers and
data focused enterprises.
Provider records, however, is not the only kind of health care
information that people generate. User-generated data, such as that
from wearable devices like FitBit, are not covered by HIPAA. I pick on
FitBit versus Apple Health or Huawei Health because FitBit is owned by
Google. One can see that the acquisition of health care data from
HIPAA-protected sources and unprotected user generated data is a major
effort for Google. Google is not alone, though. Apple, Amazon,
Facebook, and Microsoft are but a few of the major established
information technology players also working on cornering the big data
market in health care. The combination of data from FitBit users whose
data is also contained in Project Nightingale leads to questions about
what that data and its commercialization will lead to.
Smaller players like Xealth are also in the market and working on
similar products and initiatives. Xealth, which has attracted investors
that include the Cleveland clinic, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Atrium Health, and Amazon, has developed a product where health
care providers can check off products and services from a digital
shopping list, and offer or prescribe them to patients as part of the
visit or consultation. Patients can then use the recommendations from
Xealth to order products, services, and prescriptions directly from
vendors, including Amazon. Even excluding the sharing or leakage of
health data, purchasing patterns of consumer goods can lead to
predictions about health conditions. For example, the purchase of
compression socks, syringes, and testing strips can be analyzed to
determine that a consumer suffers from diabetes - all from non-HIPAA
protected information.
Genetic information adds to the mix and can present daunting
questions of privacy. While major commercial providers of DNA testing
for purposes of determining ancestry and genealogy are pretty good
about requiring opt-in for certain information sharing, and informed
consent for research purposes, they also note that they are not
required to comply with HIPAA and that they may store and share
information, including genetic information, with their service or
business partners. As with EULAs, these partners may have different
privacy policies, and one has to review all the privacy policies of all
partners. Other sites, for instance GEDmatch, make all genetic
information submitted publicly available. It is estimated that 60
percent of Americans who are of Northern European descent can be
identified through data in public data bases, with that figure expected
to rise to 90 percent in the next few years.
How does this affect veterans? VA's Million Veteran Program (MVP)
immediately comes to mind. VA is merging the health care and genetic
data of veterans who opt-in in a landmark study that has revolutionary
implications for the provision of health care. However, little is
discussed about data security, and what is available is not in plain
language. However, VA does note that ``There could be a slight risk of
a breach of confidentiality, and if information about you does leak
out, the VA will not be able to guarantee that it will be protected.''
VA must do what it takes to ensure a breach does not occur. The VFW
also urges VA to be more transparent about the policies and procedures
in place to assure data safety, and provide prominent links to the full
policies, as well as plain language translations.
While all this when placed in a certain context may be Orwellian,
we must not see a conspiracy around every corner. Health care data
sharing can yield immense benefits. As much as we believe that medicine
is science, it is also art and relies heavily on providers' experience
and judgment. At a certain point, the symptoms of a common cold can
look an awful lot like those of a life-threatening disease, or a major
medical event such as an aneurysm, heart attack, or stroke. Growing up
in a medical family, I have heard enough anecdotes about medical
miracles and missed diagnoses that I could churn out scripts for
tearjerkers on the Hallmark Channel indefinitely into the future.
Often, these missed moments or life-saving revelations were the result
of experience and noticing details that may have been overlooked, or
were not in a provider's experience base. Technology can help solve
this.
A doctor can have a patient's entire medical history at hand
without relying on the limitations of a patient's memory or self-
reporting. The availability of the complete medical record can allow
the doctor to make a more informed diagnosis. That diagnosis can be
checked by an impartial AI system that might see patterns missed in the
rush of an emergency room visit on a busy day. User-generated
information from health trackers can objectively report a patient's
activity levels, sleep, and other vitals without having to rely on
memory and self-reporting from patients who may be in crisis or less
than one hundred percent. Amalgamated, de-identified patient data can
be searched, and research populations identified, with big data tools
in a fraction of the time as in the past by hand. There are benefits,
but the benefits must balance the risks, and we must look at what may
be possible in the future versus what we merely see as possible today.
The laws governing privacy rights, particularly with electronic
data, are more of a patchwork than a comprehensive whole. HIPAA was
passed in 1996, in an era before big data when records were kept
locally and on paper before today's computing power was available. For
reference, Amazon was merely an online book seller and my Apple
Macintosh LC 3 had a whopping 80 megabytes of memory. The VFW applauds
this subcommittee for looking at this issue intently and, ever so
importantly, with an eye to the effects from the perspective of
veterans. As institutions that safeguard the rights for which our
veterans fought, and as organizations that represent our veterans' best
interests, we must ensure that privacy and security, or information,
particularly health data, is paramount and that veterans remain in
control.
This concludes my statement. Thank you for your time and I look
forward to answering any questions you may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Harold F. Wolf, III

Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member Banks and Members of the
Subcommittee--thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf
of the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) on
how to safely and securely manage veterans' health data.
My name is Hal Wolf, and I am the President and Chief Executive
Officer of HIMSS. I represent more than 80,000 members globally who are
dedicated to transforming the health ecosystem through information and
technology. As a mission-driven non-profit, HIMSS offers a unique depth
and breadth of expertise in health innovation, public policy, workforce
development, research and analytics to advise global leaders,
stakeholders and influencers on best practices in health information
and technology. Headquartered in Chicago, Illinois, HIMSS serves the
global health information and technology communities with focused
operations across North America, Europe, the United Kingdom, the Middle
East and Asia Pacific.
We appreciate the Committee holding today's hearing on ``Data
Privacy and Portability at the VA: Protecting Veterans' Personal
Data.'' Today's hearing around the role of Congress and the Department
of Veterans Affairs in ensuring the confidentiality, integrity,
security, interoperability, and availability of patient data reflects a
larger conversation occurring across the healthcare ecosystem. Namely,
as the significant investment in technological advancements in
healthcare now allows us to capture and use data and the ensuing
information it provides in unprecedented ways, to realize the full
potential of that data to improve health outcomes, we must ensure the
proper processes around privacy and security are in place to protect
the patient's most sensitive data and information.
Before joining HIMSS, I served at The Chartis Group as Director;
Practice Leader of Information and Digital Health Strategy, and prior
to that I was Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of
Kaiser Permanente's The Permanente Federation. During this time, I was
responsible for the development and implementation of critical care
delivery strategies, data management and governance, population care
management environments and the implementation of unique innovations
and large-scale programs that impacted end-to-end operations. Critical
to the innovations introduced within these functions was maintaining
the security and protection of the confidential information entrusted
to us by our patients. These responsibilities require the same
vigilance in all systems undergoing strategic change.

Changes in the Digital Health Ecosystem Driving Data Availability,
Access, and Use

Our healthcare ecosystem is undergoing a profound transformation
that is increasing pressure on all stakeholders to drive innovation. A
significant piece of that change is in the digital health space,
particularly around the need to provide patients access to and use of
their data and information to derive meaningful benefits for their own
health.
As a matter of principle, HIMSS firmly believes that seamless,
secure, ubiquitous, and
nationwide data access and interoperable health information
exchange should ensure the right people have the right access to the
right health information in a usable format at the right time to
provide the optimal level of care.
However, until you take data, that is essentially ones and zeros,
categorize it, and put it into digestible pieces to create information,
we do not have the ability to use it in the way that we want. Data
alone isn't the solution - it is fundamentally useless until you turn
it into information.
For example, the health app on your smartphone takes data and turns
it into information that is then used by the individual. Subsequently,
when you do a comparative analysis, that information becomes knowledge
that can provide real health benefits to the patient and to the
ecosystem at large.
As we transition from volume to value-based care to achieve the
goals of improved care outcomes, lower cost per episode, and enhanced
delivery of care, technology-enabled data collection and interoperable
data sharing will play a vital role in supporting these efforts. Given
the large population receiving services through the Department of
Veterans Affairs healthcare system, it is not a stretch to see that VA
is facing the same external pressures to make more data available to
and for veterans and help them better manage their health.
Technology has advanced to the point that it is ubiquitous in most
healthcare interactions, and it plays such a critical role in how we
connect clinicians, patients, caregivers, and applications. Further,
based on the convenience of mobile apps and devices in other
industries, patients are growing more sophisticated in their knowledge
of the health system, and ability to understand and act upon the
information shared through these technologies. As a result, patients
are more resolute in their needs and expectations--they expect the same
level of access, connectedness and engagement with their healthcare
that they experience in other facets of their lives.
Particularly, in the last several years, we have seen an incredible
attention shift to a consumer-based approach regarding integrated care.
With greater incorporation of technology into the healthcare ecosystem,
and as more information becomes readily available and accessible, many
in the health ecosystem have been looking toward the use of data and
available information as a means to solve the multitude of problems we
have in healthcare. This data is particularly important, for instance,
when a patient goes for a second opinion.
The Federal Government, particularly the Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS), Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and
Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT, has played a vital
role in helping the healthcare ecosystem prepare for the continuing
increase in data and information access and usage. Through recent
proposed regulations that we believe will advance interoperability and
support greater patient access to data, HHS is seeking to increase
innovation and competition by giving patients and their healthcare
providers safe and secure access to health information and new tools
that will allow for more choice in care and treatment. The regulations
also propose to adopt standardized application programming interfaces
(APIs) in the healthcare industry to help allow individuals to securely
and easily access structured electronic health information (EHI) using
smartphone applications. This advancement places a strong focus on a
patient's ability to access their health information through a
provision requiring that patients can electronically access all of
their EHI at no cost.
Healthcare stakeholders should demand integration among all
interoperability approaches, entities, and trusted exchange frameworks,
and support combining administrative and clinical data to enhance
transparency and enable value-based care delivery for the public good.
Moreover, health IT systems must be designed to ensure patients and
consumers are at the center of care delivery and obtain the right
information at the right time to enable them to make informed decisions
about the delivery and coordination of their care and seamlessly
communicate with their providers.

Growing Challenges and Opportunities Around Patient's Personal
Healthcare Data

Differences and Distinctions Between Data Access, Ownership, Usage
and Stewardship

Any discussion around a patient's health data inevitably leads to
questions around who owns the data, who can access the data, what can
be done with the data once access is granted and what are the
stewardship responsibilities over the data when it is in possession of
any entity. . An obstacle we often hit is getting bogged down in
ownership - we spend time arguing over who owns the data, resulting in
an unwillingness to share. This construct does neither the patient and
caregiver nor the provider any good. It is imperative that our mindset
shifts to that which benefits patient or individual health, and that
includes sharing across multiple platforms and systems to realize the
full potential of data in improving health outcomes.
Generally speaking, data ownership refers to the entity or
individual who owns the data. For example, in the current way of
thinking, healthcare providers own the designated record set, and
health plans may own the data of its members. It is important to note
however, that data may not necessarily be in the ``possession'' of
someone/something, but it can flow through an entity, for example, like
a conduit. Possession does not imply ownership. Additionally, the
complexity of applications, such as electronic decision-support (EDS),
use not only clinical data, but also social data such as lifestyle
information to help guide individual recommendations. Those data
sources can be numerous and often involve multiple pass throughs.
Data access simply refers to being in possession of data in some
way. This might include the ability to read, edit, or copy data for a
variety of purposes. From a security standpoint, access is controlled
according to rules based on ``need to know.'' Access control is
frequently based on the role of the person requesting the data.
Thinking beyond individual access--it isn't just a person who may have
access to the data, but also an entity, such as an intelligent
artificial agent that performs tasks on behalf of a larger entity such
as a health system. And access control issues are further nuanced,
moving beyond who has the need or right to access the data to include
the more important concept of what that person or entity can do with
the data once in their possession. This idea of what can be done with
the data falls to the concept of data usage - which is where I think
the conversation should center.
Data usage is basically the rules and rights of how the data can be
appropriately stored, movement of the data, and its secondary use both
short and long term. Rules around usage have impact on many areas such
as secondary research, resale of data for commercial purposes as well
as impacts on access hierarchy as mentioned above. The goal of data
usage is to achieve the greatest possible benefit that may be realized
from the effective and appropriate access to the data, while, at the
same time, protecting the rights of the individual and originating data
entity.
Data stewardship focuses on minimizing the risk to patients and to
the organization in both the access and use of the data by providing a
secure and trackable environment. Cybersecurity is an important
component of data stewardship. Data use and stewardship falls squarely
in the realm of governance.

Personal Healthcare Data- Who has access? Who should have access?
Who shouldn't?

It is safe to say that there is nothing more personal and valuable
to an individual than their health information. When you look at the
fact that healthcare, which is the largest industry in the world from a
Gross Domestic Product standpoint, is being driven by data and the use
of information, it stands to reason that the information and data held
by this sector is a valuable asset. Data has to be protected at the
human level, and the economic level, which creates complications. In
order to ensure that both veterans and broader patient populations
receive the best possible care, providers, patients, and caregivers
must be able to access the right information at the right time to allow
for the most accurate decisions about the delivery and coordination of
care for our veterans.
There are several public policy levers in place that the Department
and the veteran community can leverage to achieve true data access and
use by this population. Alignment of data access and use paradigms
across VA as well as the broader healthcare delivery system will prove
beneficial to veterans that receive some care in VA facilities, but
also utilize community providers.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
remains an integral part of our Nation's information security and
privacy infrastructure for both veterans and the broader patient and
consumer populations. A Proposed Regulation with changes to HIPAA is
under development in the HHS Office for Civil Rights. With respect to
the public dialog on possible HIPAA changes, HIMSS has focused on
encouraging the safe portability of data. Specifically, HIMSS believes:

It is imperative that HIPAA Regulations work in concert
with the 21st Century Cures Act Information Blocking Rules

Any Changes to HIPAA Rules Should Prioritize the Needs
and Role of the Patient in Care Coordination Activities

Rule Modifications Should Ensure Alignment and Eliminate
Regulatory Gaps Between HIPAA and State Laws as well as Other Measures

HHS Must Redouble Efforts to Educate the Public and
Providers About the Scope and Reach of HIPAA

Ultimately, HIMSS would like to keep HIPAA focused on articulating
the standard ways that individuals' health information is to be used
and disclosed. Our broader perspective on interoperability remains
focused on ensuring the right people have the right access to the right
health information at the right time. While we have made great strides
over the past generation, seamless, secure, nationwide interoperable
health information exchange has continued to elude us. Ensuring that VA
continues to build on the advances undertaken by HIPAA as well as other
measures promulgated at HHS will be huge steps in the right direction
for the veteran community and could lead the larger health ecosystem.
In addition, HIMSS wants to continue working toward creating a
healthcare ecosystem that reinforces the secure access to, exchange of,
and use of electronic health information. This includes building upon
these existing protections and helping to ensure patient privacy as
well as access in a HIPAA-regulated world and for non-covered entities
under HIPAA.

Addressing Patient's Privacy and Security Concerns

We are all in agreement that patient data needs to be protected,
for both information privacy and security purposes. However, healthcare
delivery and coordination of care cannot be achieved without data
shared in an interoperable manner across various systems. Thus, a
careful balance must be made between the need to keep the data private
and secure, while remaining shareable across various environments to
help ensure that patient care is not impeded.
The HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules govern how protected health
information may be used and disclosed, as well as how it may be secured
in terms of physical, technical, and administrative safeguards to
ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information.
Good cybersecurity practices help to ensure that data will indeed be
kept confidential, have integrity, and be available on demand.
Cybersecurity, a key responsibility to data stewardship, is a
necessary predicate to data privacy, access, and usage. These elements
cannot exist were it not for cybersecurity, especially within an
electronic environment. Additionally, data should be protected, not
just to preserve data privacy, but also to protect the patient and
preserve patient safety. Recognizing the value of such data, we need to
have robust cybersecurity practices (and policies) in order to ensure
interoperability of healthcare data as well. People, processes, and
technology must work in tandem with each other.
HIMSS has long believed that maturing and advancing the state-of-
the-art for security and information privacy across the global health
sector should be supported to: (1) protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of patient data and other sensitive
information and assets of stakeholders, (2) ensure the continued and
effective delivery of patient care and coordination of care, (3)
protect patient safety and privacy, and (4) further the delivery of
safe, secure, and effective technology-enabled care-delivery across
disparate health systems.
I would like to thank Chairwoman Lee and Ranking Member Banks for
this opportunity to testify today, and all members of the Subcommittee
for prioritizing such a critical issue. The VA has no greater priority
than ensuring that our veterans receive the best possible care, and
this cannot be done without ensuring the safety and security of their
personal data and health information.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
