- NATIVE VETERANS' ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NATIVE VETERANS' ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-42

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-247             WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

JULIA BROWNLEY, California, Chairwoman

CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             NEAL P. DUNN, Florida, Ranking
MIKE LEVIN, California                   Member
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York           AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MAX ROSE, New York                       American Samoa
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           ANDY BARR, Kentucky
California                       DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2019

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Julia Brownley, Chairwoman.............................     1
Honorable Jack Bergman, Acting Ranking Member....................     2
Honorable Mark Takano, Chairman, Full Committee..................    12

WITNESSES

Andrew C. Joseph Jr., Immediate Past Member-at-large & Portland
Area Representative, National Indian Health Board (NIHB).......     3
Kevin J. Allis, CEO, National Congress of American Indians (NCAI)     5
Sonya M. Tetnowski, CEO, National Council on Urban Indian Health
(NCUIH)........................................................     7
Chief William Smith, Vice Chairperson, Alaska Native.............     8
Marilynn Malerba, Chief, Mohegan Tribe of Connecticut, Indian
Health Service Tribal Self-Governance Advisory Committee (IHS
TSGAC).........................................................    10
Dr. Kameron Matthew, Deputy Under Secretary for Health for
Community Care, Veterans' Health Administration................    24

Accompanied by:

Dr. Thomas Klobuchar, Executive Director, Office of Rural
Health, Department of Veterans Affairs

Stephanie Birdwell, Director, Office of Tribal Government
Relations
Benjamin Smith, Deputy Director for Intergovermental Affairs,
Indian Health Service..........................................    27

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements of Witness

Andrew C. Joseph Jr. Prepared Statement..........................    37
Kevin J. Allis Prepared Statement................................    43
Sonya M. Tetnowski Prepared Statement............................    47
Chief William Smith Prepared Statement...........................    49
Marilynn Malerba Prepared Statement..............................    53
Dr. Kameron Matthews Prepared Statement..........................    58
Benjamin Smith Prepared Statement................................    60

Statement For The Record

United South and Eastern Tribes, Inc.............................    65
California Rural Indian Health Board.............................    67
California Consortium for Urban Indian Health....................    69
Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians.......................    70
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe........................................    72

Additional Submissions For The Record

Treaties Submitted by Representative Gallego.....................    77
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and Indian Health Service
Memorandum of Understanding Annual Report Fiscal Year 2018.....    80
Department of Veterans Affairs Tribal Consultation Policy........    87
Memorandum of Understanding Between the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) and Indian Health Service (IHS)...................    94
Indian Health Service and Tribal Health Program Monthly Report-
June 2019......................................................   100

NATIVE VETERANS' ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 30, 2019

U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Health
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Julia Brownley
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Brownley, Lamb, Cisneros, Sablan,
Dunn, Bergman, and Steube.
Also present: Representatives Takano, Haaland, Cunningham,
Gallego, and Gianforte.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JULIA BROWNLEY, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Brownley. Good morning and welcome to the Subcommittee
on Health's hearing on Native Veterans Access to Care.
Before we begin, a little business, and I would like to
request unanimous consent for Congresswoman Haaland Congressman
Gallego to join us for today's hearing.
Without objection--oh, and Congressman Gianforte to join us
for today's hearing as well. We welcome the three Members on
the committee and three additional Members to today's
committee, and I appreciate your attendance very much.
Today is a historic day in Washington, DC. as it is the
first time in at least 30 years that either chambers' Veterans'
Affairs Committee has held a hearing solely on the health care
needs of our Native Veterans. I know Mr. Bergman had a hearing
in his district, but this is the first one in Washington, DC.
in 30 years.
American Indian and Alaska Native Peoples have served in
the United States Armed Forces since the Revolutionary War, and
served without being acknowledged as citizens until 1924.
Native People serve at consistently higher rates than any other
racial or ethnic group. The rates are even greater for Indian
and Alaska Native women, who serve as disproportionately higher
rates than Native men and non-Native women.
This hearing is different than most this committee holds as
it is an examination not only of VA and the health status of
Native Americans, but of VA as a part of a Federal Government
that has a solemn duty to uphold trust and treaty obligations
to tribal people.
In exchange for land and resources, the United States
promised members of Indian tribes safety, economic opportunity,
and health care. The Federal provisions of health care is not a
handout, it is a payment on a debt, and that debt, sadly, has
continuously been defaulted on by the United States.
It is essential that we recognize this Federal obligation
does not stop at the doors of the Indian Health Service (IHS),
it is an obligation of all parts of our Government. For that
reason, we have called this hearing to hear from tribes and
tribal organizations to learn how the VA is meeting its Federal
Trust Responsibility and where do they need to do better.
We know that while Native People serve more than anyone
else, they have the lowest health status of any other race or
ethnicity in the United States. Native Veterans are more likely
to have service-connected disabilities, experience sexual
assault and post-traumatic stress, and die by suicide.
In 2010, the VA and Indian Health Service (IHS) established
a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to improve the health
status of American Indian/Alaska Native Veterans through
coordination, improved services, and resource sharing between
VA, IHS, and federally recognized tribes.
This year, VA and IHS plan to revise the 2010 MOU. We would
like to check in on the progress made over the past 9 years;
what went well, what did not, and what is needed in the new MOU
to ensure we truly are improving the health status of American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans.
Before we move on to our first panel, I want to express to
you my great disappointment that Dr. Stone, who will be the
signatory of this new MOU, is not here today to speak to these
issues. Secretary Wilkie spoke many times this summer, with
several dozen news articles to show for it, that Native
Veterans' access to health care is one of his top priorities.
Now, while I do not doubt that, I do not doubt his
commitment of the program offices, I do not doubt that the
commitment of the program officers here today, I know that
the--I am sorry.
Now, while I do not doubt the Secretary's commitment, I am
concerned about the progress we are making in a successful
conclusion to a negotiation with the MOU.
With that, I would like to recognize Acting Ranking Member
General Bergman for 5 minutes for any opening remarks he may
wish to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JACK BERGMAN, ACTING RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Chairwoman Brownley. It is an honor
to be with you all today and filling in for Dr. Dunn, who is
the ranking member, and he and I sat down and chatted about the
importance of this hearing. As you all know, he had a conflict,
but he will be here as soon as he can.
In the meantime, it is a great, again, honor to be here in
his place to recognize the committed service of so many of our
American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans. There is perhaps no
better hearing that we could be having as we prepare to return
to our districts for the Veterans Day time period here than the
hearing we are having today.
The numbers show that there is no other ethnic group that
steps up to serve the United States in the United States Armed
Forces more than Native Americans. My district, the First
District of Michigan, is home to eight federally recognized
tribes, and their deeply embedded patriotism and commitment to
service is a credit to our community and an inspiration to all.
As we will learn this morning, Native Veterans often face
unique barriers to care and we still have a long way to go in
ensuring that they receive the care, benefits, and services
that they deserve as veterans.
I look forward to hearing about how the Department of
Veterans Affairs is working with Indian Health Service, tribal
organizations, and other important stakeholders, many of whom
are represented here today, to identify, break down, and
eliminate the barriers to success.
I am glad to hear that VA is actively working on a new
memorandum of understanding with IHS, but that MOU will only be
effective if; number one, it includes measurable metrics and
improved coordination of care, particularly where referrals to
specialty care services are concerned; number two, is developed
with a direct involvement and engagement of those will be most
impacted by it, that is, the Native American Veterans
themselves; and, three, is supported by an ongoing commitment
to cultural respect, sensitivity, and trust and relationship-
building.
I appreciate the many tribal nations and communities that
are represented here today either as witnesses or through the
statements for the record that have been provided. I am very
much looking forward to listening to your testimony today, and
I want you to know that your service has not and will never be
forgotten. Thank you for that.
With that, I yield back.
[Audio malfunction in hearing room.]
Ms. Brownley.--Andrew C. Joseph, Jr., Immediate Past
Member-at-Large and Portland Area Representative for the
National Indian Health Board. Next we have Kevin J. Allis,
Chief Executive Officer for the National Congress of American
Indians, followed by Ms. Sonya Tetnowski, Vice President of the
National Council of Urban Indian Health.
In addition, we are joined by Chief William F. Smith on
behalf of Alaska Native Health Board. Finally, Chief Marilynn
Malerba on behalf of the Indian Health Service Tribal Self-
Governance Advisory Committee.
With that, I now recognize Mr. Joseph for 5 minutes, and
welcome.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW C. JOSEPH, JR.

Mr. Joseph. Good morning, Chairman Brownley and members of
the subcommittee. On behalf of the National Indian Health
Board, thank you for the invitation to testify on health
services for Native Veterans.
[Speaking native language.] Badger is my name, I am Andy
Joseph, Jr. I am an enrolled member of the Confederate Tribes
of the Colville and I am an Army veteran. I can speak firsthand
about ongoing challenges in Native Veterans' health.
Native Veterans have served in every U.S. military conflict
of the past 200 years, yet today's hearing is the first ever on
health care access for Native Veterans. Thank you for this
step.
On behalf of the National Indian Health Board and as a
veteran, I am disappointed that Secretary Robert Wilkie and
Rear Admiral Weoki [phonetic] will not be here today. Both
Secretary Wilkie and the Rear Admiral have spoken about their
desire to better serve the health needs of Native Veterans and
we are counting on them and this Administration to Native
Veterans.
The Federal Government has a dual responsibility to Native
Veterans on one obligation because of our political status as
Native people and one because of our military service. Our
people served in the military at higher rates than any other
ethnicity in America. We continue to hold up our end of the
bargain.
There are many challenges that Native Veterans face in
receiving quality health care. Please allow me to share some
policy recommendations. All equally important, these are
discussed in detail in our written testimony.
One, tribal consultation can help remedy many issues for
Native Veterans. We invite the VA to engage in regular tribal
consultation with the Native Veterans.
Two, there are limited options within the VA for culturally
appropriate programs and services tailored for Native Veterans;
that needs to change.
Three, make advance investments directly to tribes for
Native Veterans mental health care. Native Veterans are twice
as likely as other veterans to return home with post-traumatic
stress disorder. Depression, alcohol and drug use disorders are
significantly higher among our veterans. The same is true with
suicide. These issues and transition from active service back
home needs sufficient investment.
Four, we ask the VA committee to actively support advance
appropriations for the Indian Health Service and other
programs. Our people are still suffering from the most recent
35-day government shutdown. It has been a decade since the VA
has benefited from advance appropriations, it is IHS's turn. We
ask you for your active support.
Five, Indian Health Services is a payer of last resort. We
strongly recommend that Congress makes explicit in law that VA
is required to reimburse IHS and tribes for services under
purchase and referred care.
Six, Congress should exempt Native Veterans from co-pays
and deductibles consistent with trust responsibility for health
care for all Native people.
Seven, when it comes to health IT modernization, Congress
must ensure parity in appropriations and technical assistance
to tribes to ensure interoperability between the VA and IHS. It
is shameful that Native Veterans are forced to hand carry
health records between their IHS and a VHA provider.
Eight, we need a tribal technical advisory committee to the
VA. We strongly request that the VA committee favorably act on
the bipartisan H.R. 2791, introduced by Representative Haaland.
Nine, tribal leaders and veterans continue to request that
the VA create written guidelines and policies to clarify
referral process under the VA and IHS memorandum of
understanding; the VA has yet to do so. This recommendation was
also made in 2019 Government Accountability Office.
In conclusion, on behalf of the National Indian Health
Board, thank you for holding this important hearing. We have a
long way to go together to improve care for Native Veterans, we
will serve as the--and this way as well.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Andrew C. Joseph, Jr. Appears In
The Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Joseph.
[Audio malfunction in hearing room.]

STATEMENT OF KEVIN J. ALLIS

Mr. Allis. Thank you. Chairman Brownley and Acting Ranking
Member General Bergman, and members of the subcommittee, on
behalf of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI), I
would like to thank you for holding this important hearing
today to discuss the many issues affecting Native Veterans
across health care.
I really do appreciate the comments that everybody has made
here today and also Mr. Joseph. There is a commonality, there
are many things we will touch on together, which shows that we
start from a strong foundation of being on the same page.
I serve currently as the Chief Executive Officer of NCAI
and I am an enrolled member of the Forest County Potawatomi
Community in Northern Wisconsin. I look forward to working with
members of the subcommittee and other Members of Congress to
better fulfill the Federal Government's commitment to provide
for the well-being of American Indian and Alaska Native
Veterans when they return home.
Founded in 1944, NCAI is the oldest and the largest
national organization composed of tribal nations and their
citizens. Tribal leaders created NCAI in response to
termination and assimilation policies that threatened the
existence of tribal nations.
Since then, NCAI has fought hard to protect and enhance
tribal treaty rights, sovereign rights, secure tribal
traditional laws and customs of our tribal nations, promote the
common understanding of tribal nations' roles in the family of
American Governments, and improve the quality of life of all
Native Americans across the country.
American Indians and Alaska Natives, as mentioned here
already, have a long history of distinguished service to this
country. Per capita, American Indians and Alaska Natives serve
at a higher rate in the Armed Forces than any other group of
Americans that have served in all the Nation's wars since the
Revolutionary War. In fact, in periods when we were not even
U.S. citizens, our American Indian Natives participated as
veterans for this country. Despite this esteemed service,
Native Veterans have lower personal incomes, higher
unemployment rates, and are more likely to lack necessary
health insurance.
The Federal Government's responsibility, as you mentioned,
to provide quality health care to Native Veterans comes from
two places: their service to this country and the Federal
obligations that are owed to Indian country due to giving up so
much land back in the last two centuries. The United States
must honor its commitments to Native Veterans by ensuring
Federal policy addresses its unique needs. There is no way to
accomplish this, though, without us being at the table and
being in the conversations where decisions are made.
Right now, the Department of Veterans Affairs and the
Indian Health Service are negotiating a new memorandum of
understanding that will impact Native Veterans for many years
to come. The VA and IHS must ensure that Indian country has a
voice in these discussions, so that this next MOU fully
addresses the need Native Veterans have regardless of whether
they are living on rural reservations or in major urban areas.
Ensuring Native Veterans are getting the health care they
deserve requires communication and cultural competency. On the
ground, this means streamlining processes for tribal nations to
become tribal veterans service organizations that provide
access to culturally appropriate assistance for Native Veterans
when they are pursuing VA benefit claims. In Washington, DC. it
means passing and implementing legislation that will ensure
Native Veterans' voices are heard by the highest offices in the
VA.
Accordingly, I encourage you all and every member of this
subcommittee to support H.R. 2791, the Department of Veterans
Affairs Tribal Advisory Committee Act of 2019. This bipartisan
legislation, which was introduced by Congresswoman Deb Haaland,
and would establish a tribal advisory committee to advise the
Secretary on how to improve programs and services for American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans.
In addition, to improving engagement with Native Veterans,
Federal policymakers must make it easier for Native Veterans to
access health care through increased coordination between the
VA and IHS system.
For reasons ranging from cultural competency to
significantly reduced travel times, Native Veterans often
prefer to receive care at IHS, tribal or Urban Indian
Organization facilities. Therefore, NCAI calls on Congress and
the Administration to ensure referrals through the Purchase
Referred Care Program and services provided to Native Veterans
by Urban Indian Organizations are reimbursable by the VA.
Additionally, we must eliminate VA's co-sharing for Native
Veterans, as the Federal Government has treaty and trust
obligations to provide health care to American Indian and
Alaska Native people.
Finally, I want to briefly emphasize the importance of
advance appropriations for IHS and the Bureau of Indian
Affairs. IHS is often responsible for providing health care to
Native Veterans, and access to IHS and VA facilities often
depends on services provided by the BIA. Protecting funding for
these agencies from uncertainties in the Federal budget process
will improve access to vital health care for Native Veterans
I want to close my testimony by expressing my sincere
gratitude for the service and sacrifice of all the veterans,
especially our Native Veterans, many of whom are tribal leaders
across Indian country. It is incumbent upon us all to ensure
the Federal Government to honor its solemn commitments to
Indian country.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify and I would
be happy to answer any questions when it is over.

[The Prepared Statement Of Kevin J. Allis Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Allis.
I now recognize Ms. Tetnowski for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SONYA M. TETNOWSKI

Ms. Tetnowski. Good morning. My name is Sonya Tetnowski. I
am an enrolled member of the Makah tribe, a U.S. Army Veteran
Paratrooper, and the CEO of the Indian Health Service of Santa
Clara Valley. I am also the Vice President of the National
Council of Urban Indian Health (NCUIH) and the President of the
California Consortium of Urban Indian Health. Urban Indian
Organizations (UIOs) provide high-quality, culturally competent
care to urban Indians, which consists of about 75 percent of
all American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/AN).
I would like to thank Chairwoman Brownley, Mr. Bergman, and
other distinguished members of the subcommittee for holding
this important hearing.
It is my pleasure to testify today regarding H.R. 4153, the
Health Care Access for Urban Native Veterans Act. We ask that
the Department of Veterans Affairs fully implement the VA and
IHS MOU, and reimbursement agreement for direct care services.
This action would allow UIOs to be reimbursed for providing
health care to AI/AN veterans. Most AI/AN veterans live in
urban areas and would benefit from the culturally competent
care provided by UIOs.
Despite the history between tribal people and the United
States Government, American Indians and Alaska Natives continue
to serve this country at a higher rate than any other group in
the Nation. We have a responsibility to protect the land of our
ancestors, respect their teachings, and pass that knowledge on
to generations that follow us. I am sad to report that
according to a 2014 Minority Veterans Report conducted by the
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics, it
clearly states that American Indians and Alaska Natives have
the highest poverty rate and the highest uninsured rate. This
seems out of balance. We serve, we protect, but yet we struggle
to have parity in the system.
We ask you to help us complete the Indian Health Service/
Tribal Health Program/Urban Indian Organization (I/T/U) system
of care. In order to begin to address the health disparities of
urban Native communities, I ask that this committee take into
account the national health care spending average of $9,523 and
the $19,228 that VA spends in Santa Clara County per patient
served, compared to the $3,688 currently allocated to me to
serve that same patient. UIOs are efficient and effective, and
we deserve parity.
We also ask that medication delivery and dispensing be
included in the agreement this time, as many of our veterans
are homeless and do not have addresses to receive their
medication. As these are our community members, we do what we
can to help them overcome these obstacles.
The balance of traditional and Western medicine is vital to
the healing of many of us, which is why my UIO, the Indian
Health Center of Santa Clara Valley, provides an annual Wiping
of the Tears ceremony, so that my fellow soldiers and I can
stand together and grieve and heal as only another soldier
would understand. For many urban Indians, the UIOs are the only
place where they can receive cultural and traditional services.
Bring parity to the system and together let us wrap our
soldiers in culturally competent care, help us strengthen our
I/T/U system of care.
Again, NCUIH strongly recommends, pursuant to Section
405(c) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, that the VA-
IHS MOU include reimbursement for care provided by the UIOs.
I would like to present you with this medicine, which
consists of abalone shells, sage, cedar, and sweet grass to
remind you what traditional medicine has done for me and my
fellow soldiers. Our traditions keep us grounded and provide
that support needed to heal the invisible wounds that we all
have from serving and protecting this country.
With that, I ask you to support my work and the work of all
Urban Indian programs to bring support for that healing to our
communities.
Thank you for holding these hearings today and for the
committee's support of parity in the I/T/U system of care and
H.R. 4153. My full testimony has been provided for the record
and thank you again for the opportunity to speak.

[The Prepared Statement Of Sonya M. Tetnowski Appears In
The Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Ms. Tet--Tetnowski----
Ms. Tetnowski. Tetnowski.
Ms. Brownley.--I am not sure why I am having a hard time
with that, but I am. I apologize, but I do also want to thank
you for your service. Being a paratrooper is--just it is
amazing and thank you very much.
I now recognize Chief Smith for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHIEF WILLIAM SMITH

Chief Smith. [Speaking native language.] Chief Bill.
Good morning, my name is Chief Bill, Chief of Eyaks. My
mother was the last full-blooded Eyak speaker, my father was a
World War II veteran. I am also the Vice President of the
Valdez Native Tribe, Executive Committee member of the Alaska
Native Health Board and Vice Chair of the National Indian
Health Board, and a Vietnam Vet.
On behalf of the Alaska Native Health Board, thank you,
Chairman Brownley, Ranking Member Dunn, and distinguished
members of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Subcommittee on Health for the opportunity to speak with you
today. For the record, I have provided a written statement,
which gives more background and details on the issues that I
can share with you today. I hope mostly to honor our veterans,
lift our government-to-government relationships between tribes
and Federal Government involved in the Federal Trust
Responsibility, and provide a description of the Alaska Tribal
Health System and our Tribal Sharing Agreements.
I too am also disappointed that today we are not sitting
with Rear Admiral Weocki or Secretary Wilkie or Dr. Stone for
this important hearing recognizing the government-to-government
relationship and to start a strong partnership between the
tribes and the VA and Indian Health Service. It is my hope that
we will continue to have tribal representatives on the IHS VA
MOU team.
In our written comments, we also provide details on issues
including, but not limited to, support of H.R. 2791 and S. 524,
Department of Veterans Affairs Advisory Committee Act of 2019,
including tribal representatives on Indian Health Service and
the VA leadership team on renewing the MOUs reflecting the
government-to-government relationships; review and revise of
the VA Tribal Consultation Policy; build parity between the VA
and the Indian Health Service; exempt Native Veterans from co-
pay and deductions in recognition of the unique political
status of American Indians and Alaska Natives on the Federal
Trust Responsibility; and I support the Tribal Veterans
Representative model.
I would like to start with the Tribal Sharing Agreement.
Before the agreement, Alaska Veterans only had six points of
access for care through the VA in an area that would cover the
Lower 48 from coast to coast, and from the northern borders to
the southern borders. Most vets went years, if not decades
without care. After signing the agreement, veterans for the
first time had access to care closer to home, from six
locations to over 200, with little or no capital expense
carried out by the VA, and even non-Native Veterans can be
served at a Veterans Hospital that we have in Alaska.
As I was at the Alaska--recently at the Alaska Native
Federal AFN meeting in Fairbanks, tribal delegates shared with
the VA a need to go out to the cabins. When I say go out to the
cabins, when the VA comes to Alaska they usually go to the
hubs, Kotzebue, Fairbanks, Anchorage, and they say everything
is good. What the veterans would like to see is them fly into
Dillingham, get off the plane in Dillingham, get down to a
skiff and go up river 50 miles, get out of that skiff at 50
miles, and go on a snow machine or a four-wheeler or dog sled
and talk to the veteran in the cabin that has not got his
share, that has come home from Vietnam, come home from Iraq,
Afghanistan, and everything else, and ask him if he is Okay,
because they are out there. I for one as a Vietnam Vet took 35
years to talk to my brother that was there before I was, or to
even get care from the VA.
We support the Tribal Veteran Representative, the one way
to help develop outreach, but support the Tribal Sharing
Agreements, offer direct access to care with providing veterans
with their families. That is the only way we are going to get
the veterans out of the woods is through the Tribal Veterans
Representatives, their aunts, their uncles, their kids that are
going to tell that veteran this is a new VA; this is something
that they can come home to, this is something that will welcome
and take care of them.
Like I say, it took me 35 years to seek help, and I talked
to my brother and he was there. It was a fireworks in Anchorage
on the Fourth--I mean New Year's Eve and he was sitting there
watching it, next thing you know he was on the deck. He was not
there, he was back in Vietnam, he was out there on patrol and
those were not fireworks, those were bombs and everything else
coming in. That is what we have. We are still 19 years old, we
are still in Vietnam; we come home, but Vietnam come home with
us and, not only did that, Agent Orange come home with us. If
we had to build a Vietnam wall from the people that passed away
since then with Agent Orange exposure, that wall would be
tenfolds.
In conclusion, many veterans have broken the faith of the
VA system, some have not accessed care in decades, like I said.
Tribes in Alaska and across the Nation are working with the VA
to help restore their faith. In Alaska, we have over 34,000
vets enrolled and out of an estimated 75,000 to 90,000 vets.
More work needs to be done to reach the brothers and sisters
when we work together with the VA and Health Service through
consultation, with recognition of the strength of their tribes
and Tribal Health Organizations bringing it to the table.
An important step would be to allow us for longer Tribal
Sharing Agreements periods, support continuous care over time,
allow for Tribal Representatives to join the leadership teams
reflected in the government-to-government relationships, and
will provide the best results for the meeting and need to honor
our veterans.
Alaska Native Health Board thanks the subcommittee and
looking forward to further support of members and their work on
the veterans health care issues, and the Alaska Native Health
Board welcomes any questions.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Chief William Smith Appears In
The Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you. Thank you very much, Chief Smith,
and I thank you also for your service to our country.
Last, but not least, I now recognize Chief Malerba for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARILYNN MALERBA

Ms. Malerba. [Speaking native language.] Good morning,
Chairwoman Brownley, Acting Ranking Member General Bergman, and
members of the subcommittee.
[Speaking native language.] My name is Chief, Many-Hearts-
Lynn Malerba of the Mohegan Tribe. On behalf of the Indian
Health Service Tribal Self-Governance Advisory Committee, it is
a great honor for me to present our testimony before you today.
Our formal written testimony has been submitted to the
subcommittee for the record.
Native Veterans, as you have heard, have a uniquely special
status with the United States. Our American Indian and Alaska
Natives have fought for the U.S. Armed Forces in every war
since colonial times; in fact, 39 Mohegan men fought at Bunker
Hill. In exchange for the cession of lands, treaties between
our Native governments and U.S. included health care for our
people. As warriors for this Nation, Native Veterans are
deserving of the best health care we can provide.
The VA reports that there are 145,000 Native Veterans
living in the United States with an average life expectancy 4
years shorter than the general U.S. population and who are more
likely than other veterans to experience social and economic
difficulties that impact their health.
Tribal nations that elect to administer health programs and
services under a self-governance agreement to their citizens
are effective, because tribal nations know the needs of their
communities and are in the best position to provide culturally
appropriate solutions to address those local needs. However,
Tribal Health Programs (THPs) are limited due to limitations
imposed by the VA.
In recognition of the shared responsibility to provide
better care, an MOU between the U.S. VA and IHS was implemented
to access VA funding for services provided to our Native
Veterans. There is a tremendous opportunity for all to work
collaboratively to update the MOU and identify components that
will ensure Native Veterans receive timely access to quality
health care, the services that they are owed.
The Tribal Self-Governance Advisory Committee (TSGAC)
strongly advocates for the following improvements. Veterans
often require additional specialty services that are not
available at IHS or THPs. If a Native Veterans needs a
referral, that same patient must then be seen within the VA
system before a referral can be secured. Veterans are then
forced to maneuver a very complex health care system. Our
recommendation is that the VA should accept referrals made by
IHS and THPs and to ensure best services to our veterans.
Further, the VA should include Purchased Referred Care (PRC) in
the IHS THP reimbursement agreements to eliminate rationing of
health care and delays in care.
Native Veterans who seek health care services at a VA
facility are assessed with copayments, which is in direct
opposition to the Federal Trust Obligation; we recommend the
discontinuation of this practice.
The VA does not accept provider credentialing from THPs.
Our recommendation is that they be accepted by the VA to ensure
care coordination is effective and efficient.
IHS and THPs have significant workforce challenges due in
part to most facilities being located in rural and remote
locations. Our recommendation is that IHS and tribes be
included in the planning of GME pilot program to ensure that
any future regulations or policies work optimally in Indian
country.
Only those IHS and Tribal Health Programs that use the
Resource and Patient Management System (RPMS) system have
access to CMOP, the Consolidated Mail Order Pharmacy. We
recommend that information technology systems experts from both
VA and IHS ensure that all systems used by Tribal Health
Programs are compliant and compatible with the CMOP system.
The TSGAC is supportive of quality measures that provide
further tracking of meaningful outcomes; however, we oppose the
prospect of developing either data reporting requirements that
affect reimbursements to IHS and THPs or that require new
collection of data and reporting systems. Our recommendation is
the VA and IHS work together and consult with tribes to develop
evaluation measures for assessing the progress toward MOU
goals.
Additionally, the VA should not oppose any additional
quality programs upon IHS THPs because it is burdensome,
costly, and unnecessary due to the fact that there are already
quality requirements in place.
The VA belongs to a National Health Information Exchange
and it reported to the GAO this year that IHS and THPs could
join the exchange to access information about common veteran
patients; however, IHS reported to GAO that testing and on-
boarding costs to participate were prohibitive. We recommend
that local VA health care facilities work with their local THPs
to ensure health information can be exchanged through local
health information exchanges rather than one national health
exchange.
We recommend that the VA work in coordination with tribes
to establish a tribal advisory board, because we know that
those are effective forms to resolve issues in a government-to-
government fashion.
In March 2019, the GAO reported that the MOUs signed by the
VA and IHS lacked sufficient measures for assessing its goals.
We recommend that Federal agencies focus their limited
resources on actions that improve the health of Native Veterans
by ensuring that the measures are focused on health care
outcomes. They should be measured, developed, and agreed upon
jointly.
In closing, the VA, IHS and Tribal Health Programs have
made progress and have demonstrated a willingness to improve
quality access to care for our Native Veterans, deservedly so,
but as you see in our statement, there still are significant
opportunities for improvement.
[Speaking native language.] I thank you very much for
hearing my comments today.

[The Prepared Statement Of Marilynn Malerba Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Chief Malerba.
I first want to recognize Chairman Takano has joined us.
Chairman Takano chairs the Full VA Committee. Welcome, and
thank you for being here.
Would you like to make any comments?

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, CHAIRMAN, FULL COMMITTEE

Mr. Takano. Just an opening statement.
Good morning and thank you so much, Congresswoman Brownley,
for holding this important hearing.
I want to thank our witnesses from the National Indian
Health Board, the National Congress of American Indians, the
National Council on Urban Indian Health, the Alaska Native
Health Board, and the IHS Tribal Self-Governance Advisory
Committee. To those of you who served, thank you for your
service.
It is critical that this subcommittee hears your voices and
the voices of the tribal members that you represent. While we
know Native Americans serve at higher rates than anyone else,
they also endure the lowest health status of anyone else. This,
frankly, is a national shame and a terrible violation of the
Trust Responsibility the United States Government is obligated
to uphold. We must do better.
VA must do more to ensure the goal of improving the health
status of American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans is
accomplished. I am disappointed to see that Under Secretary Dr.
Stone is not here. While I commend the work of the program
officers here to testify, I know the needs of all Native
Veterans cannot be met by these three program offices alone.
This must be a priority VA-wide.
Again, I can not thank you enough for sharing your time
with us, and I assure you that as part of my VA 2030 Vision
this committee is dedicated to ensuring marginalized veterans
are receiving access to the health care and benefits that they
have earned. This is just the beginning of this committee's
work on these issues.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Chairman Takano, and, again, thank
you for joining us this morning.
I will recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. I
wanted to open by just saying that our Native Veterans, in my
opinion, should be receiving actually the very best health care
in our country, because they have been promised from two
sources their health care, both from our country in our
commitment to the health care of our Native Indians, including
our Native Veterans, in addition to VA's commitment to our
Native Veterans. If you compile those two pieces together, you
should be getting the very best health care in our country, and
clearly that is not the case.
It is very clear to me that there is much to work on and
much to improve upon, which leads me to the place of the
upcoming MOU. All of you have talked about issues, including
the Advisory Committee that Ms. Haaland is leading on, issues
around co-pays, issues about reimbursements for services, the
duplicity of services that have been received, but all of these
components need to be ironed out and worked through in this new
MOU. We have learned a lot over the last 9 years and now it is
time to really rectify that through a successful negotiations
with the MOU.
My question is for each and every one of you on the panel.
I want to and this committee wants to be assured that you are
at the table for these negotiations. If you could comment on
that for me, whether you feel assured that you will be at the
table or you have concerns about being at the table.
I can just start with--I am sorry, I do not have my glasses
on--we can start Chief--Mr. Joseph.
Mr. Joseph. Well, I am glad that you are asking the
question and, you know, and part of the testimony, with the IHS
funded the way that it is, it is discretionary and the recent,
you know, Government shutdowns that I spoke to in my testimony
really impact the services that would be provided to any of our
veterans that come to our facilities, be it IHS or a tribal
facility. It would be really good to be at the table, you know,
when they are making those recommendations.
I testified in the Senate Committee on Veterans, you know,
prior to the MOU being put in there and one of my asks was that
the VA set up an Office of Indian Affairs in the VA, and they
did that. Then the second one was to have the VA deploy doctors
and nurses to our facilities, because the IHS is so far behind
in actually having health care providers to provide the
services, and the H.R. system that they deal with is causing a
lot of issues, you know, on getting good quality providers that
come to IHS facilities. There is----
Ms. Brownley. Mr. Joseph, thank you. I only get 5 minutes
myself, so I want to hear from all of the others on the panel--
--
Mr. Joseph. Okay.
Ms. Brownley.--but I want to make sure whether you have a
sense of whether you would be at the table for these
negotiations around the MOU.
Mr. Joseph. I imagine that the National Indian Health Board
would definitely have someone at the table there. Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Mr. Allis.
Mr. Allis. Yes, Chairwoman. My answer is, I certainly hope
so. I do not feel comfortable right now with the situation and,
as Mr. Joseph mentioned, there are other organizations that
certainly are plugged into this.
I will say this, consultation should be going on right now
about this. It has been the practice where, you know, these
things get put together, these agreements get shaped, and then
they bring them to Indian country after the decisions have
already been made. I also note that the March 2019 GAO report
mentioned that there used to be 12 work groups that discussed
this and tribes only participated in three of them, but at
least they were participating. Now there are three work groups
and there is no tribal participation.
There is some level of concern for us there that in the
crafting of this language addressing the issues that we all
addressed today and that you acknowledge are properly being
discussed at the table.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Tetnowski.
Ms. Tetnowski. Thank you. We would welcome the opportunity
to sit on the panel and be a part of a working group to discuss
the parity issues that we continue to have in serving our
Native Veterans in the urban community.
Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much.
Chief Smith.
Chief Smith. Yes, that would be the right thing to do if we
could be on the panel to help, because when we had the MOU in
Alaska with the VA, they come to the Alaska Native Health Board
and we had consultation. I can tell you right now that it
worked out great, because my doctor I have had with the Indian
Health Service for 15 years and with the VA I have had three
doctors in 1 year. My doctor knows me at the Indian Health
Service, but the VA also needs to pick up their fair share,
because it is something that I earned and it can make our
Indian Health Service money go a lot further for those that are
on it.
Yes, if I could be there, I will be there.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Chief Smith.
Chief Malerba.
Ms. Malerba. I hope so, but I am not sure that that is the
case. I do not know that we have been given any assurances
about that, but I will say this, consultation is more than just
asking the question; consultation is actually doing something
with the information you received during consultation. Had the
VA and I just listened to the previous consultations around
these topics, we probably would not be sitting with you today
talking about the ways that we can improve this program.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you so much.
I have very little time left, but I do want to mention that
a constituent of mine in my district is a dual user of VA and
the Santa Barbara Indian Clinic--I am from California--and he
uses as it seems like a lot of Native Veterans do, he uses the
clinic, the Indian clinic for his primary care and then uses
the VA for his specialty care. We know that his records are not
going back and forth, and they seem to have--the VA providers
specifically have limited to know understanding of his cultural
needs. In fact, he told me and he told my staff that when he
went to the VA, the VA staff responded by ``I did not know
Indians lived in this city.''
This whole issue of cultural competency and a welcoming
from the VA I think really does need to be addressed and I
certainly would like your feedback on it, but my time has
expired, but we can have further conversations about that
offline.
I now welcome Dr. Dunn and recognize Dr. Dunn for 5
minutes. Thank you for joining us.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair, and I apologize
for being tardy. We have another committee meeting scheduled
precisely at the same time.
I want to thank General Bergman for sitting in for me.
Thank you very much, General Bergman.
With that, I will yield the remainder of my time to General
Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Dunn, and thank you,
Chairwoman Brownley.
You know, God puts us where he wants and when he wants us
there, it is up to us to figure out the why. Listening to your
comments, I know why I was here today pinch-hitting for Dr.
Dunn at the beginning is to hear your words.
Chief Smith, thank you for your service, welcome home. As I
look at our fellow Vietnam Veterans, because you mentioned
something that--the Vietnam wall--I am not going to ask you to
provide comment, but I am guessing I will maybe get some
nodding of heads that maybe--not maybe, I know for a fact that,
as a country, if we had started welcoming our brothers and
sisters home 50 years ago, we would not have some of the mental
health, depression, suicidal issues we have amongst our
veterans period from Vietnam, but especially those tribal
members.
Right now we are trying here in the committee as a whole to
get the Improve Act, which is a bipartisan bill that
Representative Chrissy Houlahan and I have put out there to get
it to the committee, to get it--to get it out there, so that we
can reach out to, I am guessing your tribal members are the
majority of that 70 percent of the veterans outside the VA
systems who take their lives on a daily basis, and the purpose
of the Improve Act is to reach out and make contact with you
and your tribal members.
Now, having said that, when you try to put something into
place, we have a lot of acronyms in the world and, you know, I
like logjam. We all can visualize what a logjam is. Well, in
this case, it is layers of Government is the log. When we start
putting in new layers, we do not necessarily increase output
and better results.
Would any of you care to comment on what is preventing the
VA and the tribes from sitting down and hammering out for
specific credentialing metrics, so we can get providers
credentialed in both sides? Anyone care to comment?
Chief Smith. I know when I meet with the VA and I meet with
the Indian Health Service what I tell them to do is to tear
down their towers. They have got to work together, that is the
most important thing. To me, I see two different towers, just
like I see with the VA, there are three, but the VA and the
Indian Health Service needs to remove all other walls and start
working together to help our Native Veterans.
Like you say on our Vietnam brothers and sisters, yes, it
is nice to be welcomed home and that is why we are there when
the rest of our brothers and sisters do come back from war,
because we will never want that to happen to any other
generation ever again.
My main thing is, they started the listening sessions, but
it needs to go farther than that. They need to tear their walls
down and work together to help our people.
That is my opinion.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you very much. You know, I yield back.
As--well, before I yield back, we have already made some
progress in my district with trying to figure out ways--you got
the Tribal Health Clinic, you got extra office space, you got
different things, why ca not we combine Indian Health Service,
VA services? Because when you live in not only a rural
district, but a remote district, that can be a center of health
care for the entire population run by the tribe.
Anyway, thank you. I appreciate the time and thank you for
allowing me to be in here, and I yield back.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cisneros, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cisneros. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Thank you all
for being here today.
You know, I became aware of a report of a Native American
Marine Corps veteran who was denied being put on the transplant
list for a kidney and the reason that was given was a cognitive
impairment basically, because I guess a test that he was given
saying that he would not remember, be able to remember the care
that he needed to be able to provide to himself. After
investigation, he did eventually get the transplant and get on
the list, but it took so long because of this. What they found
out when they investigated was that there was--the reason he
was denied was because of this cognitive impairment, but really
what it was was a barrier, either a language barrier or a
cultural barrier.
Have you all seen other examples of this where people are
being denied treatment, especially whether it be a kidney or a
liver, something that they need, because of this cultural bias?
Anyone.
Chief Smith. I do not know if it was the culture and
everything else, but I know that it was too late for my
brother, because he needed his lungs. He passed away in 2017.
We could not get him healthy enough in Alaska to transport him
to the Lower 48 secondary to Agent Orange exposure. He took his
last breath and his lungs just quit working, and he did not get
well enough to be able to have me transport him down to Seattle
to get a new set of lungs.
There are things in there like, oh, you need to get down--
he was at 209, he had to get down to 200 pounds, they said. For
nine pounds, my brother--my brother could have lived 5 more
years with a new set of lungs, but we could not get him well
enough when he went downhill to get him down to Seattle to get
a new set of lungs.
That is all I can say. He was--he was my hero.
Mr. Allis. Congressman, no specific situations, but the
scenario that you point out is common across Indian country in
a lot of different areas. When you look at not taking--you
know, agency folks or the Government not taking the time to
look at the uniqueness of these communities, you know, not only
the location, but the traditional customs and culture, and the
language barriers that could exist that are not taken into
consideration. It is definitely an issue with treating our
veterans, especially that might have, you know, brain injuries
or head injuries and revert to their traditional languages
because it is much easier to communicate, because that is how
they were raised.
We see this with health care, we see it with voting, we see
it with, you know, signing up. All that kind of stuff is we
need people to pay more attention and to take the time to learn
about the uniqueness of our communities in a way where they can
connect, we can connect, and things can get accomplished.
Mr. Cisneros. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Malerba. Well, and I think that that is what we were
talking about before. When we have to refer somebody outside of
our system, you do not have anyone helping them to navigate
that system, whereas if you are within the Tribal Health
Program or the IHS system, you will have people there that are
culturally competent, that can understand what some of the
barriers are to that person accessing care, and sometimes it is
that they just have a reluctance to go outside their own
community.
I think that that is why we want to make sure that we do
not have to send them back into another system for a referral
to care, because chances are likely that they would not access
that, they will just give up and they would not access that
care.
Mr. Cisneros. Right. Just--I have got one minute left here,
but just to followup on some other things. You have all talked
about the MOU between the VA and IHS. In some of these remote
areas where there is no VA, you know, and veterans are going
there to seek services, have we had situations because of lack
of the MOU where they have been denied services or that the VA
has said we are not going to pay for that service because they
are not enrolled?
Anybody can answer that one. Go ahead, yes.
Ms. Tetnowski. We have had situations where the VA would
not accept our referral. Similar to what Chief Malerba was
talking about is that the VA--it is hard enough to get our
veterans to come to any facilities to seek that additional
support and once we have to then transfer them out of our
facilities into another system without a patient navigator or a
tribal navigator inside the system, we tend to lose them in the
process. Many times, even as an urban facility, our nearest VA
hospital is about an hour and a half to two hours away, and so
during that time without that referral acceptance we lose them
in the process, because they do not want to go again.
It is like a lot of the response that I get is, I already
went through those tests with you, why do I have to go there
and do it again, and that is a fair statement. We should be
able to transfer our medical records into the VA system and not
put our community members through that again.
Mr. Cisneros. Right.
Ms. Malerba. One of the things with the MOU is that it
limits the services that non-Native Veterans can access at IHS,
even though typically we would allow certain services covered.
They do not allow non-Native pregnant women with Native
children to access care there, even when they are connected to
the veteran, and especially in cases where the IHS and THP are
the only facility in close proximity to the veteran.
We think that we need to make sure that all services are
covered and that they are not limited, because in some cases
those are the only facilities that are available.
Mr. Allis. If I may make one more comment? This is the
importance of really look at the regulatory burdens that are in
the way of tribes with respect to tribal veterans service
organizations and being able to put those up, the tribes have
to go through so much. They have to establish and fund an
organization before somebody can get accredited, be able to
manage that, and work with the community folks on going through
the process of their claims and tracking their services.
There really needs to be a look at that.
Mr. Cisneros. All right. Go ahead, Chief Bill.
Chief Smith. Yes, the other thing too is, like Alaska has
over 70 to 90,000 veterans and only 30,000 of them are
registered for the health care. A lot of them are Vietnam Vets
and a lot of them that have not trusted the VA enough to come
back to the system, and that is where you need to have the
tribal veterans, our veterans being able to talk to them and
saying that this is the new VA. They earned everything that
they had, but they have never trusted the VA enough to come
back to the table, and that is half our veterans up in Alaska
are still in the bush and still need to come home.
Mr. Cisneros. Right. Well, I am out of time, but thank you
all for your answers. Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Cisneros.
Mr. Lamb, you are recognized.
Mr. Lamb. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you to all
the witnesses for making this long trip here to educate us.
I had a question to begin with for Chief Smith. In your
testimony I noticed you talked about exempting tribes and THPs
from the establishment and consolidation of the community care
networks; are you referring to under the MISSION Act?
Yes, sorry, I did not mean to catch you off guard there.
Chief Smith. Yes.
Mr. Lamb. Could you just talk me through, to the extent you
are able, what impact you see the MISSION Act as having on the
Alaskan system and on your tribes and community, if any. If you
think there should be interaction based on the MISSION Act or
if everything is supposed to be separate, I am just trying to
see where you stand on that. Thank you.
Chief Smith. As a veteran from the MISSION Act to the
Choice program to everything else, it is just another thing
coming down the pike to us. As a veteran, we just have to see
how it is going to work out, because what we need is health
care and, like we have been talking about, health care between
deals. Because I can get my blood tests for my diabetes
secondary to Agent Orange exposure and I can get it at Indian
Health Service and it costs thousands of dollars, and I have to
go right across the street to the VA in Anchorage and get the
same tests, and I have to travel 300 and some miles to get my
nearest VA. That is a little bit shorter than my dad did. My
dad had to go to Portland, Oregon from Cordova, Alaska to the
VA when he passed away.
As a veteran, you know, the MISSION Act, the Choice
program, everything else, what the veteran needs to do is being
able to treat where the veteran knows he is going to get the
best service for himself, for himself or herself. Is that
closer to home? Just like we were talking about the MOUs, if
you lived in Dutch Harbor, Alaska, it cost you over 1500 bucks
to fly one way into Anchorage and then you need an escort, and
then that is the VA is picking it up, but if you get treated
right at Dutch Harbor, if you get treated with your doctor, you
do not have to pay that travel cost and that veteran gets
treated closer to home. Not everybody likes to go to the big
village just to spend the day.
Mr. Lamb. Yes. Well, I think what I was trying to figure
out was, could the MISSION Act--and anyone can answer this, if
they have an opinion--could the MISSION Act be a vehicle for
basically saving you that trip and helping you get care in your
actual community if the VA had already made that provider part
of their network, is that a possibility or is there something
that prevents that?
Chief Smith. It would be a very good possibility, but last
time I used my VA Choice when I first got given my VA card, I
had to have a scope job and it cost me 1500 bucks by using the
VA myself. I have no--I needed it in writing first that the VA
is going to pick up the bill, because I tried it and so has a
lot of other veterans.
We need to be able to know that they are going to take care
of us.
Mr. Lamb. It all goes to how the network is designed and
implemented.
If we could--Ms. Tetnowski and Chief Malerba, and then I
will probably be out of time.
Ms. Tetnowski. Just a quick comment on that. The Choice
system tends to be the place where the VA refers us to and at
the end of the day, more often than not, it is already out of
money. We end up with what happened to Chief Smith there where
they want you to go there, but it is not available. Again
another barrier. Now it becomes the veteran's responsibility to
cover those costs and they are supposed to be receiving this
service as part of their benefits for service.
Mr. Lamb. Okay, got it. Thank you.
Chief Malerba.
Ms. Malerba. I think that is where credentialing comes into
play. If there was reciprocity and full faith and credit for
the THPs and IHS provider, then there would be no barrier.
Mr. Lamb. Right. Whether that happened through an MOU or
the MISSION Act, I guess that is what I was trying to figure
out, does it make a difference, it sounds like probably not.
Mr. Joseph.
Mr. Joseph. You know, I think it would be really good if,
you know, an MOU or the act, if you pass an act that would
shift the funds directly to IHS or to tribes to allow our
providers to be able to provide for our veterans.
Like Chief Smith talked about, some of our veterans, you
know, were forced to go to war and drafted, and they do not
trust VA. The new VA sounds really good, but, you know, a lot
of our people want to be seen at home by the providers that
they are used to. And if you compare the IHS budget to what the
VA gets per patient, you would see a big, big difference and
the need for the IHS to have the funding. I spoke about the
Government shutdown and impacts there.
Mr. Lamb. Right, I noticed those numbers in your testimony
as well. Thank you very much. I am out of time.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Ms. Brownley. Mr. Gianforte, welcome. You have just sat
down, but because we are trying to go back and forth, you are
recognized.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Chair. First, I want to thank you
and the ranking member for letting me join this hearing. Thank
you for our panelists here today, so we can learn more about
this subject.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you regarding
Native American veterans' access to health care. Native
Americans make up nearly 10 percent of Montana's population and
they overwhelmingly answer the call to serve. This is why I
have introduced the bill in front of us today, to ensure our
Native Veterans have access to the care that they deserve.
In 2012, the Indian Health Service of the Department of
Veterans Affairs established a reimbursement agreement which
allowed rural IHS providers to supplement VA care. In classic
Washington bureaucratic fashion, Urban Indian Health Centers
were left out of the agreement. In Montana, Urban Indian Health
Centers provide care to 60 percent of Native Americans who are
not located on a reservation.
My bill, the Health Care Access for Urban Native Veterans
Act, will ensure that our Native Veterans have access to care
that works best for them and will cut wait times at VA clinics
for all veterans.
This committee has worked tirelessly to ensure we keep our
promise to our veterans who have sacrificed so much for this
country and my bill continues this good work.
Ms. Tetnowski, Urban Indian Centers receive limited funds
from IHS to provide their services. What would be the impact on
these urban centers if they were to receive reimbursement from
the VA?
Ms. Tetnowski. Thank you so much. The impact would be
significant. As you stated yourself, 60 percent in Montana
receive services at their local urban center, same goes with my
facility in Santa Clara County.
We provide support, we have 41 Urban Indian Health Centers
throughout the Nation, and these centers provide that support
where a tribal facility may not be located. In most cases these
urban centers are located in places where relocation centers
occurred, so that was the purpose of creating our Urban Health
Centers. I think the impact would continue to allow us to
provide that culturally competent care and increase our ability
to meld both traditional and Western medicine to provide the
support that our veterans need in these urban centers.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. We have five of these centers in
Montana, in Missoula, Great Falls, Billings, Butte, and Helena.
If this bill became law, you are saying they would be able to
better care for our Native Veterans. Okay.
One follow-on question, if I could. What has been done to
leverage telehealth in any of these centers? Is that something
that you are looking at and what impacts have you had?
Ms. Tetnowski. We have attempted to get through the process
to allow telehealth to be available in our urban centers, but
many of our urban health centers have capacity to continue to
serve. Telehealth, other than specialty care, may not be
necessary. Most of them have behavioral health services, we
have medical and dental and other support services inside our
facilities, but telehealth would add additional ability to get
that specialty care to those urban centers.
Mr. Gianforte. Yes. This is--I have been advocating for
telehealth, because we have many rural communities, we can not
have----
Ms. Tetnowski. Yes.
Mr. Gianforte.--every specialist in every community.
Telehealth is a way to provide better care at higher quality. I
would just----
Ms. Tetnowski. It would be a wonderful way also for us to
continue to partner with our local tribal communities as well
to provide support for each other----
Mr. Gianforte. Again----
Ms. Tetnowski.--because we are one community.
Mr. Gianforte.--not to substitute for local care, but it is
just an enhancement.
I just want to thank the chair and ranking member again for
letting me join this hearing today, and I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Gianforte, and I thank you for
raising the important issue around our Native Veterans who live
in cities, because I think it is abundantly clear that we are
not servicing them the way they need to be serviced and we have
got a lot of work to do in that area, so thank you for bringing
that up.
Mr. Sablan, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Yes, thank you very much, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much for holding today's hearing.
To the witnesses, I know what it is to fly a distance to
come to Washington. I live the furthest away from Washington,
DC. as a member here. I live out in the Northern Mariana
Islands and that part of a place called Micronesia. That is a
bunch of over 3,000 islands spread out over the size equal to,
if not larger than, the 48 contiguous states. We talk about
remoteness, yes, I am very remote as well. Thank you for
coming.
A friend of mine, actually a personal friend who lives on
Saipan actually is on contract with a company that he is a
physician's assistant and he provides his services, he is on
contract and assigned to a part of Alaska where he serves, he
provides health--medical services to residents of that
particular--so far away removed, I think he said you can
actually see Russia from where he is at. I do not know if it is
just for Native Americans, but I think he said it is for the
residents of that village. A smaller area, but so far removed.
I looked at the fact sheets about some of the culture
Native Americans have, we have the very same culture where say
if my father were to be giving me a lecture on something, even
if he is--I think he is wrong, I would have to keep my mouth
shut and allow him to tell me what is on his mind. For many
times I think--I thought I was smarter than him and now I know
that actually, no, he was smart, much, much smarter than I am.
You know, our history is so far back that we go through
oral history, that when Western civilization was still trying
to find the spices so they could cure their meat, my people
were already traversing the wide-open ocean based on nothing
but the stars and the currents, and they were traveling. When
Ferdinand Magellan got lost at sea, he landed on Guam. One of
the things he found, according to the log of the--was rice,
that we had rice in the Mariana Islands when rice was supposed
to be exclusive to Asia. But so much of your culture is in my
culture.
Let me also thank the chairwoman, because I think this is
one of the very few times when we have a hearing for the Native
Americans. I am not fully immersed in the VA issues for Native
Americans. I am immersed, much more immersed in the issue of
the Indian education. I chaired the subcommittee on elementary
and secondary education, and the BIE, the Department of
Interior's Bureau of Indian Education. The services they
provide in terms for Native Americans is a disgrace, it is a
shame. Where there would be school facilities in some of the
coldest part of the country and they would have buildings that
have heaters that do not work or that they would not have
enough tables and desks for students, and the schools are in a
complete lack of maintenance, and it is a disgrace. If the VA
provides as much service to Native Americans as they do for
their BIE, then we got a lot of work ahead of us.
I came here to thank you for being here today. I am also
actually in a markup on higher education, so I will need to
leave, but I just came to thank you guys for--all of you for
being here.
I know that there is a VA representative in the room, so we
have got a lot of work to do.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for holding today's hearing. I
yield back.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Sablan. I had the privilege to
travel to the American territories with you, including going to
your home in the Mariana Islands. I will just say that there
are very many parallels in terms of the challenges of
delivering health care in our territories very similarly to the
challenges we are facing with our Native Veterans.
Mr. Sablan. Right.
Ms. Brownley. We have a lot of work----
Mr. Sablan. Madam Chair, if I may interrupt, if I may.
Actually--and I am not taking credit for what happened, but it
was not until I got elected to this office that the VA actually
set up a VA fee-based, contracted a physician to provide
services to veterans.
Sir, you are right, our Vietnam Veterans, for some reason
they refuse to sign up with VHA. I have had research fairs.
When Choice happened, I brought the CEO of Choice, we had 20
providers, we increased that to 81, but for some reason, sir,
my Vietnam Veterans also and others after Vietnam, they do not
want to sign up for VHA. I am having a really tough time trying
to get a Community Based Outpatient Clinic (CBOC) established
in my district, but I am not going to give up.
Thank you, everyone.
Madam Chair, I am being disrespectful, that is not allowed
in my culture and in Native American culture, but I apologize
profusely and I thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Very respectfully, your time has expired.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Brownley. And I will now recognize Dr. Dunn.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Chief Smith, during my time in service in the Army as a
Sergeant, I interacted with a number of different IHS systems
around the country and one that seemed to work better than
most, in fact quite well, was the health and dental services in
Alaska, and it strikes me that that is an area where there are
more challenges, not less challenges than perhaps in other
areas.
I wonder if you would address for us, you know, what you do
to integrate that kind of care, make that work so well in
Alaska and many different tribes, a lot of area to cover, both
urban and remote, and what can we learn, what can we take away
from that for the rest of the country?
Chief Smith. Talk to us, consult, and work with the Indian
tribes to work with the health services. That seems to work, I
know when Susan Yeager come to the last Alaska Native Health
Board to talk about health issues.
You know, we are trying to do things like dental aides to
start a program, so we can teach our people how to do it,
because there is not enough dentists up in Alaska to take care
of everybody. We have dental aides that go out and take care of
our kids with teeth.
I mean, when I was a kid, they just put a temporary filling
in with the stainless steel pins, and about a week later the
temporary nikem-pucki [phonetic] that they put in there
dissolved, and then you had to take a file and file off the
little stainless steel pins, and now today you can get new
teeth and better care. One dentist told me, he says, if he
could do something for the villages, he would stop at the
airport and he would destroy every can of pop that was ever
delivered out there. I agree with him, it is education. They
just need to know that it is better to drink the water than it
is to drink the soda and, you know, it is back to nature and
back to our ideals.
I just want to make one comment to this gentleman over here
about Vietnam Vets. It is probably because of the way we were
treated when we come home and it is hard to bring a veteran
back to the table, a Vietnam Vet. It takes another vet to talk
to him and it takes another grandchild or whatever to drag that
grumpy old Vietnam Vets out of the woods saying you have got to
come back, because you are dying and this is the reason, and
they can actually help you today, and welcome home.
Up in Alaska, just consulting with tribes and deals on
health care, because with the Alaska Native Health Board we
have 229 tribes, and we talk together to work on our health
issues. I know down here you are trying to follow some of our
programs that we started up there and it works. The only thing
that I would appreciate is, if it works in Alaska and you bring
it down here, do not do too many changes and send it back to
Alaska, because we already worked out the bugs.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Chief. I appreciate those
insights. I was just--I remember being sort of impressed with
how well it was working there. Obviously, there are some
hiccups and you have highlighted that. Thank you very much.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Dr. Dunn.
Welcome, Mr. Gallego. I understand that you have questions
for the second panel, so we are going to proceed there.
I want to thank the panel for being here, each and every
one of you, we appreciate it very, very much. Your testimony
helps to really raise all of the issues that need to be
wrestled with and helps to raise awareness, not only for this
committee, but for the entire Congress on the issues that we
face. We appreciate your presence very, very much. Thank you.
I will excuse you and the second panel will join us.
[Pause.]
Ms. Brownley. Thank you to the second panel for being here
this morning. We are joined by Dr. Kameron Matthews, the Deputy
Under Secretary for Health for Community Care for the Veterans
Health Administration, accompanying her is Dr. Thomas
Klobuchar, the Executive Director of the Office of Rural Health
of the Department of Veterans Affairs; and Stephanie Birdwell,
the Director of the Office of Tribal Government Relations at
the VA. Joining us from Indian Health Service is Benjamin
Smith, the Deputy Director for Intergovernmental Affairs.
With that, I now recognize Dr. Kameron Matthews for 5
minutes. Welcome.

STATEMENT OF KAMERON MATTHEWS

Dr. Matthews. Good morning, Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking
Member Dunn, and members of the subcommittee, tribal leaders
and tribal representatives. I appreciate the opportunity to
discuss how care at the Department of Veterans Affairs and our
partnership with Indian Health Service positively impact our
Native Veterans.
I am accompanied today by colleagues Ms. Stephanie
Birdwell, Director for the Department of Veterans Affairs
Office of Tribal Government Relations, and Dr. Thomas
Klobuchar, Executive Director for Veterans Health
Administration Office of Rural Health.
I would like to tell you a little bit about my background,
as you can understand why health care for Native Veterans is so
important to me. I am a family physician from outside
Philadelphia that has focused my career on helping vulnerable
populations. From my work in correctional health to community
health centers, I value the relationship with primary care, and
seek to expand access to care for those communities that are
faced with disadvantages and inequities.
I have trained and worked in Chicago and I am very familiar
with urban health issues, racial and ethnic health disparities,
and the impact of social determinants for health. As an
advocate for my patients and communities, I am here now at the
VA to listen, learn, and serve those who have served our
Nation.
Of a special note, I am proud to have visited the Alaska
Native Tribal Medical Center in May 2018 and was indeed
impressed by its amazing services.
As Secretary Wilkie has shared during his meetings with
Native American veterans and tribal leaders across the country,
our goal at VA is to shorten the distance between people in
need of veterans' services. While the Secretary and Executive
in Charge could not be here today, I am proud to be here on
behalf of the Department discussing such a vital group within
our veteran population.
Native Americans have participated in every American
conflict dating back to the Revolutionary War, and they serve
in the military at a higher per capita rate than any other
ethnic group. The importance of Native servicemembers has only
grown in this country over time, and we strive to honor this
community with the quality, culturally competent care that they
deserve.
As Secretary Wilkie recently stated, we at VA will continue
to provide vital reimbursements to tribal health programs and
Indian Health Service. To that end, a memorandum of
understanding originally signed in 2003 and updated again in
2010, established the Indian Health Service and VA can
coordinate, collaborate, and share resources between the
departments.
This partnership resulted in the establishment of shared
goals and, in order to achieve said goals, VHA has piloted and
subsequently adopted several programs. In 2012, VA started
establishing reimbursement agreements with Indian Health
Service and 114 tribal health programs so far in order to
address access to care, achieve effective partnerships, and
ensure the availability of resources.
In addition to these reimbursement agreements, local VA
medical centers have established, where appropriate, several
agreements with tribal health programs and Indian Health
Service facilities to deliver tele-mental health to Native
Veterans.
The program serves tribal communities through Indian Health
Service facilities in Alaska, Montana, Wyoming, and Oklahoma.
The Office of Rural Health, Veterans Rural Health Resource
Center in Salt Lake City has an active portfolio of innovations
in Native Veterans health care, including the creation of a
Rural Veteran Tribal Navigator Program that will connect Native
Veterans with the benefits and care they have earned.
Furthermore, the VA Video Connect pilot program is
currently being deployed nationwide. VA Video Connect will
allow rural Native Veterans to access VA health care in their
homes or local communities via cellular or wireless
capabilities. The Office of Rural Health is currently working
to tailor this program to Native Veterans communities, creating
a model that will weave together Western medicine, traditional
Native healing, and rural Native community strengths through
four main components: mental health care, technology, care
coordination, and a tailored implementation/facilitation
strategy.
In addition to these programs, the office is also piloting
programs to establish tribal VHA partnerships in suicide
prevention, and developing content regarding Native Veterans in
the VA Community Provider Toolkit.
While the 2010 MOU has opened the door to these great
successes, the March 2019 GAO report cites challenges in
obtaining the MOU goals, specifically around establishing
targets for outcome metrics to assess progress. Thus, in Fiscal
Year 2019, VHA and Indian Health Service MOU leadership agreed
that the 2010 MOU was no longer meeting the agency's needs and
required modification to create the flexibility needed to move
the interagency relationship forward to a new level.
To address the shortcomings associated with the 2010 MOU
metrics noted by GAO, VA and IHS have brought in metrics
experts from each agency to the MOU development process.
Once the draft is finalized and tribal consultation, most
importantly, is complete, the process of creating new targets
and metrics to meet the requirements outlined by GAO will take
place as new programs and pilots are developed under the new
instrument.
We are confident that the evolution of this MOU will be
successful, as it is happening in tandem with the MISSION Act.
This transformative legislation will entail the most
comprehensive change in VA's history. The MISSION Act
consolidated community care programs, as you know, to make it
easier for all veterans, families, community providers, and
employees to navigate.
The health and well-being of our Nation's veterans is of
utmost importance. We strive consistently to provide high-
quality care to all veterans, and continue to make significant
strides in enhancing the practice and culture of the Department
to be more accessible to our Native Veterans. Working with many
diverse sovereign tribes is essential to successfully achieve
the goals of the MOU. VA is committed to ensuring that our
goals align with IHS and that the needs of our Native Veterans
are met.
I apologize for going over and I do thank the committee for
hosting this hearing. I want to thank the tribal leaders and
tribal representatives, and all valued partners here who joined
today.
My colleagues and I prepared to answer any questions that
you have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Kameron Matthews Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Dr. Matthews.
I now recognize Mr. Smith.

STATEMENT OF BENJAMIN SMITH

Mr. Smith. Good morning, Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking
Member Dunn, and members of the subcommittee. My name is
Benjamin Smith, I serve as the Deputy Director for
Intergovernmental Affairs at the Indian Health Service. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify on Native Veterans' access
to health care.
I want to begin with the Indian Health Service mission,
which is to raise the physical, mental, social, and spiritual
health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest
level.
As an agency within the Department of Health and Human
Services, the Indian Health Service provides Federal health
services to approximately 2.6 million American Indians and
Alaska Natives from 573 federally recognized tribes in 37
states through a network of over 605 health care facilities
that include hospitals, clinics, health stations, and other
facility types.
The American Indian and Alaska Native population
experiences health and other disparities that
disproportionately affect their quality of life. American
Indians and Alaska Natives have an average life expectancy of 5
years shorter than that of the U.S. general population, and are
more likely than people of other races or ethnicities to
experience social and economic difficulties that may impact
their health or wellness, such as lower income, lower
educational levels, and higher unemployment.
As health needs change, new approaches to care emerge. The
Indian Health Service, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and
our tribal partners will continue to combine expertise,
resources, and efforts to assist the nearly 145,000 American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans living in the United States.
The Indian Health Service and the Veterans Affairs Veterans
Health Administration continue to work to provide eligible
American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans with access to care
that is closer to their homes, promote cultural competence and
quality health care, and focus on increasing coordination,
collaboration, and resource sharing between our agencies.
One way that we are doing this is by revising the Indian
Health Service and VA memorandum of understanding that was most
recently updated in 2010. We have a goal to revise the MOU by
fall of 2020 and to look at updating the related performance
measures, and we plan to do this using consultation and by
conferring with urban Indian organizations.
We want to underscore that this collaboration really
started back in the late 1980's when Congress directed both of
our Federal agencies to explore the feasibility of entering
into an arrangement for sharing of medical facilities and
services, and this requirement was actually memorialized in the
Indian Health Care Improvement Act. Our results were reported
to Congress and our coordination led to an initial memorandum
of understanding that was executed in 2003.
After close to a decade of collaboration, we updated the
memorandum of understanding in 2010, and in that same year the
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was enacted and
permanently reauthorized the Indian Health Care Improvement
Act. This act authorized the Indian Health Service to enter in
or expand arrangements for the sharing of medical facilities
and services between Indian Health Service, Indian tribes and
tribal organizations, and the VA. The law directs the VA to
reimburse the Indian Health Service, Indian tribes, or tribal
organizations for services provided to eligible beneficiaries
of either department in the respective facility.
Since implementing this provision in 2012, and that is the
reimbursement agreement authority that I am citing to, VA has
reimbursed over $103 million for direct-care services provided
in either Indian Health Service or tribal health programs,
covering approximately 10,645 unique American Indian and Alaska
Native Veterans.
Currently, Indian Health Service and VA operate under a
national reimbursement agreement, so that includes over 70 of
our Federal IHS-operated facilities. As we just heard, there
are 114 tribal health programs that have entered into
individual reimbursement agreements under this authority to be
reimbursed for direct care services.
We believe in the five main goals, which are to increase
access to care and services for American Indians and Alaska
Native Veterans; to promote patient-centered collaboration and
communication; to improve health promotion and disease
prevention; and to consult with tribes at the regional and
local levels; and to ensure appropriate resources are
identified and available.
We look forward to any questions that you may have as we
are here today before this committee.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Benjamin Smith Appears In The
Appendix]

Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much. Thank you both for your
testimony and I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
The first question I have is to Dr. Matthews. In your
written testimony, you said that ``in early Fiscal Year 2019
the VHA and IHS leadership team agreed that the 2010 MOU was no
longer meeting the agency's needs and required modifications to
create the flexibility to move the interagency relationship
forward to a new level.''
You said that the leadership team drafted a new MOU and
conducted a first-listening session with tribal leaders on May
15th of 2019.
Then you go on to say that that tribal input from the
session was incorporated into the draft MOU and so--and as this
additional input is now being considered for inclusion in the
draft MOU.
I am curious to know, what was that input? You said that
you got a lot of input, but you did not say what the input was.
Dr. Matthews. Great question. I am going to defer to my
colleague, Dr. Klobuchar.
Dr. Klobuchar. Thank you for that question. The tribal
consultation was conducted in concert with the Indian Health
Service in Albuquerque, and many of the questions that came up
were around inclusion of urban Indian health care in the
umbrella that the MOU will provide for the creation of new
programs. There was also some focus on referred care that,
while we have not incorporated that into the MOU itself, it
will certainly be a program or a look that the VA will take as
they move forward under the new MOU, which, again, is just an
umbrella for the creation of new programs, methods for
consultation, and so on and so forth, ongoing consultation.
I think those are the--that is the important elements that
made it into the new draft of the MOU was around the inclusion
of urban Indians and around the importance of ongoing
consultation as we move forward.
Ms. Brownley. When you talk about the referral, you are
talking about the Native Veteran going to an IHS facility and
then needs specialty care, and then has to go back to the VA,
repeat the same process again to ensure that they get specialty
care, but you are not sure whether that is going to be actually
in the drafted MOU or not?
Dr. Klobuchar. It would be a program that we would report
on under the umbrella MOU.
One of the issues--and if I can go into some detail on the
MOU itself--one of the issues that we found with the 2010 MOU
was that many of its provisions we had either fulfilled or we
found that they had been overcome by events. When we took the
decision to redraft the MOU, the idea was to create a broader,
more general MOU that would allow us to create new programs
underneath the MOU and would satisfy the GAO findings around
reporting and targets and outcomes, and so on and so forth.
Those individual programs will take place and be reported on
under that broader MOU.
Did that answer your question, ma'am?
Ms. Brownley. More or less.
Dr. Klobuchar. Okay.
Ms. Brownley. I just want a short answer and to followup on
this MOU process and how important it is going to be. I want to
hear from the VA some assurances that our Native Veterans will
be at the table with you through that negotiation.
Dr. Matthews. Yes, you have our assurances.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. Dr. Matthews, also on this, the
issue that has been raised about this referral again piece, you
said that one of the obstacles, I guess, is that you may lose
track of the care of the veteran. I do not know, that just
seems to me not a really good obstacle, because I think if you
are doing the reimbursements and everything that you are
supposed to do, you should have track of where the veteran is,
whether it is in an IHS facility or within a VA facility.
Obviously you have heard the concerns around this and why many
veterans will then just not pursue the specialty care that they
need, and certainly, from a taxpayer perspective simply, it is
duplicative and unnecessary.
Can you speak to that?
Dr. Matthews. I definitely can. It is an excellent question
and one that I agree as a clinician, the duplication of--
honestly, how VA has formally handled referrals from any of our
partners outside of VA is untenable. Especially under the
MISSION Act, we see ourselves really as a coordinator of care
at the bequest of the veterans. In helping them receive care
through the First Nations, through their partners, we
definitely see that as the veteran is staying at the center and
needing to coordinate that care.
I agree that the referral of a veteran back to the VA for
repeat visits or procedures is unnecessary and that we actually
hope to find through tribal consultations we can work through
those issues, we can develop a referral process that is more
administrative so that we can track.
The issue currently about paying reimbursements, whether
that is directly to the community provider or to the tribe
themselves, I think we can work through through consultation.
We do want to take the veteran out of the middle of that, we do
not want repetitive services, and I think we can move to really
support the tribes through establishing appropriate referral
guidelines, actually as was discussed during the first panel.
I admit that prior to now it has not been streamlined, but
as you guys have given us the authority to consolidate the
community care programs and simplify those processes, I think
we have a real path forward.
Ms. Brownley. As you try to wrestle with that, will you
wrestle with the co-pays?
Dr. Matthews. Oh, definitely, yes. I think that needs to be
acknowledged. We currently do not charge co-pays for veterans
being seen under the reimbursement agreements, it is when they
have to return to the VA or are seen in community care they are
charged a co-pay, but no veteran seen under the reimbursement
agreements are charged co-pays.
Ms. Brownley. We do not believe that the veteran should
receive--require the co-pay in the other circumstance.
Dr. Matthews. Understood, and I commit to looking into that
issue.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
My time is up. Dr. Dunn, you are recognized.
Mr. Dunn. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.
Most of the witnesses have cited concerns regarding
specialty care, referral care, and I want to address that. Let
me see if I can back out of the weeds a bit and ask some basic
questions.
I think this is to Mr. Smith, you tell me if I am wrong,
does the VA accept referrals for VA specialty care made by the
IHS and THP?
Mr. Smith. I will defer to our VA colleagues on that
question.
Dr. Matthews. I am sorry, Dr. Dunn, just to clarify the
question, a referral coming from the----
Mr. Dunn. From the IHS----
Dr. Matthews. Yes.
Mr. Dunn.--for specialty care to the VA, are those patients
accepted?
Dr. Matthews. Those referrals are accepted. I can not
necessarily speak for every facility's procedures at this
point, as they are currently being streamlined as to whether or
not they may require a visit, but those referrals are accepted.
Mr. Dunn. Is that only for veterans or for any patient from
the IHS?
Dr. Matthews. For----
Mr. Dunn. Veterans in the VA.
Dr. Matthews. Veterans in the VA, yes.
Mr. Dunn. You have got some patients in the IHS----
Dr. Matthews. Right.
Mr. Dunn.--and they get referred for specialty care to the
VA, if they are a veteran, they are accepted by the VA?
Dr. Matthews. An enrolled veteran, yes.
Mr. Dunn. If they are not a veteran?
Dr. Matthews. No.
Mr. Dunn. That is interesting to me, because when we were
in the service, I mean, we treated the Army, we treated the IHS
patients no matter whether or not they were veterans. Is that
something that has gone away?
Dr. Matthews. That is not something that is currently
included within our reimbursement agreements, no, sir.
Mr. Dunn. Is the VA--all right. Things have changed since I
was on active duty, apparently.
How well coordinated is the MISSION Act by use of the
MISSION Act with the IHS referrals to the VA? Can the VA then
enact the MISSION Act for these IHS patients, the ones they do
accept?
Dr. Matthews. Yes, their eligibility can be verified,
determined, and the veteran then of course has choice based on
their eligibility to opt in or out of community care.
Mr. Dunn. They get straight through the system, as good as
the system is, right?
Dr. Matthews. Right.
Mr. Dunn. All right, so that is an interesting thing.
All right. Well, I will yield back with that, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Dr. Dunn.
Welcome, Mr. Gallego, and you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Chairman Brownley, for holding this
hearing and for allowing me to join on the dias.
I was very lucky to serve with many Native American Marines
in Iraq and I know firsthand the patriotism and bravery they
have shown in service to this Nation, not just in current
conflicts, but in the past. That is why as Chairman of the
Subcommittee for Indigenous Peoples it has been very
frustrating to see over and over again how our Federal
Government is failing Native Americans and Native Veterans,
namely that our trust and treaty responsibilities are not being
upheld.
Ms. Matthews, a yes-or-no question: are you familiar with
the Federal Government's unique trust responsibility where it
concerns Native Americans?
Dr. Matthews. Yes, I am.
Mr. Gallego. Great. Then you also know that providing
Native Americans with health care free of cost is part of this
legal trust responsibility, for which rests in the treaty
powers in Article II of the U.S. Constitution, and is confirmed
by numerous laws and Supreme Court decisions.
Between 1778 and 1868, the U.S. ratified almost 400
treaties, many of which explicitly guaranteed tribes health
care, in addition to all proper care and protection, in return
for the seizure and occupation of their land.
I have three examples of such treaties with me right now
that I would like permission to enter into the record in case
our witnesses would like to consult them later.
Ms. Matthews--thank you.

[The Treaties Appears In The Submissions For The Record]

Mr. Gallego. Ms. Matthews, given this well-documented legal
responsibility to provide health care to Native Americans free
of cost, would you agree that it is a breach of our trust
responsibility to charge cost-sharing payments to Native
Veterans when they receive care at the VA?
We have had this discussion going on prior to this.
Dr. Matthews. I would agree it is an issue that we need to
look into as we do currently charge co-pays.
Mr. Gallego. Okay. With what I just told you, so would you
agree that--are we violating that trust then? I know you are
going to look into it, I heard you say that before, but do you
agree that we are violating our trust responsibilities in that
case?
Dr. Matthews. I would agree that VA is following its own
regulations to charge co-pays, we do not currently have an
exception on the books.
Mr. Gallego. The highest regulation there is are treaties
approved by Congress, so I would hope you would actually
understand that and send it back to your leadership.
Moving on. Ms. Matthews, given this well-documented legal
responsibility to provide health care to Native Americans free
of cost, would you--sorry.
Skipping forward. Myself and sovereign tribes think it is a
pretty clear violation and that is why I am introducing Native
American Veteran Pact Act, to prohibit the VA from charging
copayments to Native Veterans in line with our treaty
obligations.
Well, I am thankful for all the witnesses here and I know
this is not an easy subject, I know it involves a lot of
jurisdictional issues. I am disappointed that the VA Secretary
and the Under Secretary for Health, the leaders that actually
signed the MOU that impacts Native Veterans' ability to receive
care declined to attend today's hearing. Instead, Ms. Matthews,
you are accompanied by the Director of your Office of Rural
Health.
As a Representative from Phoenix, Arizona, it is home to
one of the largest urban Indian populations in this country. I
am concerned about the VA's lack of attention to urban Indians
in the MOU and, despite over 70 percent of indigenous people
living in urban areas today--and I do use the VA for services
too, so I actually--physically, actually will see this--there
is no program office responsible for ensuring that the goals of
the VA-IHS MOU reach urban Native Veterans.
Just two more questions, Ms. Matthews. In what specific
ways is the VA prepared to strengthen a new MOU when it comes
to improving access to care for urban Indian veterans?
Dr. Matthews. I would have to defer actual questions about
the MOU to Dr. Klobuchar, but before he speaks, we are
definitely committed to working closely with the urban Indian
health organizations and even enrolling them, as some of the
questions earlier, under the MISSION Act into our new networks,
we truly believe in working with these organizations.
Mr. Gallego. Mr. Klobuchar--Dr. Klobuchar.
Dr. Klobuchar. The current State of the draft MOU includes
urban--mention of urban Indian services in the text of the MOU.
Mr. Smith, do you want to make any comment on that?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I think the most important point about the
MOU is it really is the expression of how our Federal agencies
intend to collaborate to achieve these goals. Where we have
heard most of the areas of confusion arise are some of the
goals around executing some of the new authorities, such as
reimbursement authority, for example, equating that
reimbursement authority to the MOU itself. The goals of
expressing ourselves as Federal agencies and our mutual goal to
collaborate together is not the same thing as entering into a
binding agreement to reimburse for certain services. We are
trying to make that distinction as we go through this.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you. I yield back my time.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Gallego, and thanks for being
here and advocating, and also thank you for your service to our
country.
Well, there are no other members here for further
questioning. Before I conclude, I know, Ms. Birdwell, we did
not ask any questions of you, but I recognize and the committee
recognizes the good work that you have been doing and
accomplish. So we thank you for that and we thank you for your
service.
Ms. Birdwell. Thank you, Chairwoman, I appreciate that.
Ms. Brownley. Also I want to acknowledge the good work that
you and the Office of Tribal Government Relations have done to
facilitate the relationships between tribes and VA and the
Office of Community Care for facilitating reimbursement
agreements. As been already said, but over 10,000 Native
Veterans have received culturally competent care in their
tribal or IHS program and been relieved of potentially grueling
and dangerous journeys to the VA. This is critical to ensuring
veterans are not hesitating to pursue treatment, and the work
of rural health is certainly not lost on me. Your research and
grant programs are important, but you are three offices with
specific responsibilities solely to Indian country and we need
the same kind of focus for veterans who live in our cities and
urban areas.
The MOU to improve Native Veterans' care was not specific
to rural tribes or Indians receiving care on reservations, it
was to improve all Native Veterans' health status. These
veterans must be a priority in every program office and that
must be led by VA leadership. You three alone cannot direct the
services and programs necessary to improve Native Veterans'
health status across the board.
This new MOU, which is going to be extremely important,
will be approved by the Secretary and signed by the Under
Secretary. You are part of the institution and not part of its
leadership, but we are going to count on your leadership to
convey to the Secretary and to the Under Secretary everything
that has been raised here today and what will be important from
our perspective and for our Native Veterans across the country,
what is important to them to be in this MOU.
We have heard a lot today regarding--Ms. Haaland is not
here, she had to leave to go to another committee hearing, but
I am sure, if she were here, she would be asking about the
advisory committee and how important that will be as we move
forward. Co-pays, reimbursement of services, duplicity of
services, urban Indian services, these are all issues that we
hope are specifically addressed in this MOU as we move forward.
I am going to count on you to pass that along and I want to
assure you that this committee will be watching closely.
This is extremely important to us. We know we have a long
journey ahead; we have made some progress, but we still have a
lot of work ahead of us to do.
As I said, we will be watching closely, and I thank you all
for being here, we appreciate it very much.
I will ask if the ranking member would like to offer any
closing remarks?
Well, without that, again, thank you again for being here.
With that, all members will have 5 legislative days to
revise and extend remarks, and include extraneous materials.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Andrew Joseph Jr.

Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking Member Dunn, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for holding this important hearing on health
care access for Native Veterans. On behalf of the National Indian
Health Board (NIHB) and the 573 federally recognized sovereign Tribal
Nations we serve, I submit this testimony for the record. The Federal
Government's trust responsibility to provide quality and comprehensive
health services for all American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN)
Peoples extends to every Federal agency and department, including the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA).
By current estimates from the VA, there are roughly 146,000 AI/AN
Veterans, with Native Servicemembers enlisting at higher rates than any
other ethnicity nationwide. Indeed, the Department of Defense continues
to acknowledge the indispensable role of AI/AN Servicemembers
throughout American history. Native Veterans are highly respected
throughout Indian Country, in recognition of what they have sacrificed
to protect Tribal communities and the United States. Yet despite the
bravery, sacrifice, and steadfast commitment to protecting the
sovereignty of Tribal Nations and the entire United States, Native
Veterans continue to experience among the worst health outcomes, and
among the greatest challenges in receiving quality health services.
Over the course of a century, sovereign Tribal Nations and the
United States signed over 300 Treaties requiring the Federal Government
to assume specific, enduring, and legally enforceable fiduciary
obligations to the Tribes. The terms codified in those Treaties-
including for provisions of quality and comprehensive health resources
and services-have been reaffirmed by the United States Constitution,
Supreme Court decisions, Federal legislation and regulations, and even
Presidential executive orders. These Federal promises have no
expiration date, and collectively form the basis for what we now refer
to as the Federal trust responsibility. Moreover, the United States has
a dual responsibility to Native Veterans-one obligation specific to
their political status as members of federally recognized Tribes, and
one obligation specific to their service in the Armed Services of the
United States.
In 1955, Congress established the Indian Health Service (IHS) in
partial fulfillment of its constitutional obligations for health
services to all AI/ANs. The IHS is charged with a similar mission as
the VHA as it relates to administering quality health services, with
the exception of the following differences: (1) the Federal Government
has Treaty and Trust obligations to provide health care for all
American Indians and Alaska Natives; (2) IHS is severely and
chronically underfunded in comparison to the VHA, with per capita
medical expenditures within IHS at $4,078 in Fiscal Year (FY) 2017
compared to $10,692 in VHA per capita medical spending that same year
\1\; and (3) unlike IHS, the VHA has been protected from government
shutdowns and continuing resolutions (CRs) because Congress enacted
advance appropriations for the VHA a decade ago.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  The full IHS Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup
Recommendations are available at https://www.nihb.org/docs/04242019/
307871_NIHB%20IHS%20Budget%20Book_WEB.PDF
\2\  See 38 U.S.C. 117; P.L. 111-81

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Health Outcomes among Native Veterans and AI/ANs Overall

Destructive Federal Indian policies and unresponsive human service
systems have left Native Veterans and their communities with unresolved
historical and intergenerational trauma. From 2001 to 2015, suicide
rates among Native Veterans increased by 62 percent (50 in 2001 to 128
in 2015).\3\ In Fiscal Year 2014, the Office of Health Equity within
VHA reported significantly higher rates of mental health disorders
among Native Veterans compared to non-Hispanic White Veterans,
including in rates of PTSD (20.5 percent vs. 11.6 percent), depression
symptoms (18.7 percent vs. 15.2 percent), and major depressive disorder
(7.9 percent vs. 5.8 percent).\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  VA, Veteran Suicide by Race/Ethnicity: Assessments Among All
Veterans and Veterans Receiving VHA Health Services, 2001-2014 (Aug.
2017) (citing CDC statistics).
\4\  Lauren Korshak, MS, RCEP, Office of Health Equity and Donna L.
Washington, MD, MPH, Health Equity-QUERI National Partnered Evaluation
Center, and Stephanie Birdwell, M.S.W., Office of Tribal Government
Relations
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Native Veterans are 1.9 times more likely to be uninsured than non-
Hispanic White Veterans, and are significantly more likely to delay
accessing care due to lack of timely appointments and transportation
issues.\5\ Among all Veterans, Native Veterans are more likely to have
a disability, service-connected or otherwise.\6\ Native Veterans are
exponentially more likely to be homeless, with some studies showing
that 26 percent of low-income Native Veterans experienced homelessness
at some point compared to 13 percent of all low-income Veterans.\7\
There exists a paucity of Native Veteran specific health, housing, and
economic resources and programs that are accessible and culturally
appropriate. It is essential that the VHA work with IHS and Tribes to
create more resources specifically for Native Veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Johnson, P. J., Carlson, K. F., & Hearst, M. O. (2010).
Healthcare disparities for American Indian veterans in the United
States: a population-based study. Medical care, 48(6), 563-569.
doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181d5f9e1
\6\  U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2015a). American Indian
and Alaska Native Veterans: 2013 American Community Survey. Retrieved
from https://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/SpecialReports/AIANReport2015.pdf
\7\  US Department of Housing and Urban Development, US Department
of Veterans Affairs, National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans.
Veteran Homelessness: A Supplemental Report to the 2010 Annual Homeless
Assessment Report to Congress. Washington, DC.2011:56
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to IHS, AI/ANs born today have a life expectancy that is
on average 5.5 years less than the national average.\8\ In states like
South Dakota, however, life expectancy for AI/ANs is as much as two
decades lower than for Whites. Health outcomes among AI/ANs have either
remained stagnant or become as AI/AN communities continue to encounter
higher rates of poverty, lower rates of healthcare coverage, and less
socioeconomic mobility than the general population. According to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 2016, AI/ANs had the
second highest age-adjusted mortality rate of any demographic
nationwide at 800.3 deaths per 100,000 people.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  Indian Health Service. 2018. Indian Health Disparities.
Retrieved from https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/includes/themes/
responsive2017/display_objects/documents/factsheets/Disparities.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, AI/ANs have the highest uninsured rates (25.4
percent); higher rates of infant mortality (1.6 times the rate for
Whites); higher rates of diabetes (7.3 times the rate for Whites); and
significantly higher rates of suicide deaths (50 percent higher). AI/
ANs also have the highest Hepatitis C mortality rates nationwide (10.8
per 100,000); and higher rates of chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
deaths (2.3 times that of Whites). Further, while overall cancer rates
for Whites declined from 1990 to 2009, they rose significantly for AI/
ANs. For instance, from 1999 to 2015 AI/ANs encountered a 519 percent
increase in drug overdose deaths-the highest rate increase of any
demographic nationwide.\9\ All of these health determinants of health
and poor health status could be dramatically improved with adequate
investment into the health, public health and health delivery systems
operating in Indian Country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Mack KA, Jones CM, Ballesteros MF. Illicit Drug Use, Illicit
Drug Use Disorders, and Drug Overdose Deaths in Metropolitan and
Nonmetropolitan Areas--United States. MMWR Surveill Summ 2017;66(No.
SS-19):1-12. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.ss6619a1
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The VA's Veteran Outreach Toolkit lists AI/ANs as an ``at-risk''
population, citing this troubling suicide rate. Additionally, AI/ANs
grapple with complex behavioral health issues at higher rates than any
other population--for children of AI/AN veterans, this is compounded by
the return of a parent who may suffer from post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD). Outreach events for AI/AN communities should be a VA
priority to increase wellness, decrease stigma, and prevent suicide. It
is essential that the VHA continue to engage with Tribal leaders,
through consultation, to assist in carrying out these activities.

Funding Levels for IHS versus VHA: The Need for Advance Appropriations

1. Tribes and NIHB strongly urge Congress to pass bipartisan
legislation that would enact advance appropriations for Indian
programs

By the most recent estimates, federally operated IHS facilities,
Tribally operated health facilities and programs, and urban Indian
health programs collectively serve roughly 2.6 million AI/ANs
nationwide. In comparison, the VHA serves roughly 6.9 million Veterans
through 18 regional networks. In Fiscal Year 2019 discretionary
appropriations for IHS equaled roughly $5.8 billion; in comparison,
spending within the VHA totaled over $76 billion. In effect, this means
that while the VHA service population is roughly only three times the
size of the Indian health system, its discretionary appropriations are
approximately 13 times higher than for IHS.
According to the IHS Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup, IHS
appropriations must reach nearly $38 billion-phased in over 12 years-in
order to fully meet current health needs. In other words, even if today
IHS were fully funded at the level of need identified by sovereign
Tribal Nations, it would only equal half the total Fiscal Year 2019
discretionary appropriation for the VHA. Indeed, the Federal
Government's continued abrogation of its trust responsibility for
health services for AI/ANs is clearly exemplified by the gravity of the
divide in health funding for the VHA versus IHS.
Although the IHS budget has nominally increased by 2-3 percent each
year, these increases are barely sufficient to keep up with rising
medical and non-medical inflation, population growth, facility
maintenance costs, and other expenses. According to a 2018 report by
the Government Accountability Office (GAO-19-74R), from 2013 to 2017,
IHS annual spending increased by roughly 18 percent and per capita
spending increased by roughly 12 percent; in comparison, annual
spending under the VHA increased by 32 percent and per capita spending
increased by 25 percent during the same time period.\10\ The widening
gap in funding levels between IHS and the VHA only serves to perpetuate
the disproportionately higher levels of health disparities experienced
by Native Veterans and AI/ANs overall.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\  Government Accountability Office. 2018. Indian Health
Service: Spending Levels and Characteristics of IHS and Three Other
Federal Health Care Programs. Retrieved from https://www.gao.gov/
assets/700/695871.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unequivocally, the U.S. Federal Government has a moral and ethical
obligation to ensure all U.S. Veterans can access quality health
services-and it must continue to honor this responsibility. But the
U.S. also has a Trust obligation to ensure all AI/ANs, including Native
Veterans, can receive quality health services, that it continuously
fails to honor. It is long past due for the Federal Government to make
good on its constitutional obligation to Native Veterans an all AI/AN
Peoples.
The discrepancies do not end with chronic underfunding of IHS. Of
the four major Federal healthcare entities, IHS is the only one subject
to the devastating impacts of government shutdowns and continuing
resolutions (CRs). This is because Medicare and Medicaid receive
mandatory appropriations, and the VHA was authorized by Congress to
receive advance appropriations nearly a decade ago. As a result, the
VHA has been insulated from every government shutdown, CR, and
discretionary sequestration over the past decade. While it is true that
no sector of government is fully spared by the repercussions of endless
shutdowns and CRs, those repercussions are neither equal nor
generalizable across all entities. In fact, the worst consequences are
levied on Indian Country.
For instance, during the 2013 Federal budget sequester, the IHS
budget was slashed by 5.1 percent--or $221 million-levied on top of the
damage elicited by that year's government shutdown. In fact, IHS was
the only federally funded healthcare entity that was subject to full
sequestration because Congress had already exempted the VHA when it
authorized it to receive advance appropriations. Once again, during the
most recent 35-day government shutdown-the Nation's longest and most
economically disastrous-IHS was the only Federal healthcare entity to
be shut down. While direct care services remained non-exempt, providers
were not receiving pay. Administrative and technical support staff-
responsible for scheduling patient visits, conducting referrals, and
processing health records-were furloughed. Contracts with private
entities for sanitation services and facilities upgrades went weeks
without payments, prompting many Tribes to exhaust alternative
resources to stay current on bills.
Several Tribes shared that they lost physicians to hospitals and
clinics not impacted by the shutdown. Some Tribal leaders even shared
how administrative staff volunteered to go unpaid so that the Tribe had
resources to keep physicians on the payroll. These are just a few
examples of the everyday sacrifices and ongoing struggles that widen
the chasm between the health services afforded to AI/ANs and those
afforded to the Nation at large. While it is impossible to measure the
full scope of adversity brought on by the 35-day government shutdown,
one reality remains clear-Indian Country was both unequivocally and
disproportionately impacted.
In 2018, GAO released a report examining the benefits of
authorizing advance appropriations for the IHS and thus establishing
parity between IHS and the VHA (GAO-18-652). The report outlined how
Congress has been forced to use short-term or full-year CRs in all but
four of the last 40 years. In fact, only once in the past two decades-
in Fiscal Year 2006-has Congress successfully passed the Interior,
Environment, and Related Agencies appropriations package (which funds
IHS) before the end of the fiscal year. As a result, year after year,
the Indian health system is curtailed from making meaningful
improvements toward the availability and quality of health services and
programs, further restraining efforts to advance quality of life and
health outcomes for AI/ANs.
While a CR is always preferable to a government shutdown, they are
not devoid of obstacles that directly impact patient care. Because of
budget authority constraints under a CR, IHS is prohibited from
initiating any new activities or projects that were not expressly
authorized or appropriated in the previous fiscal year. In addition,
under a CR, IHS must exercise significant precaution over expenditures,
and is generally limited to simply maintain operations as opposed to
improve them. When you compound the impact of chronic underfunding and
endless use of CRs, the inevitable result are the chronic and pervasive
health disparities seen across Indian Country. As such, Tribal Nations
and NIHB strongly urge Congress to pass bipartisan legislation that
would authorize advance appropriations for Indian programs.

Lack of IHS and VHA Care Coordination and Reimbursement Agreements

1. NIHB recommends that Congress clarify statutory language
under section 405(c) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act
and make explicit the VHA's requirement to reimburse IHS and
Tribes for services under Purchased/Referred Care (PRC).

By law, an AI/AN Veteran is eligible for services under both the
VHA and IHS. A 2011 report showed that approximately one-quarter of
IHS-enrolled Veterans use the VHA for health care, commonly receiving
treatment for diabetes mellitus, hypertension or cardiovascular disease
from both Federal entities.\11\ According to the VA, more than 2,800
AI/AN Veterans are served at IHS facilities.\12\ In instances where an
AI/AN veteran is eligible for a particular health care service from
both the VA and IHS, the VA is the primary payer. Under section 2901(b)
of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), health
programs operated by the IHS, Tribes and Tribal organizations, and
urban Indian organizations (collectively referred to as the ``I/T/U''
system) are payers of last resort regardless of whether or not a
specific agreement for reimbursement is in place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  Kramer, BJ, Wang M, Jouldjian S, Lee ML, Finke B, Saliba D.
Healthcare for American Indian and Alaska native veterans: The roles of
the veterans health administration and the Indian Health Service.
Medical Care.
\12\  VA/IHS listening session held on May 15, 2019
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 407(a)(2) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (IHCIA)
reaffirms the goals of the 2003 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
between the VHA and IHS established to improve care coordination for
Native Veterans. In addition, during permanent reauthorization of
IHCIA, section 405(c) was amended to require the VHA to reimburse IHS
and Tribes for health services provided under the Purchased/Referred
Care (PRC) program. In 2010, the VHA and IHS modernized their 2003 MOU
to further improve care coordination for Native Veterans by bolstering
health facility and provider resource sharing; strengthening
interoperability of electronic health records (EHRs); engaging in joint
credentialing and staff training to help Native Veterans better
navigate IHS and VHA eligibility requirements; simplifying referral
processes; and increasing coordination of specialty services such as
for mental and behavioral health.
According to a 2019 GAO report (GAO-19-291), since implementation
of the 2010 MOU, the VHA has reported entering into 114 signed
agreements with Tribal Health Programs (THPs), along with 77
implementation agreements to strengthen care coordination. While a
single national reimbursement agreement exists between federally
operated IHS facilities and the VHA, THPs continue to exercise their
sovereignty by entering into individual agreements with the VHA. From
2014 to 2018, those reimbursement agreements with THPs alone increased
by 113 percent.
VA reimbursements to IHS and THPs overall during that same time
period increased by 75 percent, reaching $84.3 million in total. Yet
these increased reimbursements still represent just a fraction of 1
percent of the VA's annual budget. While recent increases in the
quantity of agreements and reimbursements demonstrates a positive
trend, there continue to be significant challenges in care coordination
between the VHA and IHS. The 2019 GAO report highlighted three
overarching challenges related to care coordination: ongoing issues in
patient referrals between I/T/U facilities and the VHA; significant
problems in EHR interoperability; and high staff turnover within both
VHA and IHS. These complications continue to stifle Native Veterans'
access to health care, erodes patient trust in both IHS and VHA health
systems, and obstructs efforts to improve health outcomes.
These issues are exacerbated by VHA claims that no statutory
obligation exists for reimbursement of specialty and referral services
provided through IHS or THPs. To clarify, the VHA currently reimburses
IHS and THPs for care that they provide directly under the MOU. Despite
repeated requests from Tribes, the VA has not provided reimbursement
for PRC specialty and referral care provided through IHS/THPs. This is
highly problematic, as AI/AN Veterans should have the freedom to obtain
care from either the VA or an Indian health program. If a Veteran
chooses an Indian health program, that program should be reimbursed
even if the service could have been provided by a VA facility or
program in the same community.
But because that doesn't happen, it creates greater care
coordination issues and burdensome requirements for Native Veterans.
For example, if a Native veteran goes to an IHS or THP for service and
needs a referral, the same patient must be seen within the VA system
before a referral can be secured. This means the VHA is paying for the
same services twice, first for those primary care services provided to
the Veteran in the IHS or THP facility, and then again when the patient
goes back to the VHA for the same primary care service to then receive
a VHA referral. This is neither a good use of Federal funding, nor is
it navigable for veterans. In order to provide the care that Native
Veterans need, many THPs are treating Veterans or referring them out
for specialty care and paying for it themselves so that they can be
treated in a timely and competent manner. For those Veterans that do go
back to the VHA for referrals, there is often delayed treatment and a
significantly different standard of care provided.
As a step toward mitigating the confusion surrounding reimbursement
for care provided by the VHA, NIHB recommends the VHA include PRC in
future IHS/THP reimbursement agreements, so that there is no further
rationing of health care provided by IHS and THPs to Native Veterans
and other eligible AI/ANs. Ultimately, however, NIHB recommends that
Congress clarify the statutory language under section 405(c) of IHCIA
and make explicit VHA's requirement to reimburse under PRC.

2. NIHB also strongly supports the GAO recommendation that the
VHA work with IHS to create written policy or guidelines to
clarify how referrals from IHS and THP facilities to VHA
facilities for specialty care should be managed, and to
establish specific targets for measuring action on MOU
performance measures.

The GAO report cited how, for example, facilities reported
conflicting information about the processes for referring Native
Veterans from IHS or Tribal facilities to VHA, and VA headquarters
officials confirmed that there is no national policy or guide on this
topic. One of the leading collaboration practices identified by GAO is
to have written guidance and agreements to document how agencies will
collaborate. Without written policy or guidance documents on how
referrals should be managed, neither agency can ensure that VHA, IHS,
and Tribal facilities have consistent understanding of the options
available for referral of Native Veterans for specialty care.
As is currently the case, the result is duplicative care for Native
Veteran and duplicative costs for the Federal Government. NIHB has
heard that some Native Veterans prefer to simply hand carry their EHR
records from their IHS provider to their VHA provider to avoid having
to receive the same care twice. In short, lack of written policy
perpetuates this burdensome, pointless, and complicated process that
only serves to frustrate patients, worsen administrative red tape, and
increase expenditures.
For numerous Tribes, and especially for the Veterans themselves, it
is an undue barrier to constantly have to refer patients back and forth
to the VA that ultimately wastes time and delays access to care. The
GAO identified that IHS and VA lack sufficient measures for
quantifiable assessments of progress toward MOU goals and objectives.
Although the VHA and IHS have created 15 performance measures, no
specific targets or indicators have been established that allow Tribes
to measure progress toward achieving the goals and objectives of the
MOU.

3. Tribes and NIHB have strongly recommended that the VHA
consult with Tribes and work through their MOU with IHS to
create and publish a living list of available Veterans
Liaisons/Tribal Veterans Representatives across all IHS and VHA
regions

The VHA must do more outreach and education with Native Veterans to
improve care coordination. Tribes and NIHB have consistently stressed
the need for VHA to create toolkits and guides to assist Native
Veterans in navigating care access. The paucity of currently available
newsletters, outreach workers and liaisons such as Tribal Veteran
Service Officers (TVSOs), and online resources specifically for Native
Veterans also sends the message that care for Native Veterans is not a
priority. But despite repeated Tribal demands, the agency has yet to
implement this request.
A closely related issue is the fact that Native Veterans are still
charged copays and deductibles when receiving services under the VHA.
The Federal Government's trust responsibility for health services
extends to all Native Veterans. In recognition of this, AI/ANs do not
have copays or deductibles for services received at an I/T/U facility.
Additionally, the ACA further affirmed the trust responsibility when it
included language at Section 1402 to exempt all AI/ANs under 300
percent of the Federal poverty level from co-pays and deductibles on
plans purchased on the health insurance Marketplace.

4. Congress should pass legislation exempting Native Veterans
from copays and deductibles

Section 222 of IHCIA prohibits cost sharing of AI/ANs in cases
where an AI/AN receives a referral from the from an IHS or THP under
the PRC program. Like IHS and the Marketplace, the VHA is another means
by which the Federal Government must uphold its trust responsibility to
AI/ANs. As such, it is imperative that Congress enact legislation that
requires the VHA to similarly exempt AI/AN Veterans from copays and
deductibles in the VA system in recognition of the Federal trust
responsibility. Importantly, copay costs should not be shifted to IHS
or Tribes. The VHA must absorb these costs on behalf of AI/AN Veterans
in recognition of their Trust and Treaty obligations to AI/AN Peoples.

5. Congress should pass the bipartisan H.R. 2791 - Department
of Veterans Affair Tribal Advisory Committee Act of 2019

Tribal Nations and NIHB have also strongly advocated for the
seating of a Tribal Advisory Committee (TAC) within the Office of the
Secretary at the VA. Establishing a Veteran TAC is essential for
strengthening the government-to-government relationship, and improving
VA accountability to Native Veteran health needs. Through the seating
of a TAC, top VA officials would have the ability to hear directly from
Tribal leaders about the unique health priorities and challenges that
impact Native Veterans. In addition, it would help prevent the
development of new rules or policies that would adversely affect care
for Native Veterans. As such, Tribes and NIHB strongly support the
bipartisan H.R. 2791, introduced by Representative Deb Haaland, and
urges the House VA Committee to vote to pass this significant
legislation.

EHR Interoperability and Health Information Technology (IT)
Modernization

1. Congress must ensure parity between the VA and IHS in
appropriations and technical assistance for health IT
modernization

The Resource and Patient Management System (RPMS)-which is the
primary health IT system used across the Indian health system-was
developed in close partnership with the VHA and has become partially
dependent on the VHA health IT system, known as the Veterans
Information Systems and Technology Architecture (VistA). The RPMS is an
early adoption of VistA for outpatient use, and the legacy system was
designed with the decision to keep the same underlying code
infrastructure as VistA. IHS began developing different clinical
applications for their outpatient services, and the VHA adopted code
from RPMS to provide this functionality for VistA.
RPMS eventually began to use additional VistA code as the need for
inpatient functionality increased. This type of enhancement and support
for both the IHS and VHA was made possible because VistA's software
components were designed as an Open Source solution. The RPMS suite is
able to run on mid-range personal computer hardware platforms, while
applications can operate individually or as an integrated suite with
some availability to interface with commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS)
software products.
Currently, the RPMS manages clinical, financial, and administrative
information throughout the I/T/U, although, it is deployed at various
levels across the service delivery types. However, in recent years,
many Tribes and even several Urban Indian Health Programs (UIHPs) have
elected to purchase their own COTS systems that provide a wider suite
of services than RPMS, have stronger interoperability capabilities, and
are significantly more navigable and modern systems to use. As a
result, there exists a growing patchwork of EHR platforms across the
Indian health system.
When the VA announced its decision to replace VistA with a COTS
system in 2017 (Cerner), concentrated efforts to re-evaluate the Indian
Health IT system accelerated, and arose significant concerns as to how
VHA and I/T/U EHR interoperability would continue. In 2018, IHS
launched a Health IT Modernization Project to evaluate the current I/T/
U health IT framework, and to, through Tribal consultation, key
informant interviews, and national surveys, develop a series of next
steps and recommendations toward modernizing health IT in Indian
Country.
Difficulties in achieving IT interoperability among VA, IHS, and
THP facilities pose significant problems for Native Veterans' care
coordination. Unfortunately, the VHA and IHS have yet to identify a
systemic solution toward increasing EHR interoperability between I/T/U
and VHA hospitals, clinics, and health stations. A resulting scenario
includes situations where a THP provider-having treated a Veteran and
referred them to the VHA for specialty care-would not receive the
Veteran's follow up records as quickly as if they had streamlined
access to each other's systems.
Now that the VHA is transitioning to the Cerner system, it has
worsened concerns around care coordination and sharing of EHRs between
I/T/U and VHA systems. The fact is, Native Veterans are suffering today
from the lack of health IT interoperability. It is shameful that Native
Veterans are put in a position where they have to find their own
solutions to streamline EHR sharing, most shockingly exemplified by
anecdotes of AI/AN Veterans hand carrying their health records between
their IHS and VHA provider.
Congress must ensure that the Indian health system is fully
integrated across the development and implementation of the VHA's
transition to Cerner; however, thus far it has failed to do so. By the
most current estimates, the transition to Cerner will take up to 10
years to fully implement, with a current price tag of roughly $16
billion. None of the existing estimates include calculations of how
much it will cost to include IHS in this transition; however, through
its Health IT Modernization Project, IHS is attempting to arrive at an
estimated dollar figure for this cost.
Tribes and NIHB were pleased to see that the Fiscal Year 2020
President's Budget included a request for a new $20 million line item
in the IHS budget to assist with health IT modernization, and that this
request was included in the House-passed Fiscal Year 2020 Interior
Appropriations package. But in comparison, the Fiscal Year 2020 House
Military Construction Appropriations bill budgeted $1.6 billion to
assist VHA in its transition. Ensuring EHR interoperability between I/
T/U and VHA health systems will be impossible if Congress fails to
establish parity in appropriations for VHA and IHS health IT
modernization.

Conclusion

The Federal Government has a dual responsibility to Native Veterans
that continues to be ignored. As the only national Tribal organization
dedicated exclusively to advocating for the fulfillment of the Federal
trust responsibility for health, NIHB is committed to ensuring the
highest health status and outcomes for Native Veterans. We applaud the
House VA Subcommittee for Health for holding this important hearing,
and stand ready to work with Congress in a bipartisan manner to enact
legislation that strengthens the government-government relationship,
improves access to care for Native Veterans, and raises health
outcomes.
______

Prepared Statement of Kevin J. Allis

On behalf of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI),
thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony on the topic of
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) veterans' access to
healthcare. I serve as the Chief Executive Officer of NCAI, and I look
forward to working with members of this Subcommittee and other Members
of Congress to better fulfill the Federal Government's commitment to
provide for the well-being of AI/AN veterans when they return home.
Founded in 1944, NCAI is the oldest and largest national
organization composed of tribal nations and their citizens. Tribal
leaders created NCAI in 1944 in response to termination and
assimilation policies that threatened the existence of tribal nations.
Since then, NCAI has fought to preserve the treaty and sovereign rights
of tribal nations, advance the government-to-government relationship
between tribal nations and the Federal Government, and remove historic
structural impediments to tribal self-determination.
AI/ANs have a long history of distinguished service to this
country. Per capita, AI/ANs serve at a higher rate in the Armed Forces
than any other group of Americans and have served in all the Nation's
wars since the Revolutionary War. In fact, AI/AN veterans served in
several wars before they were even recognized as U.S. citizens. Despite
this esteemed service, AI/AN veterans have lower personal incomes,
higher unemployment rates, and are more likely to lack health insurance
than other veterans.
The United States must honor its commitments to AI/AN veterans. The
Federal Government's responsibility to provide quality healthcare to
AI/AN veterans comes both from their service to this country and the
Federal Government's treaty and trust obligations to AI/AN people. NCAI
calls on Congress and the Administration to ensure that Federal policy
addresses the unique needs and circumstances of AI/AN veterans and that
Federal agencies coordinate closely to deliver the best possible
services to AI/AN veterans, regardless of whether they are living on
rural reservation lands or in major urban areas.

Cultural Competency at the Department of Veterans Affairs

NCAI's Veterans Committee provides a forum for discussing issues
that impact AI/AN veterans and helps develop NCAI policy priorities to
improve the lives of veterans across Indian Country. Participants in
the NCAI Veterans Committee continue to highlight cultural competency
issues across the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) system. This
directly impacts the provision of healthcare and can affect how
veterans' claims are processed and whether they are approved. For
example, the VA's generic Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Disability Benefits Questionnaire does not address cultural issues.
This lack of consideration leads to many AI/AN veterans being denied
benefits or receiving benefits that are insufficient given the severity
of their conditions. Additionally, aging veterans and those with
certain types of traumatic brain injuries affecting language that have
reverted to their traditional languages face a lack of translation
services.
Given the importance of cultural competency, the NCAI Veterans
Committee has expressed the need to increase access to Tribal Veterans
Service Organizations (TVSOs) to assist AI/AN veterans with benefits
claims and accessing other VA services. Unfortunately, the current
regulations require that for a tribal nation to have representatives
trained and accredited through the VA, it must establish and fund an
organization that has the primary purpose of assisting veterans and
survivors with their claims. Requiring a tribal nation to establish and
fund a separate organization fails to recognize tribal sovereign
decisionmaking and creates unnecessary regulatory burdens. This
burdensome regulatory structure is the reason only a handful of
tribally affiliated groups have applied for accreditation-and why even
fewer have received accreditation. We urge members of this Subcommittee
to examine ways to ensure tribal nations are able to establish TVSOs to
better assist AI/AN veterans with the preparation, presentation, and
prosecution of benefits claims.

VA-IHS Memorandum of Understanding and GAO-19-291

In 2010, the VA and the Indian Health Service (IHS) signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (2010 MOU) ``to establish coordination,
collaboration, and resources-sharing between the [VA and IHS] to
improve the health status of [AI/AN] Veterans.'' \1\ The MOU includes
five goals:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  U.S. Gov't Accountability Office, GAO-19-291, Actions Needed
to Strengthen Oversight and Coordination of Health Care for American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans (2019).

Increase access to and improve quality of healthcare and
services to the mutual benefit of both agencies. Effectively leverage
the strengths of the VA and IHS at the national and local levels to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
afford the delivery of optimal clinical care.

Promote patient-centered collaboration and facilitate
communication among VA, IHS, AI/AN veterans, tribal facilities, and
Urban Indian clinics.

In consultation with tribal nations at the regional and
local levels, establish effective partnerships and sharing agreements
among VA headquarters and facilities, IHS headquarters and facilities,
tribal facilities, and Urban Indian Health Programs in support of AI/AN
veterans.

Ensure that appropriate resources are identified and
available to support programs for AI/AN veterans.

Improve health promotion and disease prevention services
to AI/AN veterans to address community-based wellness.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Id.

In furtherance of the 2010 MOU, VA enters reimbursement agreements
with IHS and tribal health program facilities. These agreements allow
AI/AN veterans to receive VA-eligible healthcare services at IHS and
tribal facilities without prior VA approval. There is a single national
reimbursement agreement between VA and IHS, which was extended in June
2018 through June 30, 2022. VA negotiates individual reimbursement
agreements with tribal facilities.
In March 2019, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
published a report to provide updated information on implementation of
the 2010 MOU. GAO found that since its last report on this issue,
reimbursements by VA for healthcare services have increased,
particularly at tribal health facilities. It also noted an increase in
the number of VA-tribal health facility reimbursement agreements and
the number of veterans served under reimbursement agreements.
GAO also identified challenges that continue to hinder full
implementation of the 2010 MOU. Specifically, the report found that
performance measures established by the agencies do not include targets
to track progress and there is no national policy or guidance on
referring AI/AN veterans from IHS and tribal facilities to VA for
services, potentially causing duplicative tests and services.
GAO made the following recommendations: (1) ``[a]s VA and IHS
revise the MOU and related performance measures, the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs should ensure these measures are consistent with the
key attributes of successful performance measures, including having
measurable targets''; (2) ``[t]he Secretary of Veterans Affairs should,
in consultation with IHS and tribes, establish and distribute a written
policy or guidance on how referrals from IHS and THP facilities to VA
facilities for specialty care can be managed''; and (3) ``[a]s VA and
IHS revise the MOU and related performance measures, the Director of
IHS should ensure these measures are consistent with the key attributes
of successful performance measures, including having measurable
targets.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA and IHS are in the process of re-negotiating the 2010 MOU. In
addition to calling on VA and IHS to ensure tribal stakeholders are at
the table for those negotiations, NCAI would like to highlight several
issues raised in the GAO report that continue to be tribal priorities
for inclusion in the VA-IHS MOU.
Currently, VA does not reimburse for services provided by external
providers paid for by IHS or tribal health facilities through the
Purchase/Referred Care program. Instead, AI/AN veterans must be
referred by VA facilities to be eligible to receive reimbursable
specialty care. This is overly burdensome, results in duplicative
processes that limit access to care for AI/AN veterans, and wastes
Federal resources. VA reimbursement of Purchased/Referred Care must be
included in the re-negotiated MOU.
A specific focus of the 2010 MOU is the interoperability of the VA
and IHS systems ``to facilitate sharing of information on common
patients and populations.'' Nine years later, there still is not
interoperability between VA and IHS electronic health information
technology systems. NCAI urges VA and IHS to ensure interoperability of
their health information as they evaluate and implement new electronic
health record systems.
Finally, AI/ANs do not have cost-sharing for services received
through IHS. However, AI/AN veterans are subject to the same copayments
as other veterans when they receive care at the VA. In Fiscal Year
2017, approximately 30 percent of AI/AN veterans were charged co-
payments, averaging approximately $281.56 per veteran.\4\ This
represents a significant barrier to care for AI/AN veterans.
Accordingly, NCAI calls on Congress and the Administration to honor the
treaty and trust obligations to provide healthcare to AI/ANs by
eliminating VA co-payments for AI/AN veterans.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\  Id.

Pass the Department of Veterans Affairs Tribal Advisory Committee Act
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
of 2019

AI/AN veterans, tribal leaders, and GAO have expressed the need for
VA to engage with tribal stakeholders when assessing, developing, and
implementing policy affecting AI/AN veterans. Establishing a VA Tribal
Advisory Committee (VATAC) will help achieve this goal. Specifically,
the VATAC would advise the Secretary on how to improve programs and
services for AI/AN veterans, identify timely issues related to VA
programs, propose solutions to identified issues, provide a forum for
discussion, and help facilitate getting useful feedback from Indian
Country. Building a strong relationship between the VA and tribal
nations will increase awareness and understanding across the VA of the
unique issues affecting AI/AN veterans in tribal communities. This
awareness paired with more direct interaction with tribal leaders who
regularly hear from AI/AN veteran constituents will ultimately produce
faster solutions and better services for AI/AN veterans.
Legislation has been introduced in the House (H.R. 2791) and the
Senate (S. 524) to create a VATAC that would provide vital
opportunities for collaboration, communication, and coordination
between the VA and tribal nations to help AI/AN veterans access the
services they earned through their service to this country. NCAI
supports this legislation via Resolution #REN-19-033, ``Supporting the
Department of Veterans Affairs Tribal Advisory Committee Act.''
Accordingly, NCAI urges Congress to act swiftly to enact legislation
establishing a VATAC.

Authorize IHS and BIA Advance Appropriations to Provide Certainty for
AI/AN Veterans

Congress must uphold its solemn obligations to tribal nations by
protecting programs serving Indian Country--especially those serving
AI/AN veterans--from uncertainty in the Federal budget process.
Following the 2019 government shutdown, NCAI adopted Resolution
#ECWS-19-001, which calls on Congress to pass legislation authorizing
advance appropriations for IHS and the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA).
This resolution expands on NCAI Resolution#ANC-14-007, which calls for
advance appropriations for IHS.
Preventing Federal budget impasses from jeopardizing the health,
safety, and well-being of AI/AN veterans and all those living in tribal
communities is a major priority for Indian Country. Although the
Veterans Health Administration receives advance appropriations to
prevent Federal budget impasses from affecting or interrupting
healthcare for veterans, IHS does not receive the same treatment--even
though IHS is often the primary agency responsible for providing
critical healthcare services to AI/AN veterans. Additionally, services
provided through the BIA impact AI/AN veterans' access to health care
both at IHS and VA facilities. For instance, BIA is responsible for
construction and maintenance of roads across Indian Country, and lapses
in related funding can prevent AI/AN veterans from traveling to
healthcare appointments at the VA or Indian health system facilities.
Authorizing advance appropriations for IHS and BIA will ensure that
medical attention and resources that AI/AN veterans earned through
their military service are available when the Administration and
Congress cannot agree on spending priorities.
There are currently two bills pending in the U.S. House of
Representatives that provide advance appropriations for tribal
programs. H.R. 1128, the Indian Programs Advanced Appropriations Act
was introduced by Representative Betty McCollum and authorizes advance
appropriations for several accounts at IHS and BIA. This legislation
has a Senate companion bill, S. 229, and nearly 40 bipartisan co-
sponsors. H.R. 1135, the Indian Health Service Advance Appropriations
Act, was introduced by Representative Don Young and authorizes advance
appropriations for several accounts at IHS. This legislation has a
Senate companion bill, S. 2541, and nearly 30 bipartisan co-sponsors.
NCAI supports H.R. 1128 and H.R. 1135, and NCAI strongly urges
every member of this Subcommittee and the entire House of
Representatives to join in supporting advance appropriations for Indian
Country.

Pass the Health Care Access for Urban Native Veterans Act

Urban Indian Organizations (UIOs) are an important part of the
Indian healthcare delivery system. Given that a majority of AI/ANs live
off reservation, many of our AI/AN veterans utilize the UIO system. AI/
AN veterans often prefer to use Indian healthcare providers, including
UIOs, for reasons such as cultural competency, community and familial
relations, and VA wait times.
Although the 2010 MOU recognizes that VA and IHS must meet the
needs of Urban Indian health programs, UIOs are currently ineligible to
be reimbursed for the services they provide to AI/AN veterans. Allowing
reimbursement for UIO services would not only help alleviate broader
issues with wait times at VA facilities, but also would provide AI/AN
veterans the opportunity to seek culturally competent care when living
away from their own tribal communities, which will help reduce overall
health disparities in Indian Country.
NCAI strongly supports addressing this gap in the IHS-VA MOU.
Legislation has been introduced in the House (H.R. 4153) and the Senate
(S. 2365) to amend the Indian Health Care Improvement Act to provide
Native veterans coverage by the VA for services at urban Indian health
centers. NCAI's membership passed Resolution #REN-19-034, which calls
on Congress to pass this important legislation.

Address Data Collection on Suicide among AI/AN Veterans

AI/ANs experience high rates of depression and psychological
distress, which contributes to Native people having one of the highest
suicide rates of any group in the United States. While the VA
acknowledges suicide as a national health crisis that affects all
Americans and publishes reports each year on suicide data, it continues
to omit data specific to AI/AN veterans. When VA does disaggregate
suicide data by race/ethnicity, AI/AN veterans fall under the category
of ``other.'' Capturing data specific to AI/AN veteran suicide is
essential for developing effective policy and initiatives to generate
improved outcomes. Therefore, NCAI urges Congress and the
Administration to work to develop policies and procedures that ensure
the collection of AI/AN veteran suicide data so that Federal and tribal
policymakers have the necessary information to address the suicide
crisis among AI/AN veterans.

Invest in Tribal Infrastructure, Road Systems, and Tribal Transit
Systems

Although outside this Committee's jurisdiction, supporting a strong
surface transportation reauthorization bill for Indian Country also
would help address some of the issues AI/AN veterans face when trying
to access VA services. NCAI urges Congress to provide significant
increases for the Tribal Transportation Program, the Tribal Transit
Program, the BIA Road Maintenance Program, and other programs that will
improve road conditions and promote road safety in Indian Country.
Increased investment in these programs will enhance the ability of AI/
AN veterans to travel to VA services.

Conclusion

Thank you for the opportunity to testify regarding AI/AN veterans'
access to quality, culturally appropriate healthcare. We greatly
appreciate the work of this Committee to address the many challenges
and barriers faced by AI/AN veterans. We loforward to working with this
Subcommittee on a bipartisan basis to advance Federal policies that
support those who have served our country.
______

Prepared Statement of Sonya Tetnowski

My name is Sonya Tetnowski, I am a member of the Makah tribe, a
U.S. Army Paratrooper Veteran, and the Chief Executive Officer of the
Indian Health Center of Santa Clara Valley in California. I'm also the
Vice President of the National Council of Urban Indian Health (NCUIH),
which represents 41 Title V Urban Indian Health Organizations (UIOs)
across the Nation, as well as the President of the California
Consortium for Urban Indian Health (CCUIH). UIOs provide high-quality,
culturally competent care to urban Indian populations, which constitute
more than 78 percent of all American Indians and Alaska Natives
(AIANs). I would like to thank Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking Member
Dunn, and other distinguished members of the subcommittee for holding
this important hearing. It is my pleasure to testify today regarding
H.R. 4153, the Health Care Access for Urban Native Veterans Act.
H.R. 4153 is a necessary and critical piece of legislation, one
that will make a real meaningful difference in the funding for health
care services provided by UIOs across the United States. Just last
month, I came to Washington D.C. to advocate and give in person
testimony on this very issue before the House Indigenous Peoples of the
United States Subcommittee Legislative Hearing on held on September 25,
2019 and to voice my support of H.R. 4153.
I cannot express more urgently, that the single most important
thing the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) can do to improve
healthcare to AI/AN Veterans, is to fully implement the VA and Indian
Health Services' Memorandum of Understanding (VA-IHS MOU) and
Reimbursement Agreement for Direct Health Care Services. This would
allow UIOs to be reimbursed for providing culturally competent care to
AI/AN Veterans residing in urban areas. Despite an embattled history
between tribal people and the U.S. Government, and as an inherited
responsibility to safeguard the lands of their ancestors, AI/ANs serve
this country at a higher rate than any other group in the Nation. A
significant number of these Veterans live in urban areas and seek out
the high-quality, culturally competent care at their local UIO.
UIOs were formally recognized by Congress following the end of the
Termination Era in 1976 under the Indian Health Care Improvement Act to
fulfill the Federal Government's health care-related trust
responsibility to Indians who live off the reservations. Each UIO is
led by a Board of Directors that must be majority Indian. They are
collectively represented by the National Council of Urban Indian Health
(NCUIH), which is a 501(c)(3), member-based organization devoted to the
development of quality, accessible, and culturally sensitive healthcare
programs for AIANs living in urban communities. UIOs are a critical
part of the Indian Health Service (IHS), which uses a three-prong
approach to provide health care: Indian Health Services, Tribal
Programs, and Urban Indian Organizations commonly referred to as the I/
T/U.

VA-IHS MOU Historical Background

In February 2003, the VA and IHS signed a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) and updated this MOU in October 2010. The very
first paragraph of the MOU states:
`` the intent of this MOU (is) to facilitate collaboration between
IHS and VA, and not limit initiatives, projects, or interactions
between the agencies in any way. The MOU recognizes the importance of a
coordinated and cohesive effort on a national scope, while also
acknowledging that the implementation of such efforts requires local
adaptation to meet the needs of individual tribes, villages, islands,
and communities, as well as local VA, IHS, Tribal, and Urban Indian
health programs.''
In December 2012, the two agencies signed a reimbursement agreement
allowing the VA to financially compensate IHS for health care provided
to AIANs that are part of the VA's system of patient enrollment. While
this MOU has been implemented for IHS and Tribal providers, it has not
been implemented for UIOs, despite the fact that UIOs are explicitly
mentioned in the original language of the 2010 MOU, and provide
healthcare within IHS's own I/T/U system. Leaving out UIOs is a
violation of the MOU since the agencies agreed to ``not limit
initiatives, projects, or interactions between the agencies in any
way.'' Not reimbursing UIOs for services provided to Native Veterans is
limiting this vulnerable, underserved population from the healthcare
they need and deserve. NCUIH and UIO leaders have been testifying
before Congress for years that the MOU is not being recognized for
UIOs. Members have said this is an ``easy fix,'' and ``an oversight,''
so we are happy to see that there is now a bill to address this issue
once and for all. We maintain that as part of the I/T/U, the VA already
has the authority to reimburse title V UIOs, but we are happy Congress
is taking the next step to address this important issue.
Between 2012 and 2015, the VA reimbursed over $16.1 million for
direct services provided by IHS and Tribal Health Programs covering
5,000 eligible Veterans under the IHS-VA MOU. In spite of the Federal
trust responsibility to AIANs, the VA had decided to deem UIOs
ineligible to enter into the reimbursement agreement under the IHS-VA
MOU. For context, UIOs are already extremely underfunded and receive
less than $400 per patient from IHS, versus national health expenditure
rates of almost $10,000 per patient. In 2018, UIOs received a total of
$51.3 million to support 41 programs, and that is before IHS's
administrative costs are removed. UIOs only receive one line-item
appropriation in the IHS budget-the urban Indian health line item. UIOs
don't receive purchase and referred care dollars, Federal Tort Claims
Act coverage, 100 percent FMAP, or facilities funding. In fact, a few
UIOs temporary closed during the shutdown due to the lack of parity
within the IHS system. VA reimbursement, even half of the $16.1
million, would drastically help our facilities. It is time to fix this
issue for good.
The VA's position is that UIOs are not identified in 25 U.S.C.
Sec. 1645(c) as one of the organizations it may reimburse. However, it
is important to note that two UIOs are covered under the IHS-VA MOU
because VA officials report that those programs function as a service
unit as defined in 25 U.S.C. Sec. 1603(20).
There have been several Government Accountability Office (GAO)
reports conducted on the VA-IHS MOU--two reports on VA and IHS
implementation and oversight of the MOU were released in 2013 and 2014.
In March 2019, the GAO released a study entitled ``VA AND INDIAN HEALTH
SERVICE Actions Needed to Strengthen Oversight and Coordination of
Health Care for American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans''. The GAO
was asked to provide updated information related to the agencies' MOU
oversight. This report examines (1) VA and IHS oversight of MOU
implementation since 2014, (2) the use of reimbursement agreements to
pay for AI/AN veterans' care since 2014, and (3) key issues identified
by selected VA, IHS, and tribal health program facilities related to
coordinating AI/AN veterans' care. In this report the GAO report makes
the recommendation to both the VA Secretary and IHS Director to ensure
measureable targets to track and measure performance, and has jump
started efforts by VA to conduct consultation and confer. The VA is
currently working with IHS to revise the MOU, stating their goals for
this revision: increase access and quality of care for AI/AN veterans,
improve health promotion and disease prevention, encourage patient
centered collaboration and communication, consult with Tribes at the
regional and local levels, ensure appropriate resources for services
for AI/AN Veterans. Furthermore, the VA in a 2018 report to Congress
stated themselves that UIOs under IHCIA are ``eligible, capable, and
are entitled to receive reimbursement for healthcare services they
provide to AI/AN veterans from any payer'' as part of the IHS I/T/U
system. They also acknowledge that they have no current legal authority
to allow for expanding existing reimbursement agreements to include
UIOs. If the goal is to increase access to care for AI/AN veterans,
then now is the time for the VA to finally recognize that UIOs are a
critical part of the Indian Health Service (IHS), acknowledge the needs
of the significant amounts of AI/AN veterans who live in urban areas
and expand the reimbursement agreement to include UIOs.
Both the legislative and executive branches strongly support
efforts to increase timely access of healthcare for Veterans.
Recognition of the MOU for UIOs and urban Indian Veterans would be
highly consistent with those efforts. NCUIH has worked closely with the
National Congress of American Indians who recently passed a resolution
in support of our efforts to ensure parity for UIOs. This resolution is
being submitted as a part of my testimony today.

In Conclusion

We strongly recommend that the VA reimburses UIOs for services
rendered to Native Veterans. These reimbursements must be companied by
outreach and advocacy resources to ensure that Native Vets are aware of
all the health care options available to them in their communities. The
VA is known for its challenging wait times, yet we all agree access to
care for Veterans is a priority. UIOs can provide excellent, culturally
competent primary care, dental, and behavioral health services to
Veterans, while reducing the burden on the VA and allowing it to focus
on the specialty services it provides best.
Our national interest of serving Veterans will be best carried out
when we extend the collaborative arrangements already agreed to by the
VA and IHS to include the bulk of our Nation's Native American
Veterans--who either are or could be served by a UIO.
NCUIH strongly recommends, pursuant to Section 405(c) of the Indian
Health Care Improvement Act, that the VA-IHS MOU be expanded to include
reimbursement for care provided by the UIOs. Thank you for holding this
hearing today and for the Committee's support of urban Indian
healthcare issues. We strongly support H.R. 4153 and look forward to
working with Congress to serve as an expert resource regarding this
legislation.
______

Prepared Statement of William F. Smith

The Alaska Native Health Board (ANHB) thanks Chairwoman Brownley,
Ranking Member Dunn, and Distinguished Members of the House Committee
on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Health for the opportunity to
provide this written statement to augment Chief William F. Smith's oral
testimony. The ANHB was established in 1968 and serves as the statewide
voice of the Alaska Tribal Health System (ATHS) on Alaska Native health
issues. ANHB represents 229 federally recognized Alaska Tribes that
provide health services to over 177,000 Alaska Native people and
thousands of veterans (Native and non-Native alike) spread across the
greater than 660,000 square miles that Alaska encompasses. Please
accept this statement providing background and context and a listing of
our issues and priorities pertinent to this hearing.

Honoring Our Veterans

Alaska Natives and American Indians are the highest represented
population in the armed forces per capita. Tribal leadership stands
beside them and by their Non-Native brothers and sisters who have
served in the military and believe they should be encouraged and
enabled to utilize the benefits promised them by the Federal
Government. Tribal sharing agreements and engagement with the Tribal
health system provides a method for the Federal Government and agencies
to meet those promises. These individuals have sacrificed for our
security and our freedom and are to be lifted and celebrated. However,
sadly many veterans do not have faith and trust in the VA after past
experiences with delays in enrollment, denial of care or lack of access
to VA services. The Alaska VA is to be commended for the strides it has
taken in partnership with tribes to remedy these barriers. Its
partnership with tribes is a key component in its success.

Background:

Trust Responsibility

Established in numerous Treaties and the Constitution, the Trust
Responsibility forms a unique government-to-government relationship
between the Federal Government and American Indian and Alaska Native
(AI/AN) people. These actions form the legal basis by which the United
States has committed to protecting the health and well-being of
America's first citizens in perpetuity. Alaska Tribes have taken over
our programs and services through a contracting and compacting process
and now carry out nearly all of the functions previously administered
by the IHS. Collectively, the Alaska Tribal Health System forms an
integrated statewide health network, providing health care services at
village clinics, regional hubs and the Alaska Native Medical Center. In
taking on this responsibility, Alaska Tribes operate on the principle
of self-determination and intertribal cooperation, and in doing so have
achieved remarkable advances in strengthening the health and well-being
of our people.

The Alaska Tribal Health System

The Alaska Tribal Health System (ATHS) is a truly comprehensive
statewide system of health care. It is a voluntary affiliation of over
30 Alaskan tribes and tribal organizations providing health services to
over 177,000 Alaska Natives/American Indians. Each tribe or tribal
health organization is autonomous and serves a specific geographical
area; and, many are the only health provider in their respective
community. This fact makes the ATHS an integral part of the Alaska
Public Health System. It is a finely tuned network that provides
services through:

180 small community primary care centers

25 sub regional mid-level care centers

4 multi-physician health centers

6 regional hospitals

Alaska Native Medical Center tertiary care

Referrals to private medical providers and other states
for complex care
The infrastructure of the ATHS, including facilities and staffing,
make the ATHS a critical partner for the VA. And in most rural
locations the ATHS is the only health care provider available, making
the ATHS a necessary partner in providing veterans living in rural
Alaska the care they have earned through service.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1247.039

Figure 1 Scaled map of Alaska with ATHS referral patterns imposed over
the contiguous US.

Alaska Tribal Sharing Agreements

The Alaska Tribal Sharing Agreements were established in 12 as a
part of an initiative known as ``Care Closer to Home.'' As a result,
Alaska veterans were found to not have to endure the same wait-times as
their compatriots in the contiguous United States. Furthermore, prior
to the establishment of the Tribal Sharing Agreements, Alaska's
veterans, especially in rural Alaska, had limited or no access to
health care services supported by the VA. Alaska has the highest per
capita representation of veterans in the Nation; the ATHS is an
essential partner in the VA's mission to ``care for him who shall have
borne the battle and his widow and orphan.'' The Alaska model has
unequivocally expanded access to care to veterans, who have benefited
immensely in the years subsequent to the agreements as a result of the
partnership between Tribal Health Programs (THPs) and the VA. The
tribal sharing agreements also support an integral partnership for
enrollment and outreach to Alaska veterans. In Alaska, prior to this
partnership between the Alaska VA and the ATHS, the VA had six access
points of care to Alaska veterans. Since 2012, the VA's footprint now
matches that shown in Figure 1. Protecting and renewing these
agreements are of utmost importance to our partnership with the VA.

The Issues:

Support for H.R. 2791 and S. 524

Department of Veterans' Affairs Advisory Committee Act of 2019

ANHB encourages the full Committee to support H.R. 2791, the
Department of Veterans' Affairs Advisory Committee Act of 2019,
introduced by Congresswoman Debra Haaland of New Mexico. The companion
bill, S. 524, was introduced in the Senate by Senator Dan Sullivan of
Alaska, and is cosponsored by Senator Lisa Murkowski, also of Alaska.
Creating a VA Tribal Advisory Committee (TAC) would reflect the
government-to-government relationship and improve communications with
tribal partners. Alaska Tribes note that a VA TAC would augment (not
supplant) the consultative process. The creation of the VA TAC could
coincide with and support an update to the VA's Tribal Consultation
Policy and Process which would allow tribes to provide input on a
tribal consultation policy that better reflects the government-to-
government relationship they have with the VA. The VA TAC would play an
important role for the VA to provide regular feedback to tribes and
THPs about what actions have been taken based on tribal consultations.

Tribal Representation on the IHS VA Leadership Team on the MOU

Tribal and THP representatives need to be included in the Indian
Health Service (IHS)-VA Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) Leadership
Team and in any oversight committees which monitor its implementation
in order to honor the government-to-government relationship between the
Tribes and the Federal Government. The services provided under this MOU
are predicated on the Federal Trust Responsibility. And in
consideration of the Government Accountability Office (GAO) report
(GAO-19-291) assessing the MOU and the planning to update the
agreement, it is important to include tribal voices upfront, in the
design, which will have definite impacts on their programs. This will
also benefit the VA in seeking how to followup and implement
recommendations brought forward from tribal consultations. We ask that
Congress encourage the VA and IHS to include tribes and THPs IHS-VA MOU
Leadership Team in order to address challenges and to reflect the
government-to-government relationship in which collaboration has
already mutually benefited the VA and Tribes and THPs. On these
principles we also ask that tribes and THPs serve an active role in
reviewing, revising and evaluating the 15 performance measures
identified by the two agencies and in setting associated targets for
the selected and revised measures.

Tribal Consultation

The current Department of Veterans Affairs' Tribal Consultation
Policy was signed in 2011, ANHB recommends that the VA as a practice
work with Tribes to update this policy on a regular basis. The Policy
as it stands offers on page 5 subparagraph 7.d., provides ``through
reviewing proposed plans, policies, rules, or other pending and
proposed programmatic actions, recognizes the need to assess whether
such actions may impact Indian Tribes and/or American Indian and Alaska
Native Tribes. Consultation should take place prior to any actions that
may have the potential to significantly affect tribal resources,
rights, or land. VA strives to notify appropriate Tribal Officials
about such actions in an effort to provide Tribal Officials the
opportunity to pursue and/or engage in the consultation process.''
There are many areas where the VA can benefit from consulting with
Tribes, from implementing the VA Mission Act of 2018 to the renewal of
the VA memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Indian Health Service
(IHS).

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Build Parity Between the VA and IHS

Congress must give the IHS and its tribal partners parity with the
VA. For example, in Fiscal Year 17, VA spending per user was $7,600
\1\, whereas for the same year, IHS spending per user was $3,332.\2\
The IHS spends half what the VA spends per user. When Native veterans
are treated in IHS and THPs, that means that they are accessing a
system that is funded at half the rate of direct care VHA facilities.
The IHS is also subject to government shutdowns because it lacks the
advance appropriations authority given to the VHA. This causes
instability in care for Native veterans who receive their care in
tribal facilities. It is vital that we achieve parity with the VA to
ensure our heroes receive the care they deserve.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Golding, H. ``Potential Spending on Veterans' Health Care: 18-
28'', Congressional Budget Office. Slide 7. Accessed: (https://
www.cbo.gov/system/files/2018-11/54690-presentation_0.pdf)
\2\  ``The National Tribal Budget Formulation Workgroup's
Recommendations on the Indian Health Service Fiscal Year 2020 Budget'',
National Indian Health Board. Page 3. Accessed: (https://www.nihb.org/
docs/03012018/TBFWG%20FY%202020%20Recommendations%20Brief.pdf)

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA Copayments and Deductibles

The IHS and THPs do not charge co-payments or deductibles to AN/AI
beneficiaries as part of the Federal Trust Responsibility to provide
healthcare to AN/AIs. The same Trust Responsibility extends to Native
veterans who receive their care through the VHA. In recognition of the
Federal Trust Responsibility, the VA should eliminate all deductibles
and co-pays for Native veterans. Congress should clarify in statute
that the Trust Responsibility does not end at the IHS' doors but
extends to VA programs for Native veterans as well.

Alaska's Tribal Veteran Representative Model

There are many barriers to seeking care for Native veterans,
including stigmas around care; prior denials of application; distance
to care; and lack of awareness of benefits and services they are
entitled to receive. The Tribal Veterans Representative (TVR) program
was developed to reach Native veterans in their communities through
trusted community members. TVRs are volunteers, who are veterans and
tribal community members who reach out to unenrolled Native veterans,
provide them with information on VA health care services and benefits,
and assist them with the enrollment process. The program has proved
very successful, and Congress should continue to support this important
program.

In Conclusion:

Many veterans have broken faith in the VA system, some having not
accessed care in decades. Tribes in Alaska and across the Nation are
working with the VA to help restore that faith. The issues we have
raised in this testimony can continue the work of restoring trust in
the VA for veterans, Native and non-Native alike. Our collaborative
relationship with the VA can be strengthened through further
consultation and policy development that eases access to care for all
veterans through Indian health programs.
As Congress continues its review of health care access for
veterans, we should build on programs and institutional supports which
are proven. An important step would be to allow for longer Tribal
Sharing Agreement periods, where the agreements support step up and
step down of capacity building and support continuity of care over
time. Allowing for tribal representation and consultation are effective
methods for ensuring that policies and programs do not leave Native
veterans behind. Supporting access for veterans through culturally
engaged methods has demonstrated time and again through increased
Native veteran participation the importance that this approach
provides. Finally, building parity between the VA and IHS lifts up
veterans, especially Native and rural/remote veterans, who seek care
through tribal facilities.
ANHB thanks the subcommittee and looks forward to further
supporting the members in their work on veterans' health care issues,
and ANHB welcomes questions at
[emailprotected]
.
______

Prepared Statement of Marilynn Malerba

Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking Member Dunn, and Members of the
Subcommittee,
On behalf of the Indian Health Service (IHS) Tribal Self-Governance
Advisory Committee (TSGAC), it is an honor to submit the following
formal written testimony on the unique barriers that Native veterans
face when seeking access to quality, culturally competent care.
Established in 1996, the TSGAC provides information, education
advocacy, and policy guidance for the implementation of Self-Governance
within the IHS.
Native Veterans have a uniquely special status with the United
States. Our American Indian and Alaska Natives have fought alongside
the colonial government beginning with the Battle of Bunker Hill, and
they have subsequently fought for the United States armed forces in
every war and conflict, at higher rates per capita than any other group
in the United States.
Treaties between our native governments and the United States
included health care for our people. Our Native veterans, as warriors
on behalf of this Nation are deserving of the best health care we can
provide. All veterans, Native and non-Native, alike have sacrificed
much for this country and are owed the best health care that we can
provide.
The United States Commission on Civil Rights notes in the report
titled ``Broken Promises: Continuing Federal Funding Shortfall for
Native Americans'' ``the United States expects all nations to live up
to their treaty obligations and it should live up to its own.'' It
specifically recommends that the Federal Government should provide
steady, equitable and non-discretionary funding directly to Tribal
nations to support the public safety, health care, education, housing,
and economic development of Native Tribes and people.
One way to enhance the funding for the health of our Native
veterans was implemented with the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
between the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services' (HHS) Indian Health Service
(IHS). In fact, given the inequity of funding for our Native people
within the Federal system, the ability to access VA funding for
services provided to our Native veterans provides better care for our
veterans and provides some relief for a very economically challenged
Indian health care system. In 2017, the funding per person per year for
an American Indian was $3,332 while the Veterans Health Administration
funding per person was $8,759.

The TSGAC would specifically like to comment on the effectiveness
of this MOU and provide solutions to overcome the systematic health
inequities experienced by Native veterans as a means to improve Native
veterans' health status and well-being.

As reported by the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) in
2019, Federal Indian policy has promoted Tribal self-government--the
practical exercise of Indian tribes and nations' inherent sovereign
authority--for more than four decades The Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act of 1975 (ISDEAA), as amended, authorizes
federally recognized tribes to assume the administration of a variety
of Federal programs--or portions thereof--that were previously managed
by the Indian Health Service. In effect, the Tribes are fulfilling the
trust and treaty obligations of the United States through contractual
arrangements with the Federal Government.
Since enactment of ISDEAA, Tribal nations have demonstrated and
proven that a government-to-government relationship based on respect of
sovereignty and the inherent right of Tribes to self-govern is an
effective and successful approach for both the delivery of services to
Tribal communities and to uphold the United States' trust
responsibility to Tribal Nations and their citizens.
The VA reports there are 145,000 Native Veterans living in the
United States. The VA also reported that Native Veterans have an
average life expectancy 4 years shorter than that of the general U.S.
population and are more likely than Veterans of other ethnicities to
experience social and economic difficulties that may impact their
health or wellness, such as lower income, lower education levels and
higher unemployment. Native veterans are eligible to receive health
care services from the VA, IHS, and Tribal nations and Tribal
organizations that operate under a Self-Governance agreement (referred
to as Tribal Health Providers or THPs).
Tribal Nations that elect to administer health programs and
services under a Self-Governance agreement to their citizens and
communities are effective, in part, because Tribal Nations know the
needs of their communities and are in the best position to provide
culturally appropriate solutions tailored to address those local needs.
Many THPs have significant experience serving veterans in their
communities and have entered into reimbursement agreements with the VA,
pursuant to Section 405(c) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act
(IHCIA).\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Section 405 (c) of the IHCIA provides that...the Service,
Indian tribe, or Tribal organization shall be reimbursed by the
Department of Veterans Affairs or the Department of Defense (as the
case may be) where services are provided through the Service, an Indian
tribe, or a Tribal organization to beneficiaries eligible for services
from either such Department, notwithstanding any other provision of
law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As Native veterans return home and seek to access the benefits they
are entitled to, healthcare services often fall short to meet their
needs. Factors, such as, residing in remote rural communities, poverty,
mental health conditions, historical mistrust and a limited number of
culturally competent healthcare providers create barriers to care and
lead to Native veterans experiencing greater health disparities
compared to other veterans. Other social determinants of health impact
the overall health of our Native veterans including lack of running
water, lack of indoor plumbing, overcrowded housing and in some cases
lack of fully functioning kitchen facilities for nutrition.
Further, regulatory barriers exacerbate Native veterans' ability to
access care. Restrictions on specialty care, assessment of co-pays,
duplicative processes, overly burdensome administrative requirements
and lack of coordination of care delay access to care and have caused
irreparable harm to veterans.
Native Veterans reside in rural areas in greater proportions when
compared to Veterans of other races--with nearly 40 percent of Native
veterans residing in rural areas, often on geographically dispersed
reservations or Tribal lands which are often remote, isolated and
considered highly rural. THPs are often one of few, if any, health
providers in rural areas. As such, THPs are a critical partner for
increasing access to quality healthcare to all veterans, both Native
and non-Native. IHCIA Section 405(c) provides the authority for Tribes
to receive reimbursement for services provided to non-Native veterans
but THPs are limited from playing a greater role in providing increased
access to healthcare because VA limits the services that IHS can
provide to non-Native veterans.
In recent years, the VA and IHS made some progress overcoming these
challenges to ensure eligible veterans can access efficient adequate
health services in their own communities through THP's. However, the VA
limits the types of care that can be provided at IHS and does not cover
non-Native veterans who would otherwise routinely receive services
through IHS, such as non-Native women pregnant with Native children;
even in cases where the IHS or THP is the only facility in close
proximity to the veteran. Limiting the services that IHS can provide in
turn limits the services that Tribally administered healthcare programs
can provide to their communities.

Coordination Between VA and IHS

In 2010, VA and IHS expanded upon a 2003 memorandum of
understanding (MOU) to improve the health status of American Indian and
Alaska Native veterans through coordination and resource sharing among
VA, IHS, and Tribal Nations. This 2010 MOU outlined mutual goals for VA
and IHS collaboration and coordination of resources and health care
services provided to AI/AN veterans. For example, it included
provisions for joint contracts and purchasing agreements, sharing
staff, ensuring providers in VA and IHS could access the electronic
health records of shared patients, and the development of reimbursement
policies and mechanisms to support care delivered to AI/AN veterans
eligible for care in both systems.
In December 2012, VA and IHS signed a reimbursement agreement that
facilitates reimbursement from VA to IHS facilities for the direct care
services they provide to eligible Native veterans. VA has established
similar reimbursement agreements with individual Tribally administered
healthcare programs. The VA and IHS are now in the process of updating
the MOU. This process provides a tremendous opportunity for the VA,
IHS, and Tribal governments to work collaboratively to identify
activities that will help ensure Native Veterans are receiving the
quality healthcare services they are owed.

The current MOU between VA and IHS includes the following five
primary goals:

1. Increase access to care and services for American Indian and
Alaska Native Veterans

2. Promote patient-centered collaboration and communication

3. Improve health-promotion and disease prevention

4. Consult with Tribes at the regional and local levels

5. Ensure appropriate resources are identified and available.

In accordance with these five goals, the MOU contains specific
areas in which VA and IHS agreed to collaborate and coordinate on,
including:

Reimbursement: development of payment and reimbursement
policies and mechanisms to support care delivered to dually eligible
Native veterans.

Sharing staff: sharing of specialty services, joint
credentialing and privileging of health care staff, and arranging for
temporary assignment of IHS Public Health Service commissioned officers
to VA.

Staff training: providing systematic training for VA,
IHS, THP, and Urban Indian Health Program staff on VA and IHS
eligibility requirements to assist them with appropriate referrals for
services.

Information Technology Interoperability: interoperability
of systems to facilitate sharing of information on common patients, and
establishment of standard mechanisms for VA, IHS, and THP providers to
access records for patients receiving care in multiple systems.

We offer the following comments and recommendations that are
related to several of the goals and/or areas of agreed collaboration
and coordination:

Patient Referrals

As VA, IHS, and Tribal Nations work to build greater partnerships,
we must address issues with regard to coordination of care. Failing to
adequately coordinate care is magnified by VA's unwillingness to
reimburse referral services. For example, if a Native veteran goes to
an IHS or Tribal facility for service and needs a referral, the same
patient must then be seen within the VA system before a referral can be
secured. This is a not an efficient use of Federal funding as it is
duplicative, fails to acknowledge similarly credentialed providers and
makes care navigation difficult for Native veterans.

Recommendation: The VA should accept referrals made by IHS and THPs
in order to provide the best services to our veterans.

Reimbursement of Purchased and Referred Care

Although the MOUs and agreements with VA have demonstrated success
in facilitating patient care for veterans, neither the current national
agreement nor the Tribal agreements include reimbursement for Purchased
and Referred Care (PRC) at IHS or Tribal healthcare facilities.
Consequently, veterans are forced to maneuver through a complex
healthcare system and an elaborate administrative process.
Veterans often require additional services that are not available
at IHS or THPs. In many instances eligible veterans are also eligible
for PRC services. The PRC program authorizes Indian Healthcare
facilities to purchase services from a network of private providers.
IHS and THPs are the payors of last resort, which require that all
other sources of obtaining health services must be exhausted prior to
receiving care through the PRC program. These services may include
primary or specialty care that is not available at an IHS and/or Tribal
healthcare facility. Many THPs have existing provider networks to
ensure veteran's complex healthcare needs are met.
The VA, however, will not reimburse THPs for their referrals but
instead insist that the veteran in need of specialty care return to the
VA health system for a VA referral for care. In certain instances, this
level of care may be directly available and provided under the current
reimbursement agreements and reimbursed by the VA. However, because the
mix of direct versus purchased care varies across the Indian health
system, some IHS or Tribal health programs may purchase more care from
outside providers, which currently is unreimbursed by VA.
This illogical and inconsistent management of care is inefficient,
a waste of resources (both time and money) and fails to prioritize the
healthcare needs of Native veterans. THPs work hard to provide a
seamless health care experience. Lack of coordination of care for
specialty care and other medically necessary care paid by PRC creates
more barriers for our veterans. This creates misalignment with the VA's
mission for care which strives for improved access to all types of
care.

Recommendation: VA should include PRC in the IHS/THP reimbursement
agreements to eliminate further rationing of health care provided by
IHS and THPs to Native veterans and other eligible veterans and to
ensure timely quality healthcare.

Native Veterans Co-Pays

Native veterans who seek health care services at a VA facility are
assessed co-payments which is in direct opposition to the Federal trust
obligation to provide health care for all American Indians and Alaska
Natives. IHS and THPs are the payor of last resort (section 2901(b) of
the ACA) whether or not there is a specific agreement in place for
reimbursement. Therefore, neither the Native Veteran nor the IHS should
be responsible for any co-payments.

Recommendation: The TSGAC recommends the discontinuation of the
practice of collecting co-payments from Native Veterans.

Tribal Provider Credentialing

Although stated in the MOU, the VA does not accept provider
credentialing from THPs. Tribes that administer their health programs
through Self-Governance agreements have the right to choose and operate
their own credentialing system or to leverage the credentialing system
administered by IHS.
VA acceptance of IHS/THP-credentialed providers facilitates care
coordination by allowing IHS/THP primary care providers to refer
directly into the VA system for either continued care to be provided in
a VA facility, or for care to be purchased through outside providers.
This would eliminate the duplicative primary care visit and referral
and ensures that the Veteran continues with their primary care provider
of choice who coordinates their care and receives all reports and
results from other providers. VA has attempted in some local areas to
re-credential IHS/THP providers under the VA system, but the length of
time required for a provider to proceed through the entire VA
credentialing process is not practical or timely.

Recommendation: To ensure care coordination is effective and
efficient, VA should accept provider credentialing from IHS/THPs, upon
the provider releasing the credentialing package to VA.

Graduate Medical Education (Tribal Medical Residency Programs)

IHS and THPs have significant workforce challenges due, in part, to
most facilities being located in rural and/or remote locations. The HHS
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) automatically
designates IHS, Tribally operated and Urban Indian Health programs as
Health Professionals Shortage Areas (HPSAs) and Medically Underserved
Area and Medically Underserved Population (MUA/MUP) for these reasons.
Several THPs currently have Tribal medical residency programs.
TSGAC was very encouraged to review the provisions of the recent VA
Mission Act, specifically Section 403 which included a ``Pilot Program
on Graduate Medical Education and Residency.'' This new pilot includes
facilities operated by Tribes, Tribal Organizations and IHS as
``covered facilities'' for purposes of the program and requires such
facilities have a priority in placement of residents.

Recommendation: VA should include IHS and Tribes in the planning of
the pilot program to ensure that any regulations or policies that may
be developed in the future for the pilot work optimally in Indian
Country.

Access to Consolidated Mail Order Pharmacy (CMOP)

Currently only those IHS and Tribal Health Programs that use the
RPMS system have access to CMOP. This is an important means of
improving compliance with prescriptions when those medicines are
delivered directly to the Veteran's homes. This reduces barriers to
effective disease management

Recommendation: Information Technology Systems experts from both VA
and IHS need to ensure that all systems used by Tribal Health programs
are compliant and compatible with the CMOP system.

Quality Measures

The TSGAC is supportive of quality measures that provide for
tracking of meaningful outcomes. However, the TSGAC would be very
disturbed at the prospect of developing either data reporting
requirements that affect reimbursements to IHS/THPs, or that require
new collection of data and reporting systems in addition to those
already imposed on IHS/THPs. All IHS/THPs receiving reimbursement from
VA are required to be accredited by a nationally recognized health
accreditation agency, which assures quality standards are being
maintained. The VA also conducts quality monitoring, and visits IHS/THP
programs regularly for review, even though this is not a requirement of
the statute. Finally, all IHS/THPs participating in Medicare and
Medicaid must comply with all of their quality and performance programs
and reporting, as applicable. The VA itself is not required to comply
with this level of accountability to external agencies.

Recommendation: The IHS and VA should work together and consult
with the Tribes to develop evaluation measures for assessing the
progress toward MOU goals. Additionally, the VA should not impose any
additional quality programs upon IHS/THPs, because it is very
burdensome, costly, and unnecessary because there are sufficient
quality requirements already in place.

Health Information Exchange

VA belongs to the eHealth Exchange--a national health information
exchange--and it reported to GAO in March 2019 that IHS or THPs could
join the exchange to access information about common veteran patients.
However, IHS reported to GAO that although the agency explored
connecting to the eHealth Exchange several years ago, testing and
onboarding costs to participate were prohibitive. THPs that GAO spoke
with reported being a part of other, more locally based health
information exchanges, but noted that VA was not part of these
exchanges.

Recommendation: Local VA health care facilities should work with
their local THPs to ensure health information can be exchanged at the
local levels through local health information exchanges rather than one
national health information exchange.

Tribal Advisory Board

Tribal advisory committees provide an effective forum for Tribes
and Federal agencies to work together as government-to-government
partners to address policy, legislative, budget, program and service
issues and formulate recommended actions. In response to GAO's March
2019 report, VA stated that it will establish a Tribal advisory group
that will make recommendations related to care coordination guidance
and policies. The VA set a target completion date for establishing this
group is spring 2020.

Recommendation: The VA should work in coordination with Tribes to
establish a Tribal Advisory Board. Tribal leaders have significant
experience serving on Tribal advisory committees/boards at Federal
agencies and can provide crucial input on key components and
characteristics that make an effective advisory board.

GAO's Review of Coordination Between VA and IHS

The TSGAC fully supports the development of specific, measurable
metrics by which to evaluate the progress being made under the MOU.
Although there are a number of measures identified in annual reports
issued by the IHS and VA, they are largely process measures which
report on the number of veterans served, amount of reimbursements,
number of trainings or events, etc.
In March 2019, GAO reported that the MOU signed by the VA and IHS
lacks sufficient measures for assessing progress toward its goals.
Specifically, GAO reported that the agencies established 15 performance
measures, but they did not establish targets against which performance
could be measured. For example, while the number of shared VA-IHS
trainings and webinars is a performance measure, GAO noted that there
is no target for the number of shared trainings VA and IHS plan to
complete each year. Two of the three recommendations GAO made to the VA
and IHS focus on the lack of performance measures and one focuses on
the lack of written policy and guidance.

Recommendation: Federal agencies should focus their limited
resources on actions that will directly improve the health and well-
being of Native veterans and should ensure that measures they develop
are focused on outcomes rather than counting administrative activities
that should already occur as part of routine operations. Additionally,
these outcome measures should be developed and agreed upon jointly.
In closing, VA and IHS have made progress and have demonstrated a
willingness to improve quality access to care for Native Veterans. But,
as you see in my statements here, there are still significant
opportunities for improvement. The TSGAC truly appreciates the
opportunity to provide the Subcommittee with these written
recommendations. Thank you.
______

Prepared Statement of Kameron Matthews

Good morning, Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking Member Dunn, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss how care
at the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and our partnership with
Indian Health Service (IHS) positively impact our Native American
Veterans. I am accompanied today by my colleagues Ms. Stephanie
Birdwell, Director for the Department of Veterans Affairs' Office of
Tribal Government Relations and Dr. Thomas Klobucar, Executive Director
for Veterans Health Administration's (VHA) Office of Rural Health
(ORH).

Introduction

As Secretary Wilkie has shared during his meetings with Native
American Veterans and tribal leaders across the country, our goal at VA
is to shorten the distance between people in need of Veterans services.
VA is working to increase our reach into tribal communities through
telehealth, visits from VA representatives, and closer cooperation
between VA and IHS. VA is committed to ensuring our Native American
Veterans, more specifically our American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/
AN) Veterans, receive and find access to quality, culturally competent
care from VA and tribal health systems.

Five Goals of the Memorandum of Understanding between VA and IHS

A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), originally signed in 2003 and
updated again in 2010, established that IHS and VA can coordinate,
collaborate, and share resources between the Departments. Five mutual
goals were agreed upon when the MOU was signed:

Increase access to and improve quality of health care and
services to the mutual benefit of both agencies by effectively
leveraging the strengths of VA and IHS at the national and local levels
to afford the delivery of optimal clinical care;

Promote patient-centered collaboration and facilitate
communication among VA, IHS, AI/AN Veterans, Tribal facilities, and
Urban Indian Clinics;

Establish effective partnerships and sharing agreements
among VA headquarters and facilities, IHS headquarters, and IHS,
Tribal, and Urban Indian health programs in support of AI/AN Veterans;

Ensure that appropriate resources are identified and
available to support programs for AI/AN Veterans; and

Improve health-promotion and disease-prevention services
to AI/AN to address community-based wellness.

To achieve these goals, VHA has piloted and subsequently adopted
several programs. To address access to care, achieve effective
partnerships, and ensure the availability of resources, in 2012 VA
began to establish a national reimbursement template with IHS which led
to over 112 Tribal Health Programs (THP) agreements.
In addition to these reimbursement agreements, local VA medical
centers have established, where appropriate, several agreements with
THPs and IHS facilities to deliver telemental health care to AI/AN
Veterans. The program serves tribal communities in Alaska, Montana,
Wyoming, and Oklahoma. ORH's Veterans Rural Health Resource Center,
Salt Lake City (VRHRC SLC) has an active portfolio of innovations in
AI/AN Veteran health care, including the creation of a Rural Veteran
Tribal Navigator program that will connect AI/AN Veterans with the
benefits and care they have earned.
In addition, VA Video Connect (VVC) is a pilot program currently
being deployed nationwide. VVC will allow rural AI/AN Veterans to
access VA health care in their homes or local communities via cellular
and wireless capabilities. VRHRC SLC is currently working to tailor
this program to AI/AN Veteran-communities, creating a model that will
weave together the evidence-based Western medicine, traditional Native
Healing, and rural Native communities' strengths through four main
components: mental health care, technology (access), care coordination,
and a tailored implementation facilitation strategy. In addition to
these programs, VRHRC SLC is piloting programs to establish Tribal-VHA
Partnerships in Suicide Prevention and developing Native Veteran
Content for the VA Community Provider Toolkit.
One of the great successes in achieving the 2010 MOU goals was the
establishment of the VA/IHS Consolidated Mail Order Pharmacy Program
(CMOP) that sends prescription medications to AI/AN Veterans' homes. In
2018 alone, CMOP processed 840,000 prescriptions for AI/AN Veterans, up
17 percent from the previous year. Since its inception, CMOP has
processed more than 3.6 million prescriptions for AI/AN Veterans served
by IHS and THP programs.
The March 2019 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report ``VA
and Indian Health Services: Actions Needed to Strengthen Oversight and
Coordination of Health Care for American Indian and Alaska Native
Veterans'' cites challenges in obtaining the MOU goals, specifically
around establishing targets for outcome metrics to assess progress.
Specifically, the inadequacies found in performance metrics could limit
the agencies' ability to measure progress toward MOU goals and
ultimately impact decisions about programs or activities.
In early Fiscal Year 2019, VHA and IHS MOU leadership agreed that
the 2010 MOU was no longer meeting the agencies' needs and required
modification to create the flexibility needed to move the interagency
relationship forward to a new level. The leadership team drafted a new
MOU and conducted a first listening session with tribal leaders on May
15, 2019. Tribal input from that session was incorporated into the
draft VHA-IHS MOU and VA and IHS conducted a subsequent consultation
session at the National Indian Health Board annual meeting on September
16, 2019. This additional input is now being considered for inclusion
in the draft MOU. After the IHS and VA MOU leadership team reaches
agreement on the draft MOU, it will enter formal clearance channels for
approval by IHS and VA. The approved draft MOU document will be posted
in the Federal Register and further tribal consultation for a period of
no less than 60 days. Tribal input will be incorporated into the draft
document and it will move forward for final approval and signature.
The challenges found in the 2010 MOU performance metrics may have
limited the ability of VA and IHS managers to gauge progress and make
decisions about whether to expand or modify programs or activities
because the agencies did not have information on the effectiveness of
the programs in supporting MOU goals. VA and IHS also acknowledge that
the performance metrics contained weaknesses and that refining them is
a top priority.
To address the shortcomings associated with the 2010 MOU metrics
noted by GAO, VA and IHS have brought in metrics experts from each
agency to the MOU development process. Once the draft is finalized, the
process of creating new targets and metrics to meet the requirements
outlined by GAO will take place as new programs and pilots are
developed under the new instrument.

Reimbursement Agreements

Since the Summer of 2012, VA has signed individual reimbursement
agreements with THPs to provide direct care services to eligible AI/AN
Veterans closer to their homes in a culturally sensitive environment.
In December 2012, VA signed a national reimbursement agreement with
IHS. Today, the national reimbursement agreement with IHS covers 75 IHS
sites. There are also 114 individual reimbursement agreements with THPs
of which 26 are in Alaska and cover AI/AN Veterans and Non-Native
Veterans.
From August 2012 through August 2019, VA has reimbursed IHS and
THPs over $103 million covering approximately 10,645 AI/AN Unique
Veterans. Of the $103 million, VA has reimbursed approximately $32.2
million to Alaska THPs for covering an estimated 1,513 AI/AN Unique
Veterans. Additionally, VA has reimbursed Alaska THPs approximately
$27.7 million for approximately 4,787 Unique Non-Native Veterans.
IHS and several THPs have requested that the agreements be expanded
to cover reimbursements for purchased referred care (PRC) under which
IHS and THPs can refer AI/AN Veterans to their contracted community
care. They feel this will enhance care coordination. VA is also looking
to enhance care coordination with IHS and THP facilities. However, VA
has the primary responsibility for care provided to Veterans and
related care coordination. If VA approves PRC for AI/AN Veterans under
the reimbursement agreements, VA may lose track of that care provided
to Veterans. As a result, VA is developing a standardized care
coordination process that will enhance care coordination for AI/AN
Veterans. Initial steps include establishing an Advisory Board for care
coordination and inviting Tribal Officials to be members on the Board.
The Board's main scope will be to implement the standardized care
coordination process and to improve care coordination between VA and
IHS/THP sites for the benefit of Veterans.

Conclusion

The health and well-being of all our nations' Veterans is of the
utmost importance. We strive to consistently provide high quality care
to all Veterans and continue to make significant strides in enhancing
the practice and culture of the Department to be more accessible to our
Native American Veterans. Working with many diverse, sovereign tribes
is essential to successfully achieve the goals of the MOU. VA is
committed to ensuring that our goals align with IHS and that the needs
of our Native American Veterans are met. I want to thank the Committee
for hosting this hearing. This concludes my written testimony.
______

Prepared Statement of Benjamin Smith

Good morning, Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking Member Dunn, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Benjamin Smith, Deputy Director for
Intergovernmental Affairs, Indian Health Service (IHS). Thank you for
the opportunity to testify on native veterans' access to health care.
The IHS mission is to raise the physical, mental, social, and spiritual
health of American Indians and Alaska Natives to the highest level. As
an agency within the Department of Health and Human Services
(Department), the IHS provides Federal health services to approximately
2.6 million American Indians and Alaska Natives from 573 federally
recognized tribes in 37 states, through a network of over 605 health
care facilities, including hospitals, clinics, health stations, and
other facility types.
The American Indian and Alaska Native population experiences health
and other disparities that disproportionally affect their quality of
life. American Indians and Alaska Natives have an average life
expectancy of 5 years shorter than that of the general U.S. population
and are more likely than people of other races or ethnicities to
experience social and economic difficulties that may impact their
health or wellness, such as lower income, lower education levels, and
higher unemployment.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  IHS Disparities Fact Sheet, April 2018: https://www.ihs.gov/
newsroom/factsheets/disparities/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As health needs change and new approaches to care emerge, the IHS,
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), and their tribal partners will
continue to combine their expertise, resources, and efforts to help the
nearly 145,000 American Indian and Alaska Native veterans living in the
United States.\2\ The IHS and VA's Veterans Health Administration (VHA)
continue work to provide eligible American Indian and Alaska Native
veterans with access to care closer to their homes, promote cultural
competence and quality health care, and focus on increasing care
coordination, collaboration, and resource-sharing between the agencies.
Revising the IHS-VA Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed in 2010
will help accomplish this goal. Our plan to complete revisions to the
MOU and its related performance measures by fall 2020 includes tribal
consultation with tribal leaders and native veterans, and conferring
with urban Indian organizations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  VA Veteran Population Projection Model, 2018: https://
www.va.gov/vetdata/veteran_population.asp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the late 1980's, Congress directed the IHS and VA to explore the
feasibility of entering into an arrangement for sharing of medical
facilities and services, as required by the Indian Health Care
Improvement Act (IHCIA).\3\ The results of this collaboration led to
our initial MOU in 2003. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
of 2010 permanently reauthorized the IHCIA, and authorized IHS to enter
into (or expand) arrangements for the sharing of medical facilities and
services between IHS, Indian tribes, and tribal organizations and the
VA.\4\ The law also directs the VA to reimburse the IHS, Indian tribes,
or tribal organizations for the services provided to eligible
beneficiaries of either Department in the respective facility.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  Indian Health Service and Department of Veterans Affairs
health facilities and services sharing (25 U.S.C. Sec.  1680f).
\4\  Sharing arrangements with Federal agencies (25 U.S.C. Sec.
1645).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since implementing this provision in 2012, VA has reimbursed over
$103 million for direct care services provided by IHS and Tribal Health
Programs (THP), covering approximately 10,645 unique American Indian
and Alaska Native veterans. Currently, IHS and VA operate under a
national reimbursement agreement, inclusive of 75 IHS Federal
facilities. Likewise, the VA has entered into 114 individual
reimbursement agreements with THP. We are aware of an additional 42
tribes working with VA's Office of Community Care to enter into a
reimbursement agreement for direct care services.
In March 2019, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) released
a report entitled, VA and Indian Health Service: Actions Needed to
Strengthen Oversight and Coordination of Health Care for American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans (GAO-19-291). In its report, GAO
recommended that VA and IHS revise the MOU and related performance
measures to ensure consistency with key attributes of successful
performance measures, including having measurable targets.

IHS-VA MOU

In 2003, IHS and VA entered into the initial MOU to improve access
and health outcomes for American Indian and Alaska Native veterans. To
maximize resources and deliver an integrated approach that supports the
health and well-being of the American Indian and Alaska Native veterans
living in the United States, the IHS and VA signed a revised MOU in
2010.\5\ The updated MOU built upon a decade of successful
collaboration and further established mutual goals to advance
collaboration, coordination and resource-sharing between VA and IHS
``to improve the health status of American Indian and Alaska Native
Veterans.'' The IHCIA affirms the goals of the MOU.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  IHS-VA Memorandum of Understanding, October 2010: https://
www.ihs.gov/sites/vaihsmou/themes/responsive2017/display_objects/
documents/VA_IHS_MOU_508c.pdf.
\6\  See 25 U.S.C. Sec.  1647(a)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Together, the IHS and the VA Veterans Office of Tribal Government
Relations and Office of Rural Health form a MOU leadership team. The
leadership team meets quarterly and is responsible for review and
oversight of the MOU collaboration on care coordination, reimbursement,
workforce training, and cultural competency that align with the five
overarching goals to:

1. Increase access to care and services for American Indian and
Alaska Native veterans.

2. Promote patient-centered collaboration and communication.

3. Improve health-promotion and disease prevention.

4. Consult with tribes at the regional and local levels.

5. Ensure appropriate resources are identified and available.

In Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, the VA-IHS MOU leadership team conducted
an in-depth revision of the existing MOU to reflect changes in law, as
well as, the evolving health care and health information technology
landscape. The VA-IHS MOU leadership team focused on areas concerning
health and its social determinants for Native Veterans, including
prescription services, transportation, housing services, workforce
training and consultation with tribal communities. In addition, the
team concentrated on revising the 2010 MOU to reflect progress made to
date under the new Administration's leadership priorities. Our vision
of a revised MOU contemplates a more comprehensive and flexible
structure to support and adopt to the needs of both agencies and the
veterans they serve well into the future.
The IHS-VA workgroups completed several MOU-related activities,
which are now a routine part of each department's operations,
including:

Workforce Training: To better coordinate on training and
recruitment efforts, VA and IHS opened their training resources to each
organization's staff. In Fiscal Year 2018, they shared 256 online and
in-person training events focused on mental health, clinical support,
oral health, diabetes and more.

Access to Care: Since their inception in Fiscal Year
2012, the VA-IHS and VA-THP reimbursement agreements provided $103
million to IHS and THP for care of approximately 10,645 unique American
Indian and Alaska Native veterans. In Fiscal Year 2018 alone, VA paid
IHS and THP $20 million for the care of nearly 5,300 enrolled American
Indian and Alaska Native veterans.

Access to Medication: The VA Consolidated Mail Outpatient
Pharmacy Program (CMOP) processed 840,000 prescriptions, an increase of
17 percent from 2017. Since its inception in Fiscal Year 2010, CMOP
processed more than 3.6 million prescriptions for VA-IHS patients.

Housing Assistance: The Tribal Housing and Urban
Development-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) program
increased tribal engagement in Fiscal Year 2018 from 23 to 26 tribes
that used the program to find homes for Veterans. As a result, the
program found homes for 130 American Indian and Alaska Native veterans.

As part of the process for revising the MOU, the IHS and VA
conducted an initial listening session to solicit tribal input for the
MOU on May 15, 2019, as part of the National Indian Health Board's 10th
Annual National Public Health Summit. On September 4, 2019, IHS sent a
letter to tribal and urban Indian organization leaders to initiate
tribal consultation and urban confer on the MOU and related performance
measures. The IHS and VHA held their first in-person session on
September 16, 2019 in Temecula, California in conjunction with the
National Indian Health Board's Tribal Health Conference. The IHS and
VHA continue to deliberate on adjusting consultation and confer plans
to increase national awareness of the goals of the MOU in order to
gather meaningful input.
The IHS remains firmly committed to improving quality and access to
health care for American Indian and Alaska Native veterans. We
appreciate all your efforts in helping us provide the best possible
health care services to the veterans we serve. Thank you, and I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.

?

=======================================================================

Statements for the Record

=======================================================================

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of The United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty
Protection Fund

The United South and Eastern Tribes Sovereignty Protection Fund
(USET SPF) is pleased to provide the House Committee on Veterans'
Affairs Subcommittee on Health with the following statement for the
record of the oversight hearing entitled, ``Native Veterans' Access to
Healthcare.'' USET SPF is appreciative of the Subcommittee's commitment
to examining and addressing the unique barriers that American Indian
and Alaska Native (AI/AN) veterans face when seeking the healthcare to
which they are entitled. Whether delivered through IHS or the VA, AI/AN
veterans have pre-paid for their healthcare, both through the cession
of Tribal homelands and the defense of our Nation. We remind the
Subcommittee of the unique Federal trust responsibility to Tribal
Nations and urge the Subcommittee and Congress to improve access to
quality and culturally competent healthcare for AI/AN veterans.
USET SPF is a non-profit, inter-tribal organization representing 27
federally recognized Tribal Nations from Texas across to Florida and up
to Maine \1\. Both individually, as well as collectively through USET
SPF, our member Tribal Nations work to improve health care services for
American Indians. Our member Tribal Nations operate in the Nashville
Area of the Indian Health Service, which contains 36 IHS and Tribal
health care facilities. Our patients receive health care services both
directly at IHS facilities, as well as in Tribally operated facilities
under contracts with IHS pursuant to the Indian Self-Determination and
Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA), P.L. 93-638.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  USET SPF member Tribal Nations include: Alabama-Coushatta
Tribe of Texas (TX), Aroostook Band of Micmac Indians (ME),Catawba
Indian Nation (SC), Cayuga Nation (NY), Chitimacha Tribe of Louisiana
(LA), Coushatta Tribe of Louisiana (LA), Eastern Band of Cherokee
Indians (NC), Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians (ME), Jena Band of
Choctaw Indians (LA), Mashantucket Pequot Indian Tribe (CT), Mashpee
Wampanoag Tribe (MA), Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida (FL),
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (MS), Mohegan Tribe of Indians of
Connecticut (CT), Narragansett Indian Tribe (RI), Oneida Indian Nation
(NY), Pamunkey Indian Tribe (VA), Passamaquoddy Tribe at Indian
Township (ME), Passamaquoddy Tribe at Pleasant Point (ME), Penobscot
Indian Nation (ME), Poarch Band of Creek Indians (AL), Saint Regis
Mohawk Tribe (NY), Seminole Tribe of Florida (FL), Seneca Nation of
Indians (NY), Shinnecock Indian Nation (NY), Tunica-Biloxi Tribe of
Louisiana (LA), and the Wampanoag Tribe of Gay Head (Aquinnah) (MA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the Subcommittee is likely aware, AI/AN veterans serve in the
military at higher rates per capita than any other group in the Nation.
In addition, the VA has found that AI/AN veterans are more likely to
have a service-connected disability than non-Indian veterans. AI/AN
veterans face significant disparities in care when compared to other
veterans. In the USET SPF region, AI/AN veterans are often faced with
access to only either the limited services provided by the chronically
underfunded IHS and Tribally operated facilities or no services at all.
As the Subcommittee seeks to help improve access to quality healthcare
for AI/AN veterans, USET SPF requests the exercise of this body's
oversight functions to ensure VA's actions reflect and uphold the
Federal trust responsibility and obligations unique to our population.
This includes working to institute programs that address historical
trauma, provide culturally competent treatment, and provide greater
access to behavioral health programs. We provide additional
recommendations below to the Subcommittee on how to meet the Federal
trust obligation to AI/AN veterans.

IHS-VA MOU

USET SPF is appreciative of the Subcommittee's efforts to bring
together Tribal Nations as well as IHS and the VA to discuss the 2010
memorandum of understanding (MOU) between the VA and IHS. The intention
of the MOU was to better facilitate patient care for AI/AN veterans
across country within both agencies. However a report by the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) in 2019, ``Actions Needed to Strengthen
Oversight and Coordination of Health Care for American Indian and
Alaska Native Veterans'', found that more action is needed to
strengthen oversight and coordination between IHS and the VA regarding
implementation of the MOU.

Preservation of Existing Reimbursement Agreements

The existing reimbursement agreements within MOU have
demonstrated success in facilitating patient care for AI/AN
veterans. As both agencies seek to expand the existing MOU or
establish new agreements, the VA must continue to uphold and
preserve the existing agreements within the MOU which should
serve as a template for the VA to enter into similar agreements
within the Indian Healthcare System. Specifically, USET SPF
underscores the importance of preserving the IHS All-Inclusive
rate on reimbursements for outpatient services for AI/AN
veterans delivered through IHS. Preservation of the All-
Inclusive rate within the MOU will ensure critical dollars
remain within the Indian Health System to be able to continue
support the facilities and services provided to AI/AN veterans.

Reimbursement Agreements for PRC

IHS and Tribal health programs are not always able to directly
provide AI/AN veterans with all necessary health care services.
Like other AI/ANs, many of these veterans receive essential
health services through the Purchased/Referred Care (PRC)
program, which authorizes the purchase of services from a
network of private providers when care is not available at IHS
or Tribal facilities. PRC is an integral part of IHS and Tribal
health care systems, as it facilitates access to care that the
Federal Government has failed in providing the funding to
deliver directly.
However, the VA does not currently reimburse IHS or Tribal
programs for services provided using PRC funds. Instead, the VA
requires that veterans in need of care return to the VA for a
referral instead-an inefficient and time consuming process.
USET SPF asserts that this policy fails to prioritize the
healthcare necessities of AI/AN veterans by creating additional
and unnecessary burdens. The continued lack of coordination of
care between the VA and the Indian Healthcare System for the
full complement of health care services will only continue to
create additional barriers in access to care for our veterans.
This limitation is further contrary to the plain language of
Section 405(c) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act, which
provides for reimbursement ``where services are provided
through the [Indian Health] Service, an Indian Tribe, or a
Tribal organization ...'' (emphasis added) without limitation
to direct services. It is also in conflict with Section 2901(b)
of the Affordable Care Act, which specifies that health
programs operated by IHS, Tribal Nations, Tribal organizations,
and UIOs are payers of last resort. Through these provisions,
Congress clearly intended to shield IHS and Tribal PRC dollars
from being used to pay for services when other sources of
funding are available, including funding from VA. Accordingly,
VA should reimburse for all services provided by or through
Tribal health programs.

Ensuring UIOs are Eligible to Bill VA for AI/AN Veterans Care

Approximately 78 percent of AI/ANs do not live on Tribal
reservations. However, the MOU does not include Urban Indian
Organizations (UIOs) as eligible to for inclusion in the
reimbursement agreements even though UIOs provide critical
healthcare services to AI/AN veterans residing in urban areas.
While the VA has successfully implemented the MOU for IHS and
Tribal facilities, the VA has made a discretionary decision to
deem UIOs ineligible for inclusion in the MOU, excluding UIOs
from entering into reimbursement agreements. The Federal trust
responsibility to provide healthcare to AI/ANs in perpetuity is
not limited to where an AI/AN veteran resides. USET SPF
encourages the Subcommittee to use its authority to address
this discrepancy by ensuring the MOU, including eligibility for
reimbursement agreements, is extended to UIOs. We remind the
Subcommittee that Congress created the UIO system to honor a
Federal trust obligation and assert that UIOs are well-
positioned to play a vital role in closing the gap in service
to AI/AN veterans.

Exempt AI/AN Veterans from VA Copays

USET SPF highlights that AI/AN veterans are currently subject to
standard copays for services received within the VA. When healthcare is
received through IHS or Tribally operated facilities, AI/AN veterans
are not subject to any cost-sharing. However, AI/AN veterans are
subject to certain copayments, such as for urgent care services, when
they are receiving care from VA facilities. Subjecting AI/AN veterans
to any copayments as a condition of healthcare access is a violation of
the Federal trust responsibility, which all Federal agencies share in
equally. Further, AI/AN veterans may be discouraged from seeking
critical and life-saving healthcare if they are subject to copays for
certain VA services. We recommend the Subcommittee work with the VA to
waive any and all copays for AI/AN veterans in a manner that upholds
current law authorizing IHS as the agency of ``payer of last resort.''

Improved VA-IHS EHR Interoperability

Since 2018, the VA has been working to replace the agency's current
electronic health record (EHR) system, VistA, to an off-the-shelf EHR
known as Cerner Millennium. Since then, IHS has been considering either
maintaining its current system, the Resource and Patient Management
System, or implementing a new EHR system altogether-previously, IHS and
the VA participated in cost sharing for necessary periodic updates.
While the VA and IHS committed to facilitate the interoperability of
health information data systems between both agencies to share
information on common patients, the differences in EHR systems have led
to challenges with regard to information technology interoperability.
These challenges have made it difficult for healthcare providers to
have access important patient information within one another's EHR
systems. USET SPF underscores to the Subcommittee that interoperability
between both EHR systems be prioritized as healthcare providers for AI/
AN veterans must have access to real-time, life-saving data.

Conclusion

There is great potential in the MOU and care coordination between
IHS and the VA. However, it is critical that VA do more to recognize
its unique obligations to AI/AN veterans. Left unaddressed, AI/AN
veterans will continue to face many ongoing challenges when it comes to
accessing quality healthcare and resulting disparities. The Federal
trust obligation to provide comprehensive healthcare to Tribal Nations
and AI/AN veterans exists in perpetuity and is shared by all Federal
entities including IHS, the VA, as well as the Subcommittee. It is
incumbent upon the whole of the Federal Government to remove barriers
in accessing healthcare for AI/AN veterans, and we encourage the
Subcommittee to work to address these problems, as well as strengthen
existing partnerships between the VA and the Indian Healthcare System.
______

Prepared Statement of The California Rural Indian Health Board

My name is Mark LeBeau, CEO for the California Rural Indian Health
Board, Inc. (CRIHB). CRIHB has a network of 19 Tribal Health Programs
(THPs) that provide health care support and services to members of 59
Tribes in California (CA).
I would like to thank Chairwoman Brownley, Ranking Member Dr. Dunn,
Representative Takano, and other distinguished members of the Veteran's
Affairs Committee, Subcommittee on Health for holding this important
hearing. It is my pleasure to submit a written statement regarding the
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the U.S. Department of
Veteran's Affairs (VA) and the Indian Health Service (IHS).
The Federal Government's trust responsibility to provide health
care to all American Indians/Alaska Natives (AI/AN) extends across all
departments and agencies of the United States (U.S.) and includes the
VA. And yet, although AI/ANs serve in the U.S. military at higher rates
than any other population, they are underrepresented among Veterans who
access the services and benefits they have earned. AI/AN Veterans are
also more likely to lack health insurance and to have a disability,
service-connected or otherwise, than Veterans of other races.
In 2003, a MOU was established between the IHS and the VA to
improve the health status of AI/AN through the coordination and
resource sharing among VA, IHS, and Tribes. The MOU was expanded in
2010 to outline mutual goals for VA and IHS collaboration and
coordination of resources and health care services provided to AI/AN
Veterans.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Government Accountability Office, Report 19-291 Action Needed
to Strength Oversight and Coordination of Health Care for American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans Page 1 (Washington, DC. March 2019)
https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697736.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The MOU is an ideal mechanism for the Federal Government to
preserve and build on the existing excellent relationships that the VA
has with IHS and THPs.
For Tribes in the CRIHB membership, it is particularly challenging,
as CA has no IHS-funded hospitals and is designated as a Purchased/
Referred Care (PRC) Dependent Area. Tribes in the CA service area must
use their extremely limited PRC funding to cover the costs of placing
patients in non-IHS/Tribal hospitals and/or buying other specialty care
services. Before the PRC program provides payment, AI/AN patients must
exhaust all payer of last resort health care resources.
According to a 2019 GAO Report, many THPs were denied
reimbursement, as the VA noted, ``there is no statutory requirement for
them to include the PRC program in the reimbursement agreements.'' \2\
Although CA has the largest population of AI/ANs compared to any other
State, under the MOU, the reimbursement agreements are not
grandfathered in.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Government Accountability Office, Report 19-291 Action Needed
to Strength Oversight and Coordination of Health Care for American
Indian and Alaska Native Veterans Page 1 (Washington, DC. March 2019)
https://www.gao.gov/assets/700/697736.pdf Pg 23.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Having said that, THPs have and continue to utilize their resources
to establish reimbursement agreements with the VA for direct services
to AI/AN veterans.
Many of the CA AI/AN Veterans live in rural areas and seek out the
high-quality, culturally competent care at their THPs. As it currently
states in the MOU between IHS and the VA, THPs cannot be reimbursed for
providing services paid for with PRC funds. There are a few challenges
in seeking treatment at a VA hospital that may pose several barriers
for CA AI/AN Veterans.

Access to Care: Transportation is extremely difficult, if
available. Many Tribes are located great distances from VA facilities.
Getting to and from appointments can take up 2 days and increases the
patient's discomfort.

Duplication of Services: Many AI/AN Veterans are referred
to specialty care upon receiving initial assessment services by the
physician at their local THP. Upon arriving to the VA hospital for that
specialty care, the AI/AN Veterans are often required to have an
additional assessment conducted by the VA physician, resulting in a
duplication of services.

Wait Times: The VA is known for its challenging wait
times. This often requires the patients to spend extensive time waiting
to be seen by a provider.

Cultural barriers: AI/AN Veterans raise concerns
regarding being misdiagnosed by practitioners who may not know the
health history of the AI/AN Veteran.

Registration: Several AI/AN Veterans do not register
because of the complexity of the application process.

War designation: The VA requires patients to specify if
they are post-9/11 or non-post-9/11 Veterans. This is viewed as
downplaying Veterans of other wars and they may be less apt to seek
care.

Behavioral Health: At times, the VA has not provided
adequate Mental Health and Counseling Services for AI/AN Veterans.

Lack of Coordination of Care: AI/AN Veterans cannot
choose their specialist for specialty care services.

Our national interest of serving AI/AN Veterans will be best
achieved when we extend the collaborative arrangements already agreed
to by the inherent Federal trust responsibility. In order to improve
care to AI/AN Veterans, CRIHB strongly recommends the VA support:

The establishment of Reimbursement Agreements with THPs
through the authority granted to Tribes under the Indian Self-
Determination and Education Assistance Act, resulting in an increase to
access to care.

IHS and Tribal providers to be reimbursed for services
provided under the PRC program.

Exempting all AI/AN Veterans from copays and deductibles
in accordance with the Federal trust responsibility.

Legislation authorizing a Tribal Advisory Committee at
the VA.

THP reimbursement of non-AI/AN Veterans as referenced in
the Indian Health Care Improvement Act Section 405 (c) \3\

\3\  Indian Health Care Improvement Act (1976) https://
legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/
Indian%20Health%20Care%20Improvement%20Act.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
______

Prepared Statement of The California Consortium For Urban Indian Health

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Prepared Statement of The Sault Ste. Marie Tribe Of Chippewa Indians

Dr. Aaron Payment, n'dizhnikaaz. Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa
Indians ndoo-debendaagoz. Kina Baawaa'ting Anishinaabek Omaa go nda
Onji-kida. I am Dr. Aaron Payment. As the elected Chairman of the Sault
Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians, I am speaking on behalf of my
Tribe. With over 45,000 members, my Tribe is the largest Tribe east of
the Mississippi River. My testimony today will focus on the barriers
American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) veterans face when seeking
access to quality, culturally competent care from the Veterans
Administration (VA) and from Tribal health systems. It will also
recommend solutions.
It is important to begin this testimony with the statement about
Tribal sovereignty and treaty obligations. Tribes are governments, pre-
dating the United States. The U.S. Constitution recognizes Tribes as
``distinct governments,'' along with foreign nations and the several
States. The U.S. Supreme Court has described their status as ``domestic
dependent nations'' in which Tribal governments have retained nation
status and inherent powers of self-government, but are subservient to
U.S. Federal Government powers. The United States entered into more
than 370 treaties with the Tribes. Within these treaties, Tribal
governments retained their sovereignty rights, and ceded millions of
acres of land and natural resources to the Federal Government in
exchange for peace. The specifics of each treaty are unique, but for
purposes of this testimony, it is important to recognize that they all
contained health and general welfare provisions.
It is also important to begin with a statement regarding the
Federal trust responsibility. As noted by the Department of Interior,
the Federal trust responsibility is a legal obligation under which the
United States ``has charged itself with moral obligations of the
highest responsibility and trust'' toward Indian Tribes (Seminole
Nation v. United States, 1942). This obligation was first discussed by
Chief Justice John Marshall in Cherokee Nation v. Georgia (1831). Over
the years, the trust doctrine has been at the center of numerous other
Supreme Court cases, thus making it one of the most important
principles in Federal Indian law. The Federal Indian trust
responsibility is also a legally enforceable fiduciary obligation on
the part of the United States to protect tribal treaty rights, lands,
assets, and resources, as well as a duty to carry out the mandates of
Federal law with respect to American Indian and Alaska Native tribes
and villages.

American Indian and Alaska Native Veterans:

American Indians and Alaska Natives serve in the United States
Armed Forces at higher rates than any other ethnicity. Despite this,
they are significantly underrepresented among Veterans who access the
services and benefits they have earned. Often, this is due to barriers
created by distance, poverty, mental health symptoms, historical
mistrust, and a lack of culturally competent providers.\1\ Native
Veterans are also less likely than Veterans of other races to have
health insurance and more likely to have a disability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  National Indian Health Board. 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To combat these problems, the VA has entered into memoranda with
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Indian Health
Service (IHS) and Tribal health organizations. Overall, the use of
Memorandum of Understanding (MOUs) and Agreement (MOAs) between the IHS
and Tribal providers have been an excellent method of ensuring health
care delivery to AI/AN Veterans. These memoranda created scaffolding
that enable Veteran health care services reach American Indian and
Alaska Native Veterans that have earned them. Today, however, there is
a need to improve upon existing memoranda.

Barriers and Recommendations:

All Native Veterans should be exempted from copays and
deductibles at the VA in accordance with the Federal trust
responsibility.

The health and general welfare provisions within the Treaties, as
well as the Federal trust responsibility to the Tribes, obligate the
Federal Government to provide health care treatment to Tribal members.
This is why American Indians and Alaska Natives do not owe copays or
deductibles for services received at Indian health facilities.
Similarly, it is the reason the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act exempts AI/ANs from various cost-share requirements. \2\ The
Federal trust responsibility and the US Treaty obligations apply to all
aspects of the Federal Government, including the VA. For this reason,
my Tribe recommends Native Veterans be exempted from copays and
deductibles at the Veterans Administration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  42 U.S. Code 18071(d).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allow IHS and Tribal providers to be reimbursed by the VA
for services provided under the purchased/referred care program.

The VA currently reimburses IHS and THPs for primary care under the
IHS/VA Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), but the VA has not provided
reimbursement for specialty and referral care provided by IHS/THPs.
This creates care coordination issues and burdensome requirements for
the AI/AN veteran patient. For example, this is what typically happens
to Native Veterans seeking treatment in the First District of Michigan:
If a Native Veteran goes to a Tribal Health Services facility in Sault
Ste. Marie or Manistique for service and needs a referral, the same
patient must be seen within the VA system before a referral can be
secured. This means that the patient will need to go to the Veterans
Health Administration medical center service this area, located in Iron
Mountain, which involves 3-5 hours of travel. Thus, the VA is paying
for the same services twice, first for those primary care services
provided to the veteran in the Tribal health program facilities (same,
if the Native Veteran started at an IHS facility) and then again when
the patient goes back to the VA for the same primary care service to
receive a VA referral. This is a not a good use of Federal funding, nor
is it navigable for veterans. In order to provide the care that AI/AN
veteran's need, many Tribal Health Programs are treating veterans or
referring them out for specialty care and paying for it themselves so
that veterans can be treated in a timely and competent manner. For
those veterans that do go back to the VA for referrals, there is often
delayed treatment and a significant different standard of care that is
provided. Therefore we recommend that the IHS and Tribal providers
should be exempted from any value-based reimbursement scheme for other
VA providers.

The VA should reimburse Urban Indian Health Programs.

The 2010 reimbursement MOU has been extended and been implemented
for IHS and Tribal Providers, however it has not been implemented for
Urban Indian Health Programs.\3\ This needs to be addressed. My Tribe
strongly recommends utilizing Urban Indian Health Programs within the
parameters of the MOU. AI/AN Veterans often prefer Native health care
providers for reasons related to performance, cultural competency, and/
or the availability of non-health care-related services, and as a
result, are more likely to receive care from these institutions. Urban
Indian Health Programs provide these services, off Tribal lands and
within urban settings. AI/veterans can obtain their health care in
culturally appropriate ways and Urban Indian Health Programs can assist
the Department of Veterans Affairs meet its demand for services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  Fiscal Year 2021 Budget Recommendations. The National Tribal
Budget Formulation Workgroup's Recommendations on the Indian Health
Service Fiscal Year 2021 Budget. April 2019. Page 29.

Ensure Health IT and Telehealth upgrades at IHS are made
in tandem with the VA, and ensure Tribal Health Programs have adequate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
access, as well.

As both the Indian Health Service and the Veterans Administration
are updating their Health Information Technology systems, my Tribe
recommends Congress require the IHS and the VA work closely together to
coordinate on upgrades for the Electronic Health Record systems at the
respective agencies, and make upgrades in tandem.
The IHS, the VA, and the DoD should be encouraged to ensure that
the IT systems continue to operate together. My Tribe recommends
Congress do this, via adequate appropriations. We recommend the VA and
the HIS prioritize interoperability between the IHS Health IT system
and the VA.
My Tribe recommends that the IHS and the VA work to assist Tribal
health programs in obtaining and adopting systems that are
interoperable with the IHS/VA systems.

Create a Tribal Advisory Committee for the VA.

AI/AN Veterans experience multiple barriers to receiving treatment
from the VA. Creation of a Tribal Advisory Committee (TAC) for the VA
will work to ensure that the VA fulfills its trust responsibility to
AI/AN Veterans in a culturally competent manner.
Often, perhaps unknowingly, the VA acts in a manner that negatively
impacts Native Veterans. A TAC can educate VA officials and work to
ensure that policy changes do not adversely affect the Indian health
care system. It can provide insight and assistance to maintaining and
strengthening the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding
Agreements between the VA, the IHS, and Tribal Health Programs. The TAC
can provide critical assistance to the VA in improving its outreach and
communication to Native Veterans. A fully functioning TAC can provide
VA leadership with information and insight into Indian Country, the
Federal trust responsibility, and Tribal sovereignty; assist in the
identification and implementation of policies that meet the Federal
Government's obligations to the Tribes, and improve the government-to-
government relationship between the VA and the Tribal Nations.
The ``Department of VA Tribal Advisory Committee Act of 2019''
currently stands before the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs (HR
2791) and its Senate counter-part (S 524) is before the Senate
Committee on Veterans Affairs. Designed to create a VA Tribal Advisory
Committee, both bills have strong bi-partisan support. My Tribe
strongly supports this legislation.
If you have any questions or need additional information, please do
not hesitate to contact me or the Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa
Indians Legislative Director, Mike McCoy at
[emailprotected]
.
______

Prepared Statement of The Standing Rock Sioux Tribe

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

Additional Submissions for the Record

=======================================================================

Submissions for the Record

----------

Treaties Submitted by The Honorable Ruben Gallego

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and Indian Health Service
Memorandum of Understanding Annual Report Fiscal Year 2018

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Department of Veterans Affairs Tribal Consultation Policy

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Memorandum of Understanding Between the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) and Indian Health Service (IHS)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Indian Health Service and Tribal Health Program Monthly Report-June
2019

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
