- FURTHER EXAMINING FOREVER GI BILL IMPLEMENTATION EFFORTS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FURTHER EXAMINING FOREVER GI BILL
IMPLEMENTATION EFFORTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-46

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-376                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

MIKE LEVIN, California, Chairman

KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York           GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida Ranking
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York               Member
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JIM BANKS, Indiana
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2019

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Mike Levin, Chairman...................................     1
Honorable Jack Bergman, Acting Ranking Member....................     2
Honorable David P. Roe, Ranking Member, Full Committee...........     4

WITNESSES

Dr. Paul R. Lawrence, Under Secretary, Veterans Benefits
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs............     5

Accompanied by:

Ms. Charmain Bogue, Executive Director, Education Services,
Veterans Benefits Administration

Mr. James P. Gfrerer, Assistant Secretary, Office of
Information and Technology, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Mr. Robert Orifini, Information Technology Specialist, Office
of Information and Technology, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs

Dr. Jay Schnitzer, Vice President, Chief Technology Officer, The
MITRE Corporation..............................................     7

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Dr. Paul R. Lawrence Prepared Statement..........................    27
Dr. Jay Schnitzer Prepared Statement.............................    29

Statements For The Record

The American Legion..............................................    33
The Student Veterans of America..................................    35
The Veterans Education Success...................................    39

FURTHER EXAMINING FOREVER GI BILL
IMPLEMENTATION EFFORTS

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2019

U. S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Mike Levin (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Levin, Brindisi, Pappas, Luria,
Lee, Cunningham, Bergman, Banks, and Meuser.
Also present: Representative Roe.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE LEVIN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Levin. Good morning. I call this hearing to order.
I want to thank everyone for joining us today in the
Economic Opportunity Subcommittee. Today we are convening to
receive another update on VA's implementation of the Forever GI
Bill and, specifically, whether the Department is ready to
fully implement Sections 107 and 501 on December 1st.
It has been more than 2 years since Congress passed the
Forever GI Bill into law in August 2017. The VA was given 1
year to implement the Forever GI Bill, which was by no means an
easy task. VA had to make major modifications to its legacy
information technology systems that processed education claims
and payments in order to process the monthly housing allowance
changes required by Sections 107 and 501. The fact that we are
still modifying outdated systems for veterans' education
benefits is an issue that we must address sooner rather than
later.
Nonetheless, VA repeatedly reported to Congress that the
work was on track, that was until July 2018, 1 month before
implementation, when VA raised concerns about implementing the
bill on time. The botched implementation in August 2018 led to
thousands of veterans either not receiving their housing
stipend for months or receiving an erroneous amount.
Many veterans, as we all know, rely on their monthly
housing stipend to pay for their living expenses while they
attend classes that will prepare them for opportunities in the
job market. There were stories of veterans being evicted and
facing other economic hardships.
The Inspector General conducted its own assessment, as well
as requesting that MITRE conduct an independent technical
assessment to identify why this occurred. The findings were
stark. In the past, the VA lacked an accountable leader who
could oversee project delivery and, I quote, ``resulting in
unclear communication of implementation progress and
inadequately defined expectations, roles, and responsibilities
of the various VA business lines and contractors involved,''
end quote.
That is something that we cannot afford to repeat, which is
why Congress and specifically this subcommittee has been
closely tracking VA's progress for the last year.
In our previous hearings regarding the President's budget
request, we examined the shortfalls in Forever GI Bill
implementation. In May 2019, we held a joint hearing with the
Technology Modernization Subcommittee on VA's progress in
updating IT systems and processes to meet the implementation
date.
VA's officials since have provided our subcommittee staff
with monthly updates on the status of IT system modifications
and assured they will not repeat the mistakes of the past, and
I appreciate that very much.
Last month, I traveled to VA's Muskogee, Oklahoma regional
office and saw firsthand the systems that VA uses to process
education claims. I am grateful to the Under Secretary and
others for joining me on that visit. I learned a lot. It is
obviously very important that we continue to modernize the
systems that are in place.
We have repeatedly asked if VA officials are getting today
and in the future what they need to provide our Nation's
veterans the benefits that they deserve. This committee urges
the Department to be forthright about their needs, which I
trust that you will be, and, as you know, Congress has to
juggle several funding requests across the Federal Government
and, as is often the case, the squeaky wheel gets the grease.
Nonetheless, the focus of today's hearing is on the
implementation of Sections 107 and 501, and it is just 12 days
away. In 12 days, those changes are scheduled to go into
effect. Progress seems to be on track, but we have got to
perform our oversight duty to ensure smooth implementation
without unintended adverse effects to veterans.
Our opportunity here today is to see where things stand and
learn from the failures of the past, and hopefully build on
that for the future. I look forward to hearing the testimony
from our witnesses to do just that.
Now I would like to recognize Congressman Bergman, who is
sitting in for Ranking Member Bilirakis, for 5 minutes for his
opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JACK BERGMAN, ACTING RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
joining us at today's subcommittee hearing on the continued
implementation of the Harry W. Colmery Veterans Education
Assistance Act of 2017, also known as the Forever GI Bill. This
bill was signed into law by President Trump on August 16th,
2017, and is one of the best illustrations of the work that
Congress can get done when we work together in a bipartisan
manner. This was the first major improvement to the GI Bill
since 2011 and encompassed over 30 provisions brought forth by
many members of this House, who all share our commitment to the
men and women who serve either in uniform or alongside their
active duty spouse or parent.
As we all know, despite the best efforts and good
intentions of many in the Department, VA was unable to meet the
August 1 deadline of 2018, effective date for Sections 107 and
501 of this law. This failure led to some of the most
significant GI Bill processing delays since the program's rocky
rollout in 2009. Students suffered several financial hardships
because of these delays and even today thousands of veterans
are still not being paid the correct amount of monthly housing
allowance under the law; some are being overpaid and some are
being underpaid. It is because of this subcommittee's hearings
and bipartisan oversight that many of these issues came to
light.
On November 28th, 2018, Secretary Wilkie issued a full stop
on the development of the failed IT modifications, and decided
to reset development and implementation completely. I thank and
praise the Secretary for making this difficult decision.
This reset aimed at full implementation by December 1,
2019, which, as we know, is rapidly approaching. Since this
reset, VA has done a great job of keeping the committee
informed of their efforts to get the system online, as well as
keeping schools and students informed about upcoming changes,
many of which could have significant financial impact on
students' monthly housing allowance.
It is my understanding from staff and member meetings that
VA is poised to meet the December 1 deadline and deliver the
changes as required by law. We have come a long way from last
November's issues of blue screens of death and lack of
bandwidth that hampered processors' ability to do their jobs.
I want to give significant credit to Dr. Lawrence,
Assistant Secretary Gfrerer, and their dedicated teams of
career VA employees and contractors, for their efforts to get
this right. While it is important to acknowledge that it has
been done, we still have questions that need to be answered
about where VA goes from here.
Today, I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
how they are going to, first, ensure every veteran that has
been owed money as a result of IT failures, some since August
1st, 2018, will be made whole, as well as a time line on when
students can expect such payments; second, provide proper
accounting for the amount of money in the overpayments that are
going to be forgiven as a result of these payments' delays;
and, last, provide resources and attention to upgrading current
VA legacy systems to ensure that the types of delays that
occurred never happen again.
These legacy systems have been hanging on a thread for far
too long and calls from this subcommittee about the need for
significant upgrades have been ignored by senior VA political
leaders, especially those from the previous administration, for
far too long.
The Forever GI Bill will not be the last time that Congress
changes this education program, which means that it is time for
VA to build a truly agile system that is prepared for the
inevitable evolution of this great benefit.
Before I yield back, I want to take a moment to say thank
you to the student veterans and schools for their patience and
understanding throughout this whole process. The IT system's
failures and associated delays with the implementation of this
law have been a burden for all involved. I am hopeful that
today we can highlight the good work that has been done to
finally get this right.
I thank our panel for being here and, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Congress Member Bergman, I appreciate
your remarks.
I would now like to recognize the ranking member of the
House Veterans' Affairs Committee, Dr. Roe, for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF DAVID P. ROE, RANKING MEMBER, FULL
COMMITTEE

Mr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
recognizing me.
It is important that we are here today to review the
implementation of the Forever GI Bill. As one of the coauthors
of this legislation, I was disappointed last year to witness a
rocky implementation of Sections 107 and 501. Last August 2018,
a year ago, I was in Springfield, Illinois with Congressman
Rodney Davis at a roundtable, education roundtable, where we
realized that there was a significant problem when we were
talking to the community colleges and other colleges that were
represented.
As these delays were beginning to unfold, I applaud then
Chairman Arrington and Ranking Member O'Rourke's efforts to
understand where things went wrong and how the VA could work to
put implementation of this important law back on track.
I personally want to thank and acknowledge the work of Dr.
Lawrence, Assistant Secretary Gfrerer, Ms. Bogue, and Mr.
Orifici, and their talented staff, for their hard work to
straighten things out and get this right. I thank you for that
work.
Like many of the members today, I am very interested to
hear about VA's communication plans for alerting students to
changes to monthly housing allowance payments that will go into
effect when the student's January 1st payments begin. While no
plan is foolproof, we must do all we can to ensure that every
student is contacted and educated about the potential change to
their housing allowance payments. These changes have the
potential to impact thousands and I am concerned that, despite
VA's best efforts, some students will be very surprised when
they see an unexpected decrease in payment on January 1.
I am also interested in hearing about VA's plans to hold
Secretary Wilkie's commitment that ever student veteran who was
shortchanged due to the IT failures are made whole. It is
important to make sure these payments are made in a responsible
way, so that they do not negatively impact the processing of
spring enrollments; however, it is imperative that students
have some idea of when they should expect their payments that
they are owed under the law.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing me and for
holding this important hearing. I thank the panel for being
here today, and I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Dr. Roe.
I would now like to get to our witnesses. We are fortunate
to have true experts from the VA, also MITRE Corporation, I am
grateful to all of you for being here.
Dr. Paul Lawrence, Under Secretary at the Veterans Benefits
Administration. Good to see you. Ms. Charmain Bogue, Executive
Director of Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) Education
Services. Good to see you again. Mr. James Gfrerer, Assistant
Secretary with VA's Office of Information and Technology. Mr.
Robert Orifici, Information Technology Specialist in the Office
of Information of Technology. Dr. Jay Schnitzer, Vice President
and Chief Technology Officer of the MITRE Corporation.
Thank you all again for joining us. As you know, you will
have 5 minutes for your oral statement, but your full written
statement will be added to the record.
Under Secretary Lawrence, I would like to start with you,
and you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL R. LAWRENCE

Mr. Lawrence. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Levin,
Ranking Member Bergman, and members of the subcommittee. We
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the status of VA's implementation of the Colmery Act.
On November 28th, 2018, VA announced changes in the
implementation of the Colmery Act, Sections 107 and 501, which
deal primarily with the calculation of the monthly housing
allowance. Secretary Wilkie announced a reset of VA's
implementation to give the Department time, contracting
support, and the resources necessary to develop the capability
to process enrollments in accordance with the law by December
1st, 2018.
VA established a Program Integration Office, or PIO, as a
formal entity within the Department made up of government
leaders, staff, federally funded research and development
center support, and contract support. The PIO captured business
requirements for Sections 107 and 501, maintained an integrated
master schedule, managed a program risk register, and
reformulated the configured control process.
Previously, VA engaged MITRE to perform an independent
technical assessment of the capabilities necessary to meet the
requirements of the Act. MITRE provided 20 recommendations
intended to help VA successfully test and deploy the Colmery
Act.
Since the formation of the PIO in December 2018, Office of
Information Technology (OIT) has worked diligently in
partnership with VBA. OIT assigned proven leaders to partner
with us in governance and leadership of the Colmery Act
delivery, and co-located staff with VBA's Education Service.
OIT has worked closely with us and MITRE to improve our
requirements and testing process. Through these improvements,
the team successfully deployed two software bills and updated
five legacy systems in order to support the December 1st
launch. These bills were completed on schedule and have been
fully tested.
Since the last hearing before this committee in May, we
have successfully implemented each recommendation made by
MITRE. MITRE's recommendations in support have been
instrumental in the development and deployment of the new
solution. We are on track to meet the December 1st, 2019 launch
date.
I am also proud to report that we have accomplished the
requirements of public law to establish a tiger team. VA Chief
Information Officer (CIO) and I participate in the weekly tiger
team meetings and engage with the Colmery delivery team several
times each week.
Importantly, we are fulfilling the Secretary's promise to
make every Post-9/11 GI Bill beneficiary 100 percent whole. The
process to correct housing records will continue through 2020,
as VA will begin accepting updated records from schools in
circumstances where the student was studying at a different
campus than originally provided to VA. Also, as promised, if a
student was overpaid due to VA's challenges in implementing the
law, VA will notify the impacted student individually with the
amount VA intends to waive. Concurrently, VA will review the
debt to ensure it was incurred solely based on implementation
of Sections 107 and 501. Upon confirmation, VA will notify the
student of the completed waiver. In the process, VA does not
require anything additional from the impacted student veterans.
VA has numerous initiatives in place to better serve and
inform schools, veterans service organizations, State approving
agencies, and the stakeholders of how implementation affects
the student population and process. We provided 9 monthly
updates to Congress; we executed 40 direct email campaigns
reaching over a million GI Bill students and other
stakeholders; we participated in two conferences in July 2019,
in which we had the opportunity to connect with nearly 1400
representatives from schools across the country.
VA also hosted 45 focus groups and webinars, reaching over
30,000 school certifying officials and other stakeholders.
During the webinar sessions, we outlined the extension campus
updates, shared a time line for future changes, and provided
opportunities to ask questions. VA held nine in-person and 16
virtual sessions with School Certifying Offices (SCOs),
allowing them to review and interact with our updates to the
education processing IT system. The feedback from these was
overwhelmingly positive.
In addition, VA conducted a Forever GI Bill school tour
this past September, visiting campuses across the country to
reach students who are directly affected by the Forever GI
Bill. We visited six states--North Carolina, New York,
Maryland, Oklahoma, Virginia, and Texas--connecting with 15
schools and hundreds of GI Bill students. I personally visited
the Community College of Allegheny County and the University of
South Carolina Columbia, where I hosted roundtables with
students and school officials. I heard firsthand that the
communication we have in place is reaching all levels
successfully.
VA has made tremendous strides toward developing and
deploying the IT solution to support Sections 107 and 501. My
first priority as Under Secretary is to provide veterans the
benefits they have earned in a manner that honors their
service. On December 1st, we will start providing this same
level of high customer service to our student veterans.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. This concludes my testimony. We
are prepared to respond to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Paul R. Lawrence Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Under Secretary Lawrence.
Mr. Schnitzer, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JAY SCHNITZER

Mr. Schnitzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bergman, Ranking Member Dr.
Roe, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee on Economic
Opportunity, thank you for inviting us to testify before you
again today on matters relating to the implementation of
Sections 107 and 501 of the Colmery Act, also known as the
Forever GI Bill.
The law amended the location basis for the monthly housing
allowance and aligned those payments with the Department of
Defense's basic housing allowance rates.
My name is Jay Schnitzer, I am Vice President and Chief
Technology Officer with the MITRE Corporation. I would like to
make a brief statement and submit my full remarks for the
record.
MITRE is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit corporation operating
federally funded research and development centers on behalf of
Federal agency sponsors, including the Department of Veterans
Affairs.
As I stated in my previous testimony in May, the challenges
which impacted the Forever GI Bill program 1 year ago have been
seen repeatedly across the government as agencies struggle to
execute highly complex, integrated mission requirements, and
modernize their systems and processes to address new mission
needs. At that time, I summarized the key findings from the
independent technical assessment we delivered in November 2018
on the VA's implementation of Sections 107 and 501 of the
Forever GI Bill.
The focus of that independent assessment, requested by VA's
Office of Information Technology, was to identify issues
related to the delayed delivery of a long-term solution, or
LTS, and to recommend a resolution to the issues associated
with completing and deploying the required system updates. The
assessment explored the following six areas: one, leadership
and governance; two, technical environment; three, process;
four, requirements management; five, personnel authorities and
responsibilities; and, six, software code evaluation.
As noted by the assessment, several key findings were
related not to technical considerations, but rather to the
assignment of responsibilities and questions about governance,
authorities, priorities, and goals. Among other things, we
identified the need to establish a single cross-organizational
business leader and champion for the overall effort; new
governance structures, new program governance structures,
including a new Light Governance Council; a Program Integration
Office; and an end-to-end systems integrator to coordinate
planning, development, and integrated testing efforts.
To VA's credit, these recommendations and others were fully
accepted by the leadership soon after our independent technical
assessment was completed. Further, progress on implementation
of these recommendations have been transparently tracked and
reported on by VA.
Our current assessment is that these changes have had a
significant impact on the delivery of this program and that VA
will meet the target deployment on December 1 for the planned
functionality.
As the deployment date approaches, three key milestones
have been successfully completed, which indicate that the
deployment will occur as planned, specifically; one, the
Colmery team has completed all development milestones on or
ahead of schedule, including bill deadlines and end-to-end user
acceptance testing; two, a series of tabletop exercises have
been conducted to further verify end-to-end operational and
functional readiness; and, three, two dry runs, equivalent to a
full dress rehearsal, are being conducted for the Section 501
batch runs to identify any challenges or issues that can be
addressed prior to deployment.
Information technology programs, especially those requiring
a great deal of integration among new technology, legacy
systems, and new business rules and processes are inherently
high risk. VA now has in place an integrated program team that
is deliberately managing that risk by identifying the critical
path activities and decisions needed to succeed and
contingencies to mitigate the risk.
Going forward, we encourage VA to leverage this model to
reduce risk and improve results across the VA's other critical
programs by; one, adopting this management model enterprise-
wide by establishing for each critical program a senior
accountable business leader and a Light Governance Council;
two, working to strategically simplify the legacy system
environment by determining opportunities to modify, modernize,
or replace legacy systems as they implement new programs; and,
three, continuing use of modern information technology methods,
processes, and tools that underlie the independent technical
assessment recommendations.
MITRE remains committed to the success of this initiative
in partnership with VA leadership and the selected systems
integrator. On behalf of the entire MITRE team, I greatly
appreciate the opportunity to come before you again today to
provide this update, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Jay Schnitzer Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Dr. Schnitzer.
With that, without objection, the chair is authorized to
call a recess at any time, and I now recognize myself for 5
minutes to begin the question portion of the hearing.
Under Secretary Lawrence, thanks again for having me to
Muskogee recently. I will start with the major question that I
think we all have today, which is very simple: is VBA ready to
meet the December 1st implementation date for Sections 107 and
501 of the Forever GI Bill?
Mr. Lawrence. Yes.
Mr. Levin. I am glad to hear you say that, you say that
with confidence.
Mr. Lawrence. Ten out of ten.
Mr. Levin. Ten out of ten. Oh, and your microphone, sir.
Mr. Lawrence. Sorry. Ten out of ten.
Mr. Levin. Ten out of ten, all right. Ready for the spring
2020 semester, particularly since, you know, we know in the
past what happened with August 2018.
I know that you dedicated a lot of resources within VBA to
meet to the December 1st implementation date and one of the
issues, as you know, in August 2018 was delayed education claim
processing time, which was caused by IT systems and the
decision to delay school certifications.
My question for you, Mr. Under Secretary, what have VBA and
Education Services changed to ensure that the processing time
will not be longer than normal after December 1st?
Mr. Lawrence. I would like to ask Charmain to jump in here
in a second, but I would point out the following last year.
Last year, what happened, if--you were not here, I know--there
was delay in getting the software ready. We were always 1 week
away from having the software ready, which delayed the
processing.
As was pointed out, we received the software in October, so
it is ready. We are ready to roll per normal, so we are not
going to have a bunch of held applications waiting for us to be
ready. We are ready, but we have taken extensive steps to
prepare, hire, and train, and I would like Charmain to jump in
here and explain that.
Ms. Bogue. Yes, good morning. Basically, we have done a few
things. One, we are at the lowest point for our pending
inventory right now to prepare for what is coming for the
December 1st rollout. We are traditionally about 60K in terms
of our pending inventory, right now we are at 40K. Those are
the lowest numbers we have seen since implementation of Post-9/
11.
Number 2, we are in the process of hiring nearly 500
employees, between temporary and permanent staff members. We
are already at 54 percent when it comes to hiring those members
and they were on board by the end of November, ready for the
December 1st rollout.
Then, last, we are ready to ramp up for mandatory overtime.
Right before the spring peak period comes into place in
January, we will kick in for mandatory overtime and folks will
be working mandatory overtime, so we are prepared for the
spring semester.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that.
In November 2018, MITRE released a report stating that
the--you know, basically, that the findings, the systems, the
processes of the Education Services at VBA, providing a status
update, and then we had of course a hearing in May where VA had
completed, I believe, 10 of the 20 recommendations from MITRE.
As you shared in your testimony, Under Secretary Lawrence, VA
has now implemented all 20 of those recommendations, I think is
what you said.
As a point of clarity, when you say implemented, do you
mean completed or initiated?
Mr. Lawrence. Completed.
Mr. Levin. Great.
Under Secretary Lawrence and Dr. Schnitzer, I would like to
hear from both of you on my next question, if I could. What is
VA doing to internalize the lessons learned from 2018 and the
assistance provided by MITRE, so not just in Education
Services, but across the enterprise?
Mr. Lawrence. Perhaps I can start and I will speak to VBA
in particular, and maybe we can get Mr. Gfrerer to jump in,
because I know some of those affect what he does.
I think, if you recall, three things came about last time
which were really important and we decided to implement it in
VBA on all our significant projects that involve IT. One is a
clear, accountable official responsible for that. While it is
me in this one, in other opportunities we do where we have IT
there is a clear, accountable business unit leader there.
Another is we hire the right contractors. We talked about a
systems integrator and a software developer in this. We make
sure we are hiring the right contractors.
We have, while the role was played by MITRE now and MITRE
in some of those in VBA, but else-wise other firms providing
program integration and oversight, giving us the expertise to
watch over the whole initiative.
Those are three things we are doing in VBA based on the
learning based on the learning, as Dr. Schnitzer pointed out,
from this project.
Mr. Levin. Anything you would like to add, sir?
Mr. Schnitzer. Thank you. The only thing I would like to
add--and I agree with everything Dr. Lawrence just said--was
that some of these lessons are being shared across VA, so from
Dr. Lawrence's leadership to leadership in other parts of VA as
examples of things to consider, and I know that is ongoing at
VA as well.
Mr. Levin. Could you maybe give me a specific example of,
you know, how VA maybe has changed their process in some area
outside of Forever GI Bill implementation from, you know, the
work that you have done and the lessons that have been learned?
Mr. Lawrence. Can I deflect that to Mr. Gfrerer? He has a
broader view of the IT.
Mr. Levin. Sure.
Mr. Gfrerer. Again, while the focus was on some of the past
mistakes of the previous year, I would point to the current
year and what we are doing. Dr. Lawrence referred to a few of
them, but the first thing I would cite is that the Department
has surely from a culture standpoint shifted to a Development
Operations (DevOps) mentality. Again, at the risk of being too
technical, previously they had followed a waterfall
methodology, which is all requirements are listed up-front, and
then it is likely for the program to be successful, as opposed
to what we refer to as a minimum viable product within Agile.
The Department has done that and then, as Dr. Lawrence has
said, additionally the testing, the modernization efforts, the
table-top exercise. All of those things that we have done in
MISSION Act and some of the others have led up to the
preparation of the environment and setting the condition for
the launch on December 1st, but also for those days afterwards,
to make sure that we stabilize the environment, that the
software is acting in an appropriate fashion, that all the
other interconnected systems are contributing to the delivery
of the outcomes.
Mr. Levin. Thank you very much. I will come back with some
more questions, but I want to give my colleagues an
opportunity. I would like to recognize Congressman Bergman for
5 minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lawrence, assuming that the IT modifications are
successfully deployed on the 1st of December, what is the plan
for providing retroactive payments to student veterans who have
been underpaid, some all the way back to August 2018?
Mr. Lawrence. Certainly. We intend to true everybody up, as
promised by the Secretary.
There are two parts to this answer I would like to draw on,
there is an IT component and there is a processing component,
so let me start with Mr. Orifici explaining some of the IT
things we need to do.
Mr. Orifici. All right. As we move forward with the IT
components of this, we are currently working, we started the
first sprint toward the development of the retroactive payment
piece for Section 107, and that is currently underway. We plan
to complete the IT capability for 107 retroactive payments in
the winter of this year and then we will go on to testing
activities then for deployment in the spring.
The other component of that is with the December 1st
launch, we have a batch process that will run, which will start
the true-up process for Section 501 of the Colmery Act, and
that will launch at the stroke of midnight on December 1st.
Mr. Bergman. Good. Whoever you want to answer this next
one, it is kind of a follow-on. Once these needed upgrades are
ready--so I am hearing about March 2020--will there be a
phased-in approach to pay students? Is it reasonable to expect
that, if all the systems work out the way that you hope, that
the students should expect to be made whole by next summer?
Ms. Bogue. That is a good question. We have been working
closely with the schools over the last year in terms of the
retroactive piece and going back to correct records, and, yes,
it will be a phased approach. Our first priority is to pay
those that were underpaid for that timeframe and then our
second priority is those that were overpaid, and then there is
the third category of those where there is no change
whatsoever.
Also the phased approach will include, we will have a set
timeframe in which we will allow schools to come back in to
certify, to give them ample time, at least a 6-month window, in
order to come back and recertify enrollments for that time
period. We believe, doing that, it will help with the workload
as it relates for the schools, as well as making sure there is
no impact to students for the summer and the upcoming fall
semesters.
Mr. Bergman. Realistically, by a year from now, given your
projections, we should be--the students should be made whole?
Ms. Bogue. Realistically, yes, they should be made whole.
It is contingent upon the schools, but the schools are already
tracking that information. We have been working very closely
with the schools to make sure that they are tracking the
information of those students that are owed funds. Like I said,
the first priority is those that are underpaid, that we make
that the first priority to get those in the door to make sure
that we cut them a check for the difference.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. The earliest would be?
Ms. Bogue. The earliest in terms of those going out the
door, I would say by early summer we will start seeing checks
go out the door.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Dr. Lawrence, Section 501 of the Colmery
Act requires housing allowance amounts for many students to
decrease with their January 1st payments. What is the VA's plan
on how to communicate these changes to the students and what
will the process be for an equitable relief for those students
who will see their payments drop by a considerable amount?
Mr. Lawrence. I am going to enlist Charmain in just a
second, but I do want to comment on this, because I know one of
the lessons learned from our interactions last year was a real
egging on for more communication from us. We have tried real
hard to up our communication game in terms of explaining to
students, explaining to schools what is going to take place.
As you point out, one of the consequences of this law is
the way they change where they get their credits they will
receive less in their monthly housing allowance and this is of
real concern to us, to include us notifying your offices of
schools in your State that will be affected by this.
I really want Charmain to jump in here, because this has
been a real area of concern.
Ms. Bogue. Over the last couple of months we have had some
targeted outreach at those with a lower rate zone, we called it
the 24 Percent Campaign. Out of the 8,300 extension campus
locations that we collected across the Nation, 24 percent of
those locations fall in a lower rate zone. We targeted those
particular areas and worked with schools and students to
basically push out messaging to inform them of what is
transpiring and what is coming down the pike.
What we realized is that the majority of schools have
already started working with their students to basically inform
them that if they are spending most of their time at one of
those extension campus locations in a lower rate zone, to
expect a lower rate, and to provide them the information in
terms of what that rate will be.
Also, like as Dr. Lawrence said, just this Monday we put
out information to the congressional districts in the area as
well, to make sure they are aware of what is going on. Also we
have connected with the Veteran Services Organizations (VSOs),
so that way they are educated about what is happening.
It is not just the students and the school administrators
that we are educating, but it is the community that we are
educating about what is happening with the monthly housing
allowance changes.
Mr. Bergman. Well, thank you.
Mr. Lawrence. I notice the time is up, could we just answer
the second part of your question, sir, about equitable relief?
Mr. Bergman. Sure. I see my time has expired and I know we
are going to have a second round here, but, you know, there is
an old saying, bad news does not get better with time and the
point is if--it just is what it is and the point is, the sooner
our student veterans have an indication that there is going to
be a change to the lesser, the better they can plan on the
front end. Do not wait until you have all the numbers, get the
word out that there are going to be some changes and the
details will come later.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, and I echo those remarks.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Roe for his
questions for 5 minutes.
Mr. Roe. Thank you. Just to follow on with that line of
questioning, I think that is probably the most important part
of what you are right now. This 24 percent, is that 175,000,
200,000 students? About how many students is that?
Ms. Bogue. The 24 percent represents just the extension
campus locations for the schools, not the student count.
Mr. Roe. Okay.
Ms. Bogue. For the student count, we have done some
preliminary work with schools and what they have indicated is
that about 16 percent of the student population would be
impacted by the 107 piece, and let me equate that to some
numbers.
Within a term, basically 500,000 students receive a monthly
housing allowance. Of those 500,000, 420,000 there is no impact
to them, because they are staying at their main campus, but
about 80,000, 16 percent, they could be potentially impacted by
the 107 changes. What we are looking at right now, of the
80,000, about 21,000 would receive a lower rate.
Mr. Roe. Well, if we act like we are self-serving, we are,
because our phones are going to ring off the wall, and then
your phones are going to be ringing off the wall, because we
are going to be calling you. I think that is the thing. If you
are in an area--and, as the General said, students, you know,
they do not have too much money and when you reduce the amount
that they have, it is going to be a real impact on some
students and the quicker they get that information the better.
Again, I want to commend you all for getting this rolled
out. I am really excited about how it is going to work.
Dr. Schnitzer, just a couple things I wanted to ask you.
What do you believe are the biggest lessons learned by VA
officials in this process, and how can they apply these
experiences to improve future IT modifications, whether it be
the GI Bill process or other businesses? I think--John and I
were talking about that, about there should be some lessons
learned here.
Mr. Schnitzer. Thank you, Dr. Roe. I think the three things
are what I mentioned, but I will call them out specifically as
being the most important. I think having a single business
leader have ultimate authority within the organization, Number
one; Number two, having the Light Governance structure is
really critical; and, Number 3, incorporating the concept of a
Program Integration Office. Those three components and those
scaled for other issues as well, so those can be used
generally.
Mr. Roe. When we roll out the next--and there will be a
next sometime--I think we could certainly utilize what we have
learned here to not have this year hiccup, and then give you
enough time to get the old IT or either invest in new IT where
we can roll it out better, would that be a fair statement?
Mr. Schnitzer. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Roe. Dr. Lawrence, about the--you did not get a chance
to finish, because you ran out of time, on the equitable relief
plan.
Mr. Lawrence. Yes, certainly. We are very sensitive to that
and we understand what you were describing about our student
veterans, you know, live on modest incomes, the housing
allowance will go down in certain situations, so we want to
explain that. We share your concern that they call you and you
direct them to us. We would also like your help to communicate
this is not a VA failure, this is just how the law and the
rules work. We want to make sure that is well understood, but
we are prepared for that.
I want Charmain to talk about equitable relief.
Ms. Bogue. Equitable relief will provide a one-time relief
for students for that particular term. So if they realize that
there is a drop in their rate for that term, so let us say--I
will use San Fran as a great example, San Fran the rate is
$4300, but in Sacramento the rate is about 2500 bucks. If they
realize that they are spending most of their time in the
Sacramento area, the difference there, they can come in and
say, VA, hey, I planned my life around the situation of
receiving $4500. We will say, hey, we will do a one-time of the
difference for that particular term, and we will hand that over
to the student.
We understand that process usually takes about 3 months, so
we are working with tiger teams in our regional processing
offices to expedite that to have 2-week turnaround times all
the way up to the Secretary, because the Secretary has to
approve all equitable relief requests.
Mr. Roe. I think that is the right thing to do and to give
people who are caught off-guard, and there will be some no
matter how much you try to do this.
Dr. Lawrence, I know that the VA has made a significant
investment in time and resources to improve communication to
the schools and students about the changes coming as a result
of the Colmery Act, can you just very briefly again go through
exactly what you have done and how can we help you get that
information out?
Mr. Lawrence. Sure. I am happy to have Charmain jump in
here, because she has done a lot of this.
We have really upped our game in terms of just, you know,
emails and the like--nobody receives letter anymore--emails,
those sort of--as much social media as we could imagine.
Facebook, Charmain has been on Facebook at all the conferences,
we have folks who are doing Twitter and the things like that.
We have been to the conferences, we have spoke to the officials
and, as I said, I personally have been to roundtable at
universities to understand if this has happened. We have taken
that counsel really seriously.
Charmain, if you want to jump in here.
Ms. Bogue. Yes, social media is a powerful tool, I will
tell you, and even though we are posting on our media channels,
we have asked for your staff, as well as for our VSO partners,
to amplify that messaging to also post on their social media
channels. We usually post a couple times per week.
As Dr. Lawrence, we went out on a national school tour. You
know, New York is a great example. We went to John Jay College,
we went to Columbia University, but we invite all the local
schools to come out. The entire CUNY and SUNY system came out
and supported us to talk about the changes that are going on
and what is happening, and how it is applicable to their State.
We continue that dialog.
We also put out a simple, five-page pamphlet for students
about the monthly housing allowance changes.
We will continue doing that, you know, in the future as it
relates to communications. You know, like Dr. Lawrence said,
veterans are not sitting there waiting for a snail mail letter
to come in the mail.
Mr. Roe. Okay. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize Representative Banks for 5
minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lawrence, it is clear that the VA needs to modernize
its legacy systems after years of neglect and I think it is
fair to say from what we have heard today that you are
committed to doing just that. Could you please share with the
committee, though, your plan for a full replacement and what it
will cost to avoid the need for a reset in the future, and what
will it take in additional financial resources to get there?
Mr. Lawrence. You are right. Part of my experience in this
journey is that our legacy systems are old--and Congressman
Bergman talked about updating our legacy systems, I just do not
think that is practical anymore, we need to replace them at
some point. For us to have a world-class system for our
veterans, you just can imagine what it would take, right? Call
center technology that is unbelievably responsive, you know,
processing power and the like to be able to deal with the
issues we deal with, as well as the expected increases in what
the--or changes in the GI Bill will bring. Our systems right
now are inflexible and limit us tremendously and require more
resources to be fixed.
I am in the process of reviewing with the CIO and others
our initiatives to understand modernization before Colmery, as
well as beginning to benchmark against some of the like
projects. We would appreciate that you can appreciate we will
come forward with an ask through our internal process. We want
to make sure that this is done correctly, so we do not have to
be in this situation again; that it has to be honest and, quite
frankly, done quickly.
Mr. Gfrerer. Congressman, if I could just add quickly on
that? I do not want anyone to leave here with the impression
today that there is a binary decision here. We are not living
with just our legacy system, there is a pathway. There is an
OIT and a Department of Modernization strategy, we have
migrated to the applications to a cloud environment, refactored
them and stabilized them. We have put in an application
performance interfaces, we are doing things around managed
services.
There is a host of things between legacy and fully
modernized systems that are occurring, it is just of course
never fast enough or responsive enough for the business.
Mr. Banks. Do both of you feel comfortable that we have
identified everything that needs to be modernized in order to
execute the program?
Mr. Lawrence. I think we are completing that analysis, so
not quite everything yet.
Mr. Banks. How close to everything?
Mr. Lawrence. Pretty close.
Mr. Banks. Okay.
Mr. Gfrerer. I would be a little more specific and say it
is part of our joint business plan. Every year, we have
specific goals within what we intend to accomplish given the
restraints of funding and other, you know, constraints. You
know, again, with the Continuing Resolution (CR) environment
too, that adds an additional level of kind of to the Rubik's
cube for this year, which makes it a little more challenging.
Mr. Banks. I am not sure if that makes me more or less
comfortable, but with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Representative Banks.
I would now like to recognize Representative Meuser for 5
minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all
very much.
Dr. Lawrence, what has been stated here is some very
encouraging news and information. December 1st, you have 100
percent likelihood to go online. By early summer, I think I
heard right--Ms. Bogue, is that it, Charmain?
Ms. Bogue. That is correct.
Mr. Meuser. Okay, thank you. That you will have a true-up
on all past inequities that have existed, all milestones have
been achieved up until now. You mentioned the tabletop
executions are taking place well, you have had two stress tests
or dry runs that seem to have gone well. Also, you have an
integrated program team to implement and mitigate risk. All
this is quite encouraging.
I do want to mention just in what I am reading here,
Accenture refers to the legacy systems as ancient, so that is
something I want to ask you about. As I--well, first of all,
has Accenture proved to be a good partner?
Mr. Lawrence. They have successfully completed all the
tasks we have asked them to do, so the answer is yes.
Mr. Meuser. Great. The past failures that have existed--
and, let us face, there have been some past failures, so why--
what have we done to--and, obviously, following these
principles and a new team, which, again, I applaud, but what do
you base why these legacy systems have remained ancient and why
have we been put into a position where we did have such large
past failures, Dr. Lawrence?
Mr. Lawrence. I will start and I will ask Mr. Gfrerer, the
CIO, to jump in here. I do not really have a good answer to
that. I do not know whether it was failure to listen to perhaps
the coaching from the committee to really step back and deal
with the bigger problem ahead, versus the short-term solution
to a problem and not see what is coming.
I have had the unique experience this year to really
appreciate--this is the 75th anniversary of the GI Bill, right?
It gets modernized regularly, it will be modernized against as
more benefits are expanded. I do not know that the leaders had
the chance to really appreciate what that meant and argue for a
little more pay and a little more money, understanding the
benefits would be longer.
I do not know, Mr. Gfrerer, would----
Mr. Gfrerer. Yes. I guess the thing I would emphasize is, I
certainly talk to my counterparts in commercial financial
services to compare notes and the challenges are not entirely
dissimilar. They face the same obstacles in terms of percent of
spent and, you know, upgrading and modernizing their legacy
systems. I think that is one thing. I would not want the
committee to feel like the government is so far out in left
field as compared to like private sector counterparts. There
are a lot of the same headwinds and struggles, I can assure you
of that.
Secondarily, again, I think when you look at some of the
time lines, I think the chairman and others mentioned the kind
of challenging time lines. You know, I would point to MISSION
Act, for example. When you get very complex pieces of
legislation that have to go through the entire rulemaking
period, which eventually go into user requirements, and then
you look at like about 5 or 6 months being left to develop the
software and the code to meet these very exotic systems, that
can be incredibly challenging. MISSION Act, for example, I have
been on record that we essentially did 4 months of development
that if in a corporate entity you would have probably taken 18
to 24 months.
Again, I think there is some expectation of management, you
know, working with the committee around what we can achieve in
a certain timeframe.
Mr. Meuser. I can appreciate that. I was Secretary of the
Department of Revenue in Pennsylvania and, when a new tax code
would come in, there would be a mad rush to certainly integrate
and implement, and we did work with Accenture relatively
successfully as well.
Mr. Schnitzer, my question to you is, would these
principles and lessons learned that you described, can they be
applied elsewhere throughout the VA system?
Mr. Schnitzer. Yes, sir, and not only across the VA system,
but elsewhere in the Federal Government.
I would just point out that some of the challenges that
have been shared by my colleagues within VA and its various
agencies apply elsewhere in the Federal Government as well.
Mr. Meuser. Are they saving money?
Mr. Schnitzer. Using these approaches? Saving money,
perhaps, but, more importantly, providing better services.
Mr. Meuser. Higher quality, better delivery systems. Okay,
great.
What was mentioned by Ms. Bogue that there were 500,000
students that are within this GI Bill and receiving the housing
nationwide?
Ms. Bogue. Every term we have about 500,000 students who
are receiving a monthly housing allowance because their course
load is more than half time.
Mr. Meuser. Okay.
Ms. Bogue. That is that number that----
Mr. Meuser. I am out of time, but can we get a listing, a
spreadsheet of where those 500,000 are, where they go to
school?
Ms. Bogue. Sure. Yes----
Mr. Meuser. Great.
Ms. Bogue.--we can provide that information.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you very much.
Ms. Bogue. You are welcome.
Mr. Meuser. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Meuser.
Some additional questions for Under Secretary Lawrence.
Again, it was really a pleasure getting to spend the day in
Muskogee, Oklahoma, understanding from your team there how GI
Bill benefits are processed. I particularly appreciate the
opportunity to sit down with one of the call center workers and
just listen in on several of the calls, and just try to
understand in real time the complexity of being able to process
those benefits. One of the things I noticed is that they used a
number of different applications, a number of different
software systems running simultaneously.
How many different applications does one of those call
center workers have to use as they are processing one of those
claims?
Ms. Bogue. For the Education call center agent, it depends
on the question that is coming in the door, but nine times out
of ten the question coming in the door is about the status of
their particular benefits, so they would probably have to use
about three or four systems in order to look at that
information.
One of those systems is our long-term solution, which will
tell you where the information is processed, and then we have
our benefits delivery network, which is another system which
will tell you when the money has been released and to verify
banking information across the board. Then we have our normal
CRM tool, the Client Relations Management tool, which is the
call center management tool.
Those are three examples of a system they could use from
day to day for each call.
Mr. Levin. For the main data base with a lot of the
personal information of the veteran, what programming language
is that dependent on?
Mr. Lawrence. I think you saw us using Cobalt that day.
Mr. Levin. Cobalt?
Ms. Bogue. Yes.
Mr. Levin. I think that was created in 1959 and was
popularized in 1968. I was born in 1978, so, you know, it is
obviously a dated technology.
Given that--and, you know, this is being kind to say that
Windows OS machines usually last about a decade, it usually
does not last that long, how are you able to integrate a new
software that is now 50-plus years old?
Mr. Gfrerer. Well, first I would say that the Federal
standards around tech refresh for microcomputers is about 4
years, sir. Ten years would be--that would be below sub-
optimal, so just to set the record----
Mr. Levin. I am just happy if my phone lasts through the
year.
Mr. Gfrerer. Exactly. Your question was around the legacy
systems and just, you know, what we are doing. Again, I would
tell you that it is not a static, it is not the same Cobalt,
for example, that was started in 1959, there has been
modification language. Then we start to put technology in
between that, the application performance interfaces again, so
we can Web-enable them and tie them to the systems, and then we
are always looking for ways to combine functionality.
Again, it could be a little misleading if we led you to
believe that literally the same architecture that was on the
Veterans Benefit Management System that was coded in the 1960's
or the 1970's exist today. There have been a lot of updates
along that, much like you would if in Department of Defense
(DOD) with an aircraft, right, where it may be the existing
shell, but the guts, the internal avionics and all those things
are much more upgraded.
Mr. Levin. Well, I certainly respect and appreciate all the
hard work over decades of getting the system to, you know,
function with interoperability of Oracle data bases, Microsoft
data bases, and the like, but clearly, you know, it is very out
of date.
Are there other data bases that are used throughout VBA
that also rely on things like Cobalt or is that something that
is specific to Education Services? I guess is that something
that we need to address only in Education Services or is it
part of a far larger discussion?
Mr. Gfrerer. Well, I will start off with that. It is
certainly enterprise-wide, right? I mean, we are here with
Veterans Benefits Administration today, but, again, we have an
integrated network throughout and a lot of our development
efforts are similar across the administrations and the
corporate portfolio.
Rob, I do not know if you want to focus beyond that.
Mr. Orifici. Thank you. When it comes specifically to
Cobalt and to Benefits Delivery Network (BDN), Education
Services, the majority of the functionality remaining on that
BDN legacy system.
Ms. Bogue. If I could just add, in the space of education,
just to give you context, we actually utilize 23 systems to
process education benefits across our six programs.
Mr. Levin. That is all helpful. You know, count me among
those that absolutely believe we need to modernize this system,
I was completely convinced of that. I think everybody is
working really hard and doing the very best they can with the
software that they have got, the resources that they have,
which leads me to the next question. What resources do you need
from Congress, from us, to ensure that as you overhaul this
system from Cobalt to something that is modern and sustainable
going forward, what is it that you will need?
Mr. Gfrerer. Congressman, we are certainly in discussions
with Office of Management and Budget(OMB) around what we think
are the future investments necessary to modernize the system;
we have found a very receptive audience with our colleagues
there. We are quantifying that. Also, in our past meeting with
you, I complimented and thanked again the Congress on in the
Fiscal Year 2020 budget there is actually a line around
infrastructure readiness. Again, addressing that technical debt
that creeps into any organization, government or otherwise.
I think, directionally, we are heading in the right
direction. It is always a question of managing around the
resources that are available, but I think largely we are headed
in the right direction.
Mr. Levin. Do you have any other unfunded mandates that
would take precedence over overhauling your infrastructure?
Mr. Gfrerer. I think that is a great question. I know with
Dr. Lawrence and VBA, again, as a partnership, I think one of
the challenges that occasionally gets left out is that with the
centralized appropriation in VA when a piece of legislation is
passed, I think we need to do a better job of communicating
with the committee and the appropriators around making sure
that sufficient resources are added. Otherwise, we do as you
said, are impacted by unfunded requirements, sometimes in the
current year of execution.
Mr. Levin. My last question. I know Congress authorized $30
million in the Forever GI Bill to fund the IT modifications
that the bill mandated, but that the funds were never
appropriated. Do you anticipate that this $30 million or
perhaps additional funding for the IT infrastructure overhaul
will be requested in the President's Fiscal Year 2021 budget?
Mr. Gfrerer. Congressman, what I would say is that we
certainly have an unfunded requirements process that we have
worked with our Office of Enterprise Integration and our Chief
Financial Officer this year, so we are addressing that with
respect to any reprogramming or supplementals or future year
budget requests that might come out of that. I am not prepared
to address that at this time.
Mr. Levin. Anybody else care to comment on that? No?
All right, with that, I will turn it over to Congress
Member Bergman for additional questions.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. We are 11 days from crossing the line of
departure. Those of you who have served in uniform know exactly
what that means, because no plan survives first contact. Okay.
I would like to just start right here, Ms. Bogue, and go
down the line, what in your mind is going to be the single
biggest pop-up that stuff is hitting the fan in the wrong
direction on the 1st of December or shortly thereafter? Do you
want to go out and make a prediction here?
Ms. Bogue. I am not going to say hit the fan, what I am
going to say is my concern is making sure that we are over-
communicating, right? I want to make sure that we are
communicating at all levels to make sure that students and
schools and everyone is aware the changes are rolling out and
to understand the impact to students.
That is what keeps me up at night to make sure that we have
a robust----
Mr. Bergman. Let me ask you--hold on----
Ms. Bogue.--communications plan.
Mr. Bergman.--hold on. Okay, and that is a nice--that is a
good answer, but the point is what is your preparation--if you
are not going to verbalize necessarily what could hit the fan,
what is your preparation for when it does, whatever the ``it''
is?
Ms. Bogue. I believe that we are very prepared and I do not
foresee anything hitting the fan, but I will tell you that
between our office, as well as OIT, we have a pretty aggressive
strategy to have all boots on the ground and all hands on deck
to make sure that we mitigate for any issues that come up on
December 1st.
Mr. Bergman. All liberty is canceled?
Ms. Bogue. All what?
Mr. Bergman. All liberty is canceled----
Ms. Bogue. All liberty.
Mr. Bergman.--during the fight. Okay.
Ms. Bogue. Correct.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Dr. Lawrence.
Mr. Lawrence. We have spent an awful lot of time over the
last year thinking about this, and I am not so certain what the
military analogy is of sort of getting to fight the war over
again, you get to start again, because I think we had a lot of
time last year to figure out what we did not enjoy about our
previous war, so that gave us a real baseline.
What Dr. Schnitzer talked about and the CIO alluded to is
we have had numerous tabletops where we plan through what is
going to happen on December 1st. We have anticipated as much as
we think we can and we are prepared for that, but your point is
there might still be something else. That is what we are
worrying about, but, as Charmain pointed out, December 1st is
on a Sunday, so we are working on Thanksgiving. We have people
ready to jump in to help deal with all the situations, but we
know what is at stake, because the period of time last year,
and it was described in the statements about veterans waiting
for their checks, something we do not want to have happen.
Most of us are veterans in the VA, you know that, so we
feel this very personally. I would like to think we have
anticipated everything, but we are prepared for things we have
not thought about.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Mr. Gfrerer.
Mr. Gfrerer. Well, General, I do not get a chance often to
use the military parlance, so I will talk in terms that you
will probably accept in terms of shaping, sustaining, and
decisive. Shaping, we have taken the network and all of the
architecture, we have done a freeze moratorium on systems that
could introduce additional risk, we have done the testing in
terms of the systems to make sure that they will interact
properly.
In terms of sustaining, as was mentioned earlier, we have a
robust incident management plan. It has been rehearsed through
these tabletops, as Dr. Lawrence said. We have an enterprise
command operations center that is 24/7, people will be on a
call within minutes if a related system if experiencing latency
or some challenges.
Then I would say, decisive, the resources will be brought
to bear. Even on Sunday, December 1st, if a particular system,
if there is a bandwidth issue, whatever, we will bring to bear
all of our power with the enterprise command operations team,
with the service desk, and with our commercial providers to
make sure that those challenges are addressed, like I said,
literally within minutes.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you.
Mr. Orifici?
Mr. Orifici. Thank you for the question.
Looking at this, I think we have looked at everything that
has gone wrong in the past year and anything that has caused an
incident with our systems, and we have prepared scenarios
around those and how to remediate and effectively remove those
issues, and we have practiced those. We have run mock calls
where we have pulled people in and worked through these
exercises.
With the level of planning, I am hoping for a smooth run,
but we are prepared for the obstacle course, if we encounter
it.
Mr. Bergman. Doctor.
Mr. Schnitzer. Sir, somebody a lot smarter than me once
said, predictions are hard, especially about the future. I do
not think I can predict how things will go off the rails
exactly, but your point is well taken. Something always happens
that is unexpected and unpredicted; I think the mitigation in
this case is the quality of the team. The difference now is
that we have got people who have been through it before, there
is plenty on the bench, and who are really well prepared at
this point with really good systems in place and good support.
I think there is readiness and people willing to step up
and deal with it when it comes and who know how to do so.
Mr. Bergman. Well, you know, thank you all for your
honesty, because, Number one, things are going to happen and
there are going to be mistakes that are made. Please try to
make them be new mistakes, that is the key, because it will
show, if we make the same mistake again, we did not learn. I am
very appreciative of all your efforts to ensure that we will
embrace the change on behalf of the veterans. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, General Bergman.
I would like to recognize Ms. Luria for 5 minutes.
Ms. Luria. Well, thank you, Dr. Lawrence, Ms. Bogue, for
appearing again.
After the last time you appeared before the subcommittee in
May, I sent a letter specifically addressing the correction of
the underpayments in Section 107 and 501. Unfortunately, I am
still awaiting a response to that letter, so I thought today's
hearing would be a good opportunity to follow up on some of
those questions.
At that time I asked if you could estimate approximately
how many students have been underpaid; do you have that data
now?
Ms. Bogue. We did talk about that a little bit earlier and
what we said is, over the last year, we have basically been
working with the schools to obtain information through our
focus groups and our webinars and, based off of data from the
schools, what we realized is about 16 percent of their student
population would be impacted by the 107 changes. What that
equates to in terms of numbers, for each term about 500,000
students receive a monthly housing allowance; of the 500,000,
420,000 will not be impacted, because they are still going to
remain at the main campus location. The remaining 80,000, 16
percent will basically have some impact as it relates to the
107 changes. Of the 80,000, 22,000 potentially will receive a
lower rate; and then 40,000, no change whatsoever; and then
19,000, they will receive actually a higher rate.
Again, I just want to add that those are preliminary
numbers sort of coming in the door. Once we flip the switch on
December 1st and we continue to monitor new enrollments coming
in the door, those numbers will shift, and we will make sure to
provide updates in the January timeframe in terms of the latest
numbers after we flip the switch.
Ms. Luria. Well, thank you. Based off the understanding
that you are still collecting data to come up with the finite
numbers, students who are impacted, my next question was, what
is the price tag. I understand that you might not have an exact
number now, but do you have an estimate of the range of the
amount as far as people who are owed more funds based off the
change?
Then, if I am correct, those who were overpaid will not be
financially impacted, there is a process by which they can have
those fees waived if they have been previously overpaid
throughout this process?
Ms. Bogue. You are talking about two aspects. The piece I
just mentioned is the point-forward piece for any new term that
starts on or after December 1st. The second part of that is the
retroactive piece when we will have to go back and correct
records, but that piece will not happen until the spring
timeframe when we go back to correct records, and we will have
a better sense of the funding piece as it relates to
overpayments and underpayments for that retroactive piece.
Ms. Luria. Anyone who was overpaid will not have a
financial----
Ms. Bogue. That is correct.
Ms. Luria.--burden for that?
Ms. Bogue. Anyone who was overpaid, we will review their
information, make sure it was solely based on the 107 issue,
and we will waive that debt; that is a correct statement.
Ms. Luria. The next thing I wanted to focus on was the IT
systems for implementing this. I know that, you know, this is a
change that requires different programming, different systems
for communication. While talking to some of our subcommittee
staff who had the opportunity to visit the regional office in
Muskogee it was brought to their attention that there was not
the possibility to communicate electronically with students who
were impacted.
Can you comment on that? Then what types of systems you
might be able to put in place to smooth that communication
between affected students, for this and other issues, and then
just smoothing out the process to make it more efficient?
Ms. Bogue. I am unclear of this particular issue as it
relates to Muskogee, but we are able to connect with students
electronically. Actually at the local level VCE's claims
examiners are able to email students, if they need to; however,
if there is certain Personal Identifiable Information (PII)
information, then we are not able to share that through via
email channels because of the security natures of it.
Also at a national level, right here in headquarters we
also communicate with students on major changes that are
happening to the program. We have an email distribution of over
700,000 students in our data base and any time there is any
changes to the GI Bill program we are emailing students at the
national level.
Ms. Luria. The PII specifically for an individual's claim,
does that hinder the process? Because I would assume that there
is information that has to go back and forth, bank account
information, those types of things.
Ms. Bogue. Correct.
Ms. Luria. Is there no secure process by which that
information can be exchanged for payment?
Ms. Bogue. Not via email, but we have another tool called
Right Now Web, which is available on our website, and an
individual can use that tool to communicate via electronically.
Mr. Gfrerer. Well, and I would add too, the information in
eBenefits is a secure system and it can be updated and reviewed
in there. We are in the process of all of those are
consolidating down on VA.gov.
Again, as a recipient within veterans' benefits, I sat down
with our Chief Technology Officer (CTO), Mr. Charles
Worthington, and actually looked at where I can verify my
eBenefits direct deposit information. All of that functionality
is collapsing down on VA.gov, part of our modernization
efforts.
Ms. Luria. Well, thank you. And I appreciate the efforts
toward modernization and I will go take a look at that myself,
so that I can become familiar with what is available there for
veterans. Thank you.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Meuser for additional
questions.
Mr. Meuser. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I actually do
not have any more questions. I really just want to thank you
all for your great work. Thank you for your service, thank you
for taking care of the over 50,000 veterans that I have in
Pennsylvania's 9th congressional, and God speed.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Meuser.
If there are no further questions, we can begin to bring
this hearing to a close. I want to thank our witnesses again
for joining us today, and I thank you for your hard work as we
approach December 1st.
It is clear to me from my visit to Muskogee, my
conversations with many of you, that you are working incredibly
hard toward a successful December 1st deadline, I thank you
sincerely for that. It is also clear to me that we have got to
make some real investments in the modernization of our
technology for the GI Bill and for education benefits. You have
my unwavering commitment that as long as I am in Congress I
will work with you and try to convince my colleagues however we
need to that the very least we can do for our veterans who have
served, who have given so much to our country, is to make sure
that we can process their benefits quickly using sustainable
and modern technology.
All members are going to have 5 legislative days to revise
and extend their remarks, and include additional materials.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:09 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Paul R. Lawrence

Good Morning Chairman Levin, Madam Chair Lee, Ranking Members
Bilirakis and Banks, and Members of the Subcommittees. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the status of VA's
implementation of the provisions in the Harry W. Colmery Veterans
Educational Assistance Act of 2017 (Colmery Act) or, as it is more
commonly referred to, the Forever GI Bill. Accompanying me today are
James Gfrerer, Assistant Secretary for Information and Technology and
Chief Information Officer (CIO); Charmain Bogue, Executive Director of
Education Service, Veterans Benefits Administration; and Rob Orifici,
Information Technology (IT) Specialist, Office of Information and
Technology (OIT).

Forever GI Bill ``Reset''

As you are aware, on November 28, 2018, VA announced key changes
and a reset in the implementation of sections 107 and 501 of the
Colmery Act. These sections dealt primarily with the calculation and
processing of monthly housing allowance (MHA) payments under the Post-
9/11 GI Bill. Section 107 requires VA to pay the monthly housing
allowance (MHA) based on the campus where the student physically
participates in most of his or her classes. Section 501 requires VA to
align its MHA payments with the Department of Defense's Basic Allowance
for Housing. These sections proved difficult to implement because of
the dual challenge of updating and integrating multiple legacy systems
with new and more complicated business rules that came about because of
the statutory requirements, while also maintaining a high level of
payment accuracy. Secretary Wilkie's reset of VA's implementation
efforts was to give the Department the time, contracting support, and
resources necessary to develop the capability to process enrollments,
in accordance with the law, by December 2019.
The Secretary took three actions to ensure the successful
implementation of these two provisions of the Forever GI Bill. First,
on November 26, 2018, he appointed me as the single person responsible
and accountable for overseeing implementation of the Colmery Act. With
the support of our CIO, we developed an organizational structure to
plan and execute the tasks associated with the implementation of
Colmery Act provisions.
Next, he directed VA's Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and
Construction to provide acquisition support in the areas of
contracting, program integration, systems implementation, and software
development. On February 15, 2019, VA awarded a contract to Accenture
Federal Services, a world-class integrator, to provide systems
integration support to coordinate planning, development, and integrated
testing of all systems associated with Colmery Act implementation.
Last, he directed OIT, and any other offices required to support
this effort, to ensure that adequate staffing, funding, and any other
necessary resources are provided. On November 28, 2018, VBA established
a Program Integration Office (PIO) as a formal entity which reports
directly to me as the single accountable official for the Colmery Act's
implementation. Assigned and/or aligned Government leaders, staff,
Federally Funded Research and Development Center support, and contract
support make up this newly established office. The PIO also completed
the refinement and finalization of a comprehensive set of business
requirements for sections 107 and 501; maintained an integrated master
schedule; managed a program risk register; and reformulated the
configuration control process. As the accountable official since
January 2019, I have met with PIO personnel and the CIO weekly to
ensure our progress continued, except one time when I was meeting
Chairman Levin of the HVAC Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity in
Muskogee for a regional office site visit.
VA has made significant progress in the development and deployment
of the new solution, and we are on track to meet the December 1, 2019,
target date. Upon implementation of the fully developed IT solution, VA
will begin paying MHA payments in accordance with the law and start
retroactively correcting records affected by the implementation delay.
The process to correct housing records will continue through 2020 as VA
will begin accepting updated records from schools in circumstances
where the student was enrolled at a campus different from what was
originally provided to VA. This will cover the time period of August 1,
2018 through November 30, 2019. While VA now has these locations within
its systems for processing, we require the school to tell us where the
student was attending classes. The timing of this retroactive work
balances feedback received from schools regarding the workload this
would create with VA timeliness standards for processing housing
records. This will fulfill Secretary Wilkie's pledge that ``VA is
dedicated to ensuring that those who are underpaid are made 100 percent
whole, retroactively, if necessary.''
As promised, if a student was overpaid due to VA's challenges in
implementing the law, VA will notify the impacted student individually
with the amount VA intends to waive. Concurrently, VA will review the
debt to ensure it was incurred solely based on implementation of
section 107 or 501. Upon confirmation, VA will notify the student of
the completed waiver. In this process, VA does not require anything
additional from the impacted student.
To address the incoming workload resulting from implementation of
the law, VA has begun hiring temporary full-time employees. In Fiscal
Year 2020, 331 temporary full-time employees will be onboard to ensure
VA maintains our processing timeliness goals of 28 days for original
applications and 14 days for supplemental enrollment documents. As of
November 13, 2019, VA is processing original applications in 20.7 days
and supplemental enrollment documents in 12.1 days.

Individual Technical Assessment

In November 2018, VA chartered MITRE to perform an Independent
Technical Assessment (ITA) of the capabilities necessary to meet the
requirements of the Colmery Act. The ITA focused on identifying issues
related to the delayed delivery of updates to the Chapter 33
application residing on the Long-Term Solution (LTS) environment and
recommending resolution to the issues associated with completing and
deploying the required system updates. MITRE provided 20
recommendations intended to help OIT ensure adjustments to LTS are
successfully tested and deployed in the near future.
Since the last hearing before this Committee on May 9, 2019, PIO
has successfully implemented each MITRE recommendation as of September
30, 2019. PIO defined and executed an operating plan and improved the
development of business requirements. These improvements provide better
visibility into the overall effort required across VA and OIT to meet
the requirements of the Colmery Act and to provide for a higher
probability of successful deployment of capabilities for future
implementation of Colmery Act sections. PIO also established common
development and test environments and processes which allow for faster
cross-organizational time to release.

Communication with Stakeholders

VA has numerous initiatives in place to better serve and inform
schools, Veterans Service Organizations (VSO), State Approving
Agencies, and other stakeholders of how the implementation affects
their student population and process. We executed over 40 direct email
campaigns reaching over a million GI Bill students and other
stakeholders. We designed communications toolkits which were provided
to students, schools, regional offices, VSOs, and Congress. VA also
hosted over 45 focus groups and webinars reaching over 30,000 School
Certifying Officials (SCOs) and other stakeholders. During the webinar
sessions, VA outlined the extension campus updates; shared a timeline
for future changes; and provided opportunities to ask questions.
VA held 9 in-person and 16 virtual sessions with SCOs allowing them
to view and interact with updates to our education claims processing IT
system, VA-ONCE. The feedback from the SCOs was overwhelmingly
positive.
VA participated in two conferences in July 2019 in which VA had an
opportunity to connect with nearly 1,400 representatives from schools
across the country. During the conferences, VA provided information on
sections 107 and 501 and the impact to GI Bill beneficiaries. Question
and answer sessions were held with the Executive Director of VA's
Education Service. Additionally, we provided copies of VA's Forever GI
Bill communication toolkits. The toolkits provide language to use when
corresponding with students, including high-level messaging, email and
social media verbiage, and web and print-ready materials regarding
sections 107 and 501.
In addition, VA commenced a Forever GI Bill School Tour this past
September, visiting campuses across the country to reach those who are
directly affected by the Forever GI Bill. We visited six states (North
Carolina, New York, Maryland, Oklahoma, Virginia, and Texas) connecting
with 15 schools, and hundreds of GI Bill students and school officials.
Veterans Resource Fairs were held during our visits, which provided
students the opportunity to meet with Veterans Claims Examiners to
receive answers on situation-specific questions and check on active
claims in the VA education system. Campus leaders welcomed VA and
provided tours of their Veterans Resource Centers. I personally visited
the Community College of Allegheny County and University of South
Carolina-Columbia where I hosted roundtables with students and school
officials. I heard firsthand that the communications we have in place
are reaching all levels successfully. But most importantly, we had
meaningful conversations with students utilizing the GI Bill on how
they interact and engage with VA and their benefits. VA has future
school tours scheduled across the country through 2020.

Veteran Employment Through Technology Education Courses (VET TEC) and
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)

On April 1, 2019, VA launched the VET TEC Pilot Program. Since its
inception, VA has found over 4,000 Veterans eligible for the program.
These Veterans may, at any time, choose a program they wish to enroll
in. Currently, there are over 100 students enrolled in a VET TEC
program. VA began accepting applications for the Edith Nourse Rogers
STEM Scholarship program on August 1, 2019, and since that time has
received over 8,000 applications with over 750 scholarships awarded.

Promises Fulfilled

VA has made tremendous strides toward developing and deploying the
IT solution to support sections 107 and 501. I am proud to report we
have accomplished the President's requirement in the Forever GI Bill
Housing Payment Fulfillment Act of 2018 (Public Law 115-422) to
establish a Tiger Team to implement sections 107 and 501 of the Colmery
Act and are fulfilling the Secretary's promise to make every Post-9/11
GI Bill beneficiary 100 percent whole. Our goal, as always, is to
provide a seamless experience for GI Bill students by leveraging
innovation for timely and accurate claims processing and protecting the
integrity of the GI Bill program.
Mr. Chairman and Madam Chair, this concludes my testimony. My
colleagues and I are prepared to respond to any questions you or other
Members of the Subcommittees may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Jay Schnitzer

Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and distinguished Members
of the Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you again today on matters relating to
the implementation of Sections 107 and 501 of the Colmery Act, also
known as the Forever GI Bill (FGIB). These provisions impact all Post-
9/11 GI Bill beneficiaries in receipt of a Monthly Housing Allowance
(MHA), as they changed the way the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
must pay MHA. The law amended the location basis for the MHA and
aligned MHA payments with the Department of Defense's basic housing
allowance (BAH) rates. As you know, implementation of this legislation
is a critically important issue for untold numbers of Veterans. MITRE
very much appreciates the opportunity to share our insight from our
work on this critical program.
MITRE is a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit corporation. We are chartered
to operate in the public interest, which includes operating federally
funded research and development centers, or FFRDCs, on behalf of
Federal agency sponsors. We currently operate seven FFRDCs sponsored by
a variety of Federal sponsors including the Department of Veterans
Affairs, which is a co-sponsor of MITRE's Center for Enterprise
Modernization (CEM). Our Center for Enterprise Modernization was
established in 1998 by the Department of Treasury's Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) and we have been proud to support many modernization
efforts under that FFRDC, including aspects of the VA's modernization
efforts. The other primary sponsors for which MITRE operates FFRDCs
include the Department of Defense; the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services at the Department of Health and Human Services; the
National Institute of Standards and Technology; the Federal Aviation
Administration; the Department of Homeland Security; and the U.S.
Courts -- the latter being the only non-Executive Branch entity that
has created an FFRDC to date.

Background

As stated in our previous testimony provided in May 2019, the
challenges which impacted the FGIB program 1 year ago are seen
repeatedly across the government as agencies struggle to execute highly
complex, integrated mission requirements and modernize their systems
and processes to address new mission needs. At that time, I summarized
the key findings from the Independent Technical Assessment (ITA) we
delivered in November 2018 on the VA's implementation of Sections 107
and 501 of the FGIB.
The focus of that independent assessment, requested by VA's Office
of Information Technology (OIT), was to identify issues related to the
delayed delivery of the Long-Term Solution, or LTS, and to recommend a
resolution to the issues associated with completing and deploying the
required system updates. The assessment explored the following six
assessment areas:

1. Leadership and Governance;

2. Technical Environment;

3. Process;

4. Requirements Management;

5. Personnel Authorities and Responsibilities; and

6. Software Code Evaluation.

The ITA team's review of the observations, findings, and
recommendations -- informed by industry benchmarks and best practices,
insight from subject matter experts, and experience with large-scale
software intensive systems -- enabled it to identify four systemic
findings that were preventing rapid integrated capability delivery
under the strategy then in place:

1. Technical and business leaders were not fully empowered to
address issues related to the Colmery Act due to a lack of
clear authority, priorities, and goals;

2. Work priorities, resources, and authorities for execution
were not aligned for the delivery of Colmery Act functionality;

3. Operations and processes within and across VBA and OIT were
not focused on the Colmery Act functionality, impeding the
information flow to leaders; and

4. Data and tools were not integrated across LTS and the legacy
systems, impeding delivery of the Colmery Act functionality.

As noted by the assessment, several key findings related not to
technical considerations, but rather to the assignment of
responsibilities and questions of alignment centered around governance,
authorities, priorities, and goals. Among other things, we identified
the need to establish:

A single cross-organizational business leader and
champion for the overall effort;

New program governance structures, including a new Light
Governance Council -- one streamlined and built for speed -- to serve
as the decision authority for definition and enforcement of norms for
executing program activities, as well as the approval or disapproval of
lifecycle processes, control gates, activities, funding, acquisitions,
resources and systems required to achieve successful implementation;

A Program Integration Office, accountable for definition,
coordination, and management of functional, technical, and programmatic
activities across the VA; and

An end-to-end systems integrator, to coordinate planning,
development, and integrated testing of all systems associated with
implementation of FGIB, including new software development, interfaces
with legacy systems, systems architecture, and testing.

In response, the Under Secretary for Benefits was appointed to
oversee overall implementation of the effort, aided by the Chief
Information Officer and supported by a Light Governance Council,
referred to as Program Governance, led by two Co-Chairs, representing
the interests of the business and the technical communities
respectively and supported by a Program Integration Office (PIO), led
by key leaders from the Education Service, Office of Business Process
Integration and OIT, who are responsible for definition, coordination,
and management of functional, technical, and programmatic activities.
To VA's credit, these recommendations and others were fully
accepted by the leadership soon after our ITA was completed, briefed to
senior leaders in December and presented to this committee. Further,
progress on implementation of those recommendations has been
transparently tracked and reported on by VA. This degree of leadership
commitment and focus has been instrumental in the progress we've seen
to date.

Current Assessment

Our current assessment is that these changes have had a significant
impact on the delivery of this program. As a result, we anticipate that
VA will meet the target deployment of December 1 for the planned
functionality. This leadership team has been both highly integrated and
extremely proactive. Over the course of this past year, they have
quickly made informed, data-driven decisions and worked across all
organizations involved in or affected by this program and the changes
being made to implement it. As the December 1 deployment date
approaches, three key milestones have been successfully completed which
indicate that the deployment will occur as planned. Specifically:

1. The Colmery team has met or come in ahead of schedule on all
development milestones. Since my previous testimony, the team
completed Build 1 (7/5/19) and Build 2 (10/18/19), which
included end-to-end user acceptance testing with all
interdependent systems. These builds were completed on
schedule, and the team reviewed testing material through 10/23/
19, at which time the Minimally Viable Product was formally
accepted by VA.

2. In preparation for the deployment, a series of tabletops
have been conducted to further verify end-to-end operational
and functional readiness. Representatives from about twenty
(20) dependent systems and/or offices have worked together to
flesh out standard operating procedures (SOPs) and develop
contingency plans for hypothetical scenarios.

3. In addition, two dry runs are being conducted for the
Section 501 retro batch runs to identify any challenges or
issues that can be addressed prior to deployment. This is
equivalent to a ``full dress rehearsal'' before the December 1
deployment.

Future Actions

As stated in previous testimony, Information technology programs,
especially those requiring a great deal of integration between new
technology, legacy systems, and new business rules and processes, are
inherently high risk. Our experience, along with many industry case
studies, shows that clear leadership and accountability, along with
simplified governance that facilitates decisions making while avoiding
bureaucracy, mitigates that risk and leads to more successful results.
The VA now has in place an integrated program team that is deliberately
managing that risk by identifying the critical path activities and
decisions needed to succeed, and contingencies to mitigate the risk.
Going forward, we encourage VA to take this experience and leverage
this model to reduce risk and improve results across the VA's other
critical programs by:

1. Adopting this management model as an enterprise-wide model
by establishing for each critical program a senior accountable
business leader, assisted by the CIO, and a light governance
council supported by a PIO;

2. Working to strategically simplify the legacy system
environment by determining opportunities to modify, modernize
or replace legacy systems as they implement new programs; and

3. Continuing use of modern IT methods, processes and tools
that underlie the ITA recommendations and have contributed
overall to the success of this effort, such as DevOps and
automated testing.

MITRE remains committed to the success of this initiative in
partnership with VA leadership and the selected systems integrator.
MITRE is currently working with VA to instantiate the PIO activity as
an organic capability moving forward. We appreciate the opportunity to
provide independent, conflict-free strategic advice to the Program
Integration Office through this phase. As the operator of the VA's
FFRDC, we stand ready to assist the VA to fully establish the
capability to perform this integration and modernization function as a
core competency and a standard, integral part of their management
approach.
In closing, let me just note that of MITRE's roughly 8,500
personnel, some 30 percent are Veterans. There are few duties that our
employees consider more noble and consequential than honoring, through
our support for the VA, the service and sacrifice of our Nation's men
and women in uniform. On behalf of the entire MITRE team, I greatly
appreciate the opportunity to come before you again today to provide
this update, and I look forward to your questions.

Statements for the Record

----------

Prepared Statement of The American Legion

Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and distinguished members
of the subcommittee, on behalf of National Commander, James W. ``Bill''
Oxford, and the nearly 2 million members of The American Legion, we
thank you for the opportunity to share the views of The American Legion
on the Department of Veterans Affairs continued implementation of the
Harry W. Colmery GI Bill (hereafter referred to as the ``Forever GI
Bill'').
In the summer of 2017, the Administration and Congress enacted the
Harry W. Colmery Educational Improvement Act, named after The American
Legion's Past National Commander and the author of the original GI Bill
(The Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944). The Forever GI Bill
eliminated the arbitrary 15-year limit, increased benefits for Purple
Heart recipients, expanded Yellow Ribbon eligibility, restored benefits
to victims of school closures, and calculated housing allowances based
on the beneficiaries' zip code of class attendance. Section 107 of the
Harry W. Colmery Veterans Educational Assistance Act addresses the
perceived inequities in the Post 9/11 GI Bill by mandating that the
housing allowance be calculated based upon the location of the campus
where the majority of a student's classes were taken.

Background

When the Forever GI Bill was signed into law on August 15th, 2017,
the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) had under 12 months to
develop and launch 16 provisions of the bill, which included
restoration of lost benefits due to closed schools including
calculation of the monthly housing stipend based on location of
campuses, and aligning housing stipends to Department of Defense
levels. By May 2018, serious doubts were beginning to emerge that VA
was at risk of missing these deadlines.\1\ By October 2018, pending GI
Bill claims rose to 228,640, a 68 percent increase from the previous
year. Furthermore, over 1,400 claims were reported as delayed past 60
days. Timeliness of delivery rose to 35.4 days for original claims and
23.8 for supplemental claims. By November 2018, confidence in the VA's
ability to implement the GI Bill was at an all-time low.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  https://www.stripes.com/house-lawmakers-question-va-s-ability-
to-meet-deadline-for-gi-bill-changes-1.580317
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the following year, The American Legion convened a ``Veterans
Benefits Administration GI Bill Symposium'' on February 28th, 2019
during our 59th Washington Conference. The purpose of this symposium
was to establish a dialog between the VA and the school certifying
officials (SCOs) who were the first point of contact student veterans
turned to when their housing checks did not arrive on time. The SCOs
made it clear to VA staff that payment delays have direct consequences
on student veterans' faith in the VA system; timely payments must be
prioritized above any Forever GI Bill implementation requirements.
Implementation challenges spilled into second-order effects on GI
Bill processing times, resulting in extended housing payment delays for
student veterans in the Fall Semester of 2019. As The American Legion
focused on helping veterans who were falling into hardship due to
missed GI Bill payments, news of the payment backlog sparked bipartisan
outrage, and the VA reassigned its Director Education Service.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2018/11/15/
veterans-arent-getting-their-gi-bill-payments-because-vas-year-old-
computer-system-broke/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American Legion shares this view, and commends VA for its
improvements to benefits delivery:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T1376.004

The American Legion is pleased to share that VA appears to have
executed a remarkable turnaround to bring Forever GI Bill
implementation back on track and restore confidence in VA's ability to
effectively administer education benefits.
By October 16th, 2019, pending GI Bill claims fell to 74,343, the
lowest it has been since passage of the Post-9/11 GI Bill in 2008.
Claims over 60 days dropped to 233, and timeliness of delivery
accelerated to 23.3 days for original claims and 13.1 days for
supplemental claims. The American Legion also commends VA for achieving
its fastest GI Bill processing numbers to date, and encourages VA's
education service to continue to prioritize timely benefits processing.

Technical Challenges

The calculation and processing of Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits is a
complex process requiring inputs and oversight from veterans, SCOs, and
VA Education Liaison Representatives. The intricacy of this process
requires routine stakeholder engagement and feedback loops that were
not part of the Forever GI Bill's initial 2018 implementation plan. The
lack of organizational integration throughout the software development
lifecycle resulted in both communication and technical gaps across the
implementation phases. The Post-9/11 GI Bill provides a monthly housing
allowance for a student veteran based upon the facility code assigned
to the main campus of the approved educational facility.
Initially, in attempt to implement Section 107 as broadly as
possible, VA defined a training site as a ``campus'' included: 1) the
individual campus of a school where the student is taking classes
(i.e., the school's science center, humanities building, or athletic
center), 2) the physical location where a student is learning in a
study abroad program, or 3) an internship, externship, practicum or
student teaching site. Recognizing earlier this year that this
definition was too broad, VA then changed the definition of a
``campus'' for housing payment purposes to be only those locations
where the physical site of the training is either owned or leased by
the school and the school has ownership or control over the student's
classroom instruction. Additionally, VA has assigned sub-facility codes
to the campuses in the zip codes that meet this definition as some
students found themselves attending branch campuses with a higher cost
of living than the main campus. In response to this challenge VA reset
its implementation efforts last year for Section 107 of the law to
allow the Department time to reestablish contracting support and
resources to develop the capability to process and deploy for spring
enrollments for 2020.
The American Legion eagerly looks forward to the successful
implementation of Sections 107 of the Forever GI Bill and applauds VA
efforts to make necessary adjustments to its information technology
platform to expedite facilitatation. However, we strongly suggest that
VA remain cognizant of challenges produced for veterans and schools by
future changes and request they take said challenges into consideration
going forward.

Stakeholder Communication

Presently, VA Education Service has achieved transparent
stakeholder engagement that incorporates schools, veterans
organizations, student beneficiaries, and third-party contractors to a
degree seldom seen in its history. The American Legion believes this is
the result of solid leadership and hard-learned organizational lessons
from the VA's ``Colmery Act (PL 115-48) Section 107 -- Focus Group'' on
March 7th, 2018. The purpose of this focus group was to brief schools
and veterans organizations on VA's newly established definition of
``campus'' to meet Forever GI Bill guidelines to calculate housing
allowances based on campus zip codes (the aforementioned Section 107).
VA did not seek sufficient input on higher education's definition of
``campus,'' and as a result included internship and externship sites in
its campus definition.
Following the results of the initial Forever GI Bill
implementation, VA commissioned both a public Office of Inspector
General report and an internal MITRE Corporation Independent Technical
Assessment to determine the causes of the botched rollout; both
determined unclear communication to VA stakeholders as a contributing
factor to implementation failures along with an absence of leadership:

Throughout planning and early implementation efforts, VA lacked a
single accountable official to oversee the project, which resulted in
unclear communications to VA stakeholders of implementation progress
and inadequately defined expectations, roles, and responsibilities of
the various VA business lines and contractors involved.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  https://www.va.gov/oig/pubs/VAOIG-19-06452-97.pdf

In November 2018, the VA Secretary named the Under Secretary for
Benefits as the senior official responsible for implementing the
Forever GI Bill. In subsequent months, new leadership was established
at VA Education Service along with a new contractor, Accenture, to
oversee Forever GI Bill implementation. The product of these changes
was a strikingly more engaged outreach strategy in 2019. This effort
allowed for better communication with veteran support organizations and
congressional stakeholders, and VA Education Service began hosting
monthly stakeholder meetings to brief staffers on implementation
progress.
This also enhanced communication with schools. Accenture launched a
roundtable and webcast to collect comments and insights on how to best
implement, communicate, and provide training on GI Bill implementation,
which is a markedly different approach from 2018 that incorporates
stakeholder feedback instead of dictating stakeholder requirements.
Finally, VA increased and improved its outreach directly to student
veterans. The Under Secretary for Benefits hosted multiple Facebook
Live feedback sessions, and VA Education services launched a VA School
Tour that has visited nine sites across the country to collect feedback
from beneficiaries' and faculty experiences.

Conclusion

Seventy-five years ago, The American Legion pioneered the
proposition that America must invest in the transition back home for
those who defend her. As daring as the passage of this ``GI Bill of
Rights'' was, its ultimate success could not have been realized without
effective implementation led by the Veterans Administration's post-war
chief: General (Ret.) Omar Bradley.
The implementation challenges of the Harry W. Colmery Veterans
Educational Benefits Act of 2017 demand VA to rise to this earlier
caliber of leadership, and The American Legion stands ready to support
its successful execution.
For additional information regarding this testimony, please contact
Mr. Ernest Robinson at The American Legion's Legislative Division at
(202)-263-2990 or
[emailprotected]
.
______

Prepared Statement of The Student Veterans of America

Chairman Levin, Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member Bilirakis, Ranking
Member Banks, and Members of the Subcommittees:
Thank you for inviting Student Veterans of America (SVA) to submit
our testimony on the ongoing Forever GI Bill implementation efforts.
With more than 1,500 chapters representing nearly one million
student veterans, service members, families, and survivors using
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits in schools across the
country, we are pleased to share the perspective of those directly
impacted by the in the implementation of sections 107 and 501 of the
Forever GI Bill.
Established in 2008, SVA has grown to become a force and voice for
the interests of veterans in higher education. Student Veterans of
America places the student veteran at the top of our organizational
pyramid by conducting rigorous research on student veterans, providing
a myriad of programs supporting their success, and advocating for
improvements to veterans benefits and higher education policy. As the
future leaders of this country, and some of the most successful
students in higher education, it is imperative that we foster the
success of veterans in school to prepare them for productive and
impactful lives.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  Shane, Leo. Military Times. Report: Young vets are more
successful than their civilian peers. July 29, 2017. https://
www.militarytimes.com/veterans/2017/07/29/report-young-vets-are-more-
successful-than-their-civilian-peers/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Edward Everett, our Nation's 20th Secretary of State, and the
former President of Harvard University was famously quoted as stating,
``Education is a better safeguard of liberty than a standing army.''
While we have the finest military the world has ever known, the
sentiment remains; the importance of education to our country's
national security continues to be critical. Ensuring the success of
student veterans on campus must first start with ensuring they have
reliable and timely access to their earned education benefits.

Background

The Harry W. Colmery Educational Assistance Act, more commonly
known as the Forever GI Bill, was signed into law in August 2017 and
created the largest expansion of education benefits for veterans in
nearly a decade.\2\ The bill includes dozens of provisions that
increase access to higher education, reduce inequities within the
benefit, and turn the GI Bill into a benefit of service far beyond the
current generation. Nearly all the law's provisions are already in
effect and benefiting student veterans across the country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\  Harry W. Colmery Veterans Education Assistance Act of 2017
Sec. 108. Pub. L 115-48. (2017). https://www.Congress.gov/bill/
115thcongress/house-bill/3218.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While SVA was proud to work alongside many members of this
subcommittee and their staffs to pass the Forever GI Bill, we remain
watchful of the law's ongoing implementation of the provisions aimed at
addressing inequities in the Monthly Housing Allowance (MHA) students
receive. The Spring 2020 semester will be a crucial indicator of this
process, as the new MHA provisions should have taken effect by this
date.
In several oversight hearings this Committee held over the past
year, senior VA officials assured the Nation's student veterans and
this Congress that late payments and failures associated with a lack of
accountability at VA have been sufficiently addressed.\3\ At the time,
student veterans expressed the dire straits of the situation, noting,
``I'm about to lose everything that I own and become homeless. I don't
want to be that veteran on the street begging for change because I
haven't received what I was promised.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\  Wentling, Nikki, ``Federal watchdog: VA leadership failures
are to blame for GI Bill payment issues,'' March 21, 2019, https://
www.stripes.com/Federal-watchdog-va-leadership-failures-are-to-blame-
for-gi-bill-payment-issues-1.573672
\4\  McCausland, Phil, NBC News, Veterans haven't received GI Bill
benefits for months due to ongoing IT issues at VA, Nov. 11, 2018,
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/veterans-haven-t-receive-gi-bill-
benefits-months-due-ongoing-n934696
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In response to a March 2018 focus group outlining VA's plan to use
zip codes to calculate campus-based MHA rates as required by section
107 of the law, SVA raised concerns in an April letter with the planned
strategy and the potential roadblocks we saw with VA's plans. Our
concerns centered around the use of zip codes to define campus location
instead of existing Department of Education coding mechanisms and the
unintended consequences that could create.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\  Student Veterans of America. SVA Response to VA's Campus
Definition. https://studentveterans.org/images/pdf/will/SVA-Response-
to-VAsCampus-Definition.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As late as a July 2018 hearing before this Committee, there was a
reassurance by VA that the IT updates needed to implement the MHA
changes would be ready soon. However, by early August it became clear
VA would not only miss the Forever GI Bill implementation deadlines
because of continued IT challenges, but routine updates to MHA
calculations -- such as cost-of-living adjustments -- would also not be
calculated for the Fall semester leading to inaccurate or significantly
delayed payments. Only after SVA, alongside other veteran serving
organizations (VSO), made clear the urgency of proceeding with
certification and communicating the direction to proceed did VA make
those communications, as detailed below.
Beginning in September last year, SVA began to hear from student
veterans that MHA payments were missing or inaccurate. On September 14,
2018, SVA along with 14 other VSOs wrote VA to express our
disappointment and concern over the continued IT failures and the lack
of transparent communication on the issue to students and
stakeholders.\6\ By mid-October, VA sent letters and emails to all GI
Bill users, issued several statements online, and took internal steps
to address the backlog.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\  Student Veterans of America. VSO Response to Forever GI Bill
IT Delays. https://studentveterans.org/images/pdf/will/Forever-GI-
BillDelays_VSO-Letter-.pdf
\7\  U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Benefits
Administration. Education and Training. https://www.benefits.va.gov/
gibill/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Then, in November 2018, VA announced a ``reset'' of the
implementation process, establishing a new deadline of December 1,
2019, and returning students to the uncapped Department of Defense
(DoD) housing rates until the Spring 2020 semester. These rates were
based on the school's administrative campus location, not the location
where each student takes their classes as VA was planning to do.
Essentially, housing allowances were processed as they were before the
Forever GI Bill became law while VA worked to get their systems and
processes working properly.
Now, with the ``reset'' deadline two weeks away, VA will complete
the final testing phases for the implementation of the remaining
sections of the Forever GI Bill. These changes redefine their
interpretation of ``campus'' location to reduce administrative burdens
on students, schools, and VA, and retroactively correct any
underpayments students saw during from the Fall 2018 semester onward
based on the uncapped DoD rates. VA will also not collect debts from
any students overpaid due to the change in rate calculations.

VA Outreach and Communication

SVA commends VA and its staff for improving public outreach efforts
to spread awareness, and we commend the obvious dedication to
successfully implementing the Forever GI Bill. In our November 2018
testimony before this Committee, our primary recommendation was to
provide more consistent and transparent communication to students,
school staff, and stakeholders working alongside students during
dynamic situations such as these delays. All stakeholders in this
process have a vested interest in transparent and timely communication.
It is important that VA acknowledge potential issues and proactively
communicate those issues and ways to address them in a timely manner so
that students, schools, and other stakeholders can make informed
decisions about their education and finances.
Anecdotally, SVA is hearing generally positive feedback from
student veterans and School Certifying Officials (SCOs) regarding VA's
communications for upcoming changes to the MHA. While it may be too
early to tell, we are hopeful that these comments are representative of
the experience stakeholders will have once the Spring 2020 semester
starts. It is critical that the lines of communication between VA and
stakeholders remain open following the December 1 deadline to
communicate concerns and, if new problems arise, ensure they are
addressed immediately.
One such concern that was recently reported to SVA concerns the SCO
hotline at VA. SCOs call into this dedicated hotline for assistance
only to be met with frequent claims by VA support staff of missing or
unavailable information, lack of access to relevant data, or lack of
knowledge or adequate training to answer the SCOs' questions. These
hotline employees apparently do not receive training on the VA ONCE
system -- one of the primary methods for SCOs submit student GI Bill
certification documents to VA. VA's employee training in this area
should be reviewed and enhanced to better serve SCOs and, in turn, our
student veterans.
Last, in addition to the generally positive feedback from SCOs, SVA
has received limited reports from SCOs about workload and communication
concerns, particularly related to new extension campus requirements.
The ability of SCOs to perform their job duties is critical to SVAs
mission of helping student veterans and military-connected students
succeed in higher education. We encourage the Committee to work with
organizations like the National Association of Veterans' Program
Administrators (NAVPA) to better understand these concerns and to
address them in an efficient and effective manner.
SVA remains committed to working closely with our partners,
Congress, and VA to monitor and improve the implementation process. To
that end, SVA believes VA should answer several outstanding questions
to clarify any remaining ambiguity that exists for stakeholders.

Outstanding Questions

1. What does VA need to commit to a comprehensive modernization of
its education benefit IT infrastructure?

The issues with the VA's antiquated IT systems and their conflicts
with modern coding remain. These problems will continue to negatively
impact VA's administration of educational benefits. SVA encourages VA
to pledge to modernize its outdated education benefit IT systems.

2. Will the payments be retroactive to August 1, 2018 and be
calculated through the date of the new IT system implementation, which
is currently set for December 1, 2019?

While the Secretary's announcement last November made clear the VA
would calculate underpayments owed to students based on Forever GI Bill
requirements, it was less clear on the specific dates those
underpayments would honor. The statement said: ``To clear up any
confusion, I want to make clear that each and every post-9/11 GI Bill
beneficiary will be made 100 percent whole -- retroactively if need be
-- for their housing benefits for this academic year based on Forever
GI Bill rates, not on post-9/11 GI Bill rates.''
VA should articulate to all stakeholders how payments were or will
be calculated back to August 1, 2018 for all terms that were underpaid,
as the law requires. Further, VA should clarify the status of any
ongoing correction payments that stem from the pause on routine
adjustments, like cost-of-living, which has been in place while VA
makes improvements to its systems and processes in advance of the
December 1, 2018 deadline. If VA resumes routine adjustments for Spring
2020, SVA expects VA will have to make retroactive payments that
account for the lack of such adjustments for all academic terms
beginning Spring 2019 through Fall 2019.

3. How will the VA prevent another backlog when they process both
new claims and prior underpayments?

We also acknowledge VA has made progress with recently implemented
policies to adjudicate its oldest claims and increased the total number
of claims processing staff to address the backlog, but we remain
concerned about the potential number of claims that will need to be
processed for underpayments. This number could be staggering once you
add up the several semesters that have come and gone before the new IT
system is live.
Processing those underpayments will be in addition to the normal
claims processing required for current and new GI Bill students. A
realistic plan to process both the underpayments and the current claims
with sufficient resources, both in manpower and infrastructure, to
prevent any sort of backlog or delay in payments is critical. This must
also include any burden on SCOs for processing prior underpayments if
there is a requirement for their intervention.
There are many, both in Congress and among the veteran community,
ready and willing to advocate for what VA needs to best serve student
veterans, but we must first know what those needs are -- both from an
authorization and appropriations standpoint -- for VA to meet this
mission. VA will have to move quickly on these asks if they hope to
have resources committed in time to meet its upcoming needs.

4. How will VA communicate updates and progress?

One of the biggest frustrations during the GI Bill payment delays
experienced this past year was the lack of clear and timely
communication from VA on what was happening, what they were doing, and
what students and schools should do if they needed help or more
information. SVA has heard reports of significant improvement in this
area, but the need to always strive to improve communication cannot be
stressed enough as the last provisions roll out to student veterans
everywhere.
These delays had significant financial impact on student veterans,
varying in severity, with no ability of student veterans to predict
when their claims would be processed, and payment received. This
impacted some students' plans for continuing in higher education, their
housing, their ability to pay bills, incurring late payment fees with
their colleges for tuition, books, or fees, and even negatively
impacting their credit reports. Regardless of the extent of this
problem, or its severity, there is no question there was impact that
was not addressed well, and it must not re-occur.
Consistent, clear, and timely communication from VA will be the
best way to ensure it has what it needs following the December 1, 2019
deadline and to keep students, schools, and stakeholders supportive.
Additionally, continuing to examine how to insure more accurate contact
information is a longstanding goal VA should continue to work toward
that will ultimately aid in all VA's communication efforts.
The success of veterans in higher education is no mistake or
coincidence. Research consistently demonstrates this unique population
of non-traditional students is far outpacing their peers in many
measures of academic performance.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\  Cate, C.A., Lyon, J.S., Schmeling, J., & Bogue, B.Y. (2017).
National Veteran Education Success Tracker: A Report on the Academic
Success of Student Veterans Using the Post-9/11 GI Bill. Student
Veterans of America, Washington, DC, http://nvest.studentveterans.org/
wp-content/uploads/2017/03/NVEST-Report_FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, this success in higher education begets success in
careers, in communities, and promotes family financial stability,
holistic well-being, and provides the all-volunteer force with powerful
tools for recruitment and retention. At our 10th annual national
conference in 2018, the President and CEO of SVA, Jared Lyon, shared
the story behind the quote on our anniversary challenge coin, ``Some
attribute the following text to Thucydides and others note that it's a
paraphrase of a book written by Sir William Francis Butler from the
late 1800's. The reality, either way, rings as true today as it ever
has, and the phrase goes like this, `The nation that makes a great
distinction between its scholars and its warriors will have its
thinking done by coward and its fighting done by fools.' '' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\  Jared Lyon, Defining Our Future: Today's Scholars, Tomorrow's
Leaders, Jan. 5, 2018, https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/defining-our-
futuretodays-scholars-tomorrows-leaders-jared-lyon
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Supporting that success is paramount, and it starts with providing
necessary resources and abilities at VA to successfully manage
education benefits. We commend VA's commitment to ensuring these
remaining provisions of the Forever GI Bill are finally implemented
successfully and hope to see continued efforts to ensure seamless
transition into higher education continue while also advocating for
improvements to help meet that same goal.
We thank the Chairman, Chairwoman, Ranking Members, and the
Committee members for your time, attention, and devotion to the cause
of veterans in higher education. As always, we welcome your feedback
and questions, and we look forward to continuing to work with this
Committee and the entire Congress to ensure the success of all
generations of veterans through education.
______

Prepared Statement of The Veterans Education Success

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
