- REVIEWING THE AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES TO ADDRESS VETERAN HUNGER

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEWING THE AVAILABILITY OF
RESOURCES TO ADDRESS VETERAN HUNGER

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JANUARY 9, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-50

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-995 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tenessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

MIKE LEVIN, California, Chairman

KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York           GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida Ranking
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York               Member
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JIM BANKS, Indiana
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

THURSDAY, JANUARY 9, 2020

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Mike Levin, Chairman...................................     1
Honorable Gus M. Bilirakis, Ranking Member.......................     2
Honorable Mark Takano, Chairman, Full Committee..................     4

WITNESSES

Ms. Pamilyn Miller, Administrator, Food and Nutrition Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture.................................     4

Dr. Thomas O'Toole, Senior Medical Advisor, Providence VAMC,
Veterans Health Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     6

Accompanied by:

Ms. Christine Going, MPA, RD, FACHE, Co-Chairperson, Veterans
Health Affairs Ensuring Food Security Workgroup, Veterans
Health Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Mr. Josh Protas, Vice President of Public Policy, Mazon: A Jewish
Response to Hunger.............................................    20

Ms. Denise Hollywood, Chief Community and Programs Officer, Blue
Star Families..................................................    21

Mr. Vince Hall, CEO, Feeding San Diego...........................    23

APPENDIX
Prepared Statements Of Witnesses

Ms. Pamilyn Miller Prepared Statement............................    41
Dr. Thomas O'Toole Prepared Statement............................    44
Mr. Josh Protas Prepared Statement...............................    47
Ms. Denise Hollywood Prepared Statement..........................    54
Mr. Vince Hall Prepared Statement................................    57

REVIEWING THE AVAILABILITY OF RESOURCES TO ADDRESS VETERAN HUNGER

----------

THURSDAY, JANUARY 9, 2020

U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Mike Levin (chairman of
the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Levin, Rice, Brindisi, Pappas,
Lee, Cunningham, Bilirakis, Bergman, Barr, and Meuser.
Also present: Representative Takano.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MIKE LEVIN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Levin. Good morning, everyone, and welcome back as we
return from the holiday season to continue our work in the
Economic Opportunity Subcommittee.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to call for a
recess at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Reviewing the Availability
of Resources to Address Veteran Hunger.'' I am hopeful we can
shed some light on a very important issues for veterans around
the country.
This hearing will examine Department of Veterans Affairs
and Department of Agriculture programs that identify food
insecurity among nearly 20 million veterans, and provide
nutrition assistance to those in need.
Specifically, today's hearing will focus on how veterans
access nutrition resources, how recent policy changes have
impacted the availability of resources, and how Congress can
more effectively support public and non-public agencies that
seek to end veteran hunger. It is so critically important. This
continues the subcommittee's efforts to review economic factors
that contribute to veteran suicide, which we know include
homelessness and hunger.
Our subcommittee works in a bipartisan way to strengthen
education and job-training programs so veterans can get a good
job, but, unfortunately, that is not always the outcome.
Sometimes joblessness results in a veteran and their family
members experiencing hunger. When that occurs, nutrition
resources should and must be made readily available.
However, this committee is concerned that decisions are
being made regarding these resources without thoroughly
considering the impact on veterans. This subcommittee and
Congress as a whole need to know how United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA) considered the effect on veterans as they
proposed regulatory changes limiting access to nutrition
programs last year. If veterans were not considered, we must
understand why USDA felt it was unnecessary or that they were
unable to do so, and how we can ensure that veterans are
considered now and in the future.
In addition to ensuring the availability of resources, it
is essential that we help veterans secure them.
Since 2017, VA has screened millions of veterans for
hunger, but it is unclear how that policy is being carried out
and what VA is doing when a veteran in need is identified. The
many Federal and State programs that assist veterans who are
experiencing hunger can only be utilized if veterans are aware
of them.
This is a particularly fitting matter for our subcommittee,
which has spent this Congress on policies to improve veterans'
economic outcomes and ultimately their overall wellness. We
have a responsibility to ensure that no veteran falls through
the cracks, and I look forward to hearing the testimony from
our witnesses today to do just that.
With that, I now recognize my friend, Ranking Member
Bilirakis, with whom I have worked on a bipartisan basis, now
for 5 minutes for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF GUS M. BILIRAKIS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the witnesses as well who will
testify today on the important issue of veteran hunger.
Food security for veterans, as well as all Americans, is an
essential component for a stable life. Food insecurity can be a
contributing factor that be detrimental to a person's mental
health. It is important for us to evaluate the way we are
providing the security to ensure that it is being provided in
the most effective manner to help those who need it the most.
Mr. Chairman, neither of us were Members of Congress when
President Clinton signed the Personal Responsibility and Work
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, also known as the
Welfare Reform Act of 1996, into law. By the way, that was a
bipartisan bill and a good bill, in my opinion, but right now
states are bypassing its original intent.
This law was a bipartisan effort, as I said, to require
work or training for work in exchange for the time-related
financial assistance. This law also included incentives for
states to get those in need back to work as a means to reduce
the fiscal burden on the Federal Government and prevent what we
now call, and I quote, ``multi-generational poverty.'' We want
to prevent multi-generational poverty, something that--again,
that is what we should be striving toward, and I know that that
is your goal as well.
Broad-based categorical eligibility allows states to
circumvent income and asset requirements to extend the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SNAP, benefits
based on nothing more than an individual receiving a brochure
or pamphlet. Currently, of the 2.9 million able-bodied adults
without dependents that participate in SNAP, 2.1 million or 72
percent are not working. Additionally, the number of people
currently participating in SNAP still exceeds pre-recession
levels. I would like to hear from our panel today on why they
think this is happening. With such a low unemployment rate, why
are we seeing so many SNAP participants continue to not work
and live on these benefits?
I would also like to hear from our panel ways Congress can
help lift these people out of poverty and allow them to prosper
in this booming economy.
With that being said, under this Administration's
leadership and our continued use of pro-growth policies, the
national unemployment rate is now 3.6 percent with veteran
unemployment rate at an even lower rate of 3.3 percent, again,
for the month of November.
Mr. Chairman, it is obvious that the economy is booming.
Americans are returning to work in record numbers and
encouraging employment is the foundation for Congress'
authorization of this program, a great program, which is why I
am supportive of the Administration's rule on able-bodied
adults without dependents, which implements the existing work
requirements from the 1996 law. Again, President Clinton and
the Republican House really focused on this and got it right.
How does this apply, in my opinion, to this subcommittee?
Unfortunately, we know surprisingly very well about how this
program affects veterans. We simply do not have the idea on
veterans using the SNAP program or how prevalent food
insecurity is among veterans.
Mr. Chairman, you were not here when the Farm Bill was
authorized last Congress, so you may not be aware that, despite
requests from our side of the aisle, the Federal Government
still does not require states to conduct meaningful data
collection on SNAP participants, including tracking of
veterans.
Now, I know that we have veterans that are having a real
hard time, because I participate in those Stand Down programs
at least on a yearly basis, but by not tracking the
information, by not tracking, both Congress and the Department
of Agriculture, USDA, are left in the dark about how to improve
this program. I would very much like to work with you and our
colleagues on the House Agriculture Committee to address this
issue by putting in place a requirement for states to track
SNAP benefits for veterans, our heroes, my priority in the
Congress, I know it is yours as well, Mr. Chairman. Some states
already do this, but not all states do this.
I am grateful to our witnesses for giving us an opportunity
to hear directly from those involved with this program. I look
forward to hearing what they believe works, does not work, and
how we in Congress can empower those involved in these programs
to ensure that no one who has served our great country goes
hungry. That is the bottom line and that is our goal.
Once again, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Levin. I thank the ranking member for his remarks. I
too have participated in veterans Stand Down programs in my
district, and I appreciate our shared objectives here and look
forward to working on a bipartisan basis with you.
With that, I would like to recognize my friend, the
outstanding chairman of the House of Veterans' Affairs
Committee, Mark Takano, for his opening remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, CHAIRMAN, FULL COMMITTEE

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairman Levin, for yielding a
little bit of time to me this morning to make my opening
remarks.
Good morning to all of our witnesses. Thank you all for
appearing before this subcommittee.
Like many of our committee members, I was concerned by the
SNAP changes that took place last year and how in particular
they would impact veterans, but also active duty, Guard, and
Reservists. The Guard and Reservists in particular often face
employment challenges. And so, you know, we need to find out
more; we need better data. As with Chairman Levin and many
Members of Congress joined in sending a letter to Secretary
Perdue at the USDA on May 24th, 2019, reflecting our many
concerns. Without good data, we do not know the scope of the
program, and we--you know, we need data that can be done in
conjunction with Veterans Health Administration (VHA)
appointments, but also other interactions like awards, changes
in benefits, and also with vulnerable populations like homeless
students and--the homeless population, students, and
transitioning veterans.
Many questions exist, so I do appreciate your joining us
this morning. We are very, very concerned about how, you know,
the changes in the terms of SNAP benefits are going to affect
our Nation's veterans, active duty, Guard, and Reservists.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
interest in this subject and your continued leadership.
That brings us to our witnesses. We have two panels with us
today, the first representing the Administration and the second
made up of non-governmental policy experts.
First, I want to thank USDA for joining us on this
important topic. From USDA, we have Pamilyn Miller,
Administrator for the Food and Nutrition Service. We also have
Dr. Thomas O'Toole, the Senior Medical Advisor at the
Providence VA Medical Center. Thanks for being here. He is
accompanied by Christine Going, Co-Chairperson of the VA's
Ensuring Veterans Food Security Workgroup.
Thank you all very much for joining us. As you know, you
will have 5 minutes for your oral statement, but your full
written statement will be added to the record.
With that, Administrator Miller, you are now recognized for
5 minutes. Make sure your microphone is on.

STATEMENT OF PAMILYN MILLER

Ms. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Bilirakis, and members of the subcommittee. I am Pam Miller,
Administrator of USDA's Food and Nutrition Service, which is
responsible for administering the Nation's nutrition assistance
programs. I am pleased to be joining my colleagues from the
Department of Veterans Affairs and appreciate the collaborative
relationship we have had in serving veterans together.
We all owe great debts to the veterans who have protected
and defended our Nation. They have earned our respect and
honor, and they certainly deserve our support as they may face
the challenges of life after military service.
Food and Nutrition Services (FNS) programs are not targeted
to veterans specifically, but provide food assistance that
veterans and their families may need, particularly in tough
times. The largest program, the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program, or SNAP, currently serves about 36 million
low-income Americans each month. Census data suggests about 1.3
million veterans reported receiving SNAP in 2017.
Let me make clear that, because veteran status is not a
condition of SNAP eligibility, we do not have veteran status as
part of the data sets that we use to estimate the impact of our
rules. Congress debated the collection of this information
during the last Farm Bill and decided that it was not necessary
or appropriate at this time. I will focus on the purpose and
effects of the administration SNAP performs.
The goals of these actions is to align the program with the
statute established by Congress to reduce inequities among
participants and encourage households toward self-sufficiency.
Those eligible to receive nutrition assistance should be
treated fairly across this country. Over the years, states have
set policies that compromise consistency with certain standards
defined in statute, thereby allowing households in one State to
be eligible for SNAP or to receive more in SNAP benefits than
households in another State.
Last month, USDA finalized a final rule to help more able-
bodied adults between the ages of 18 and 49 who do not have
dependents, or ABAWDs, into promising futures through job
training and employment. With a robust economy, unemployment at
a 50-year low of 3 and a half percent, and more than 7.3
million job openings, there is no better time to engage this
group of SNAP participants to get the skills they need to be
successful in the job market.
This rule does not change work requirements for ABAWDs that
were set in the 1996 Welfare Reform Law and have been unchanged
in every Farm Bill since. Time limits do not apply to children,
their parents, pregnant women, the mentally or physically
disabled, or anyone 50 years of age or older. Importantly, the
disability exception includes veterans who are totally
disabled, permanently homebound, or in need of a regular
attendant.
Those subject to time limits can receive SNAP for 3 months
in a 3-year period unless they are working, volunteering, or
participating in training such as SNAP's employment and
training program or one of VA's work programs for at least 20
hours a week. These limits account for the fact that not all
participants are fit for employment. States must screen SNAP
participants for their ability to work and can exempt part of
their caseload from the time limit at their full discretion as
established in law.
The final rule did not change any of these policies; what
it did was clarify when and where states may seek to waive time
limits for those who do not meet the ABAWD work requirements.
Previous regulations were defined so loosely that counties with
unemployment as low as 2 and a half percent were waived areas.
Implementing the limits where jobs are available encourages
ABAWDs to realize their potential, have a sense of community,
and move toward an independent lifestyle.
Two other SNAP proposals are pending. One would eliminate a
loophole called broad-based categorical eligibility that has
been used to provide SNAP benefits without conducting a robust
eligibility determination, resulting in benefits going to
households that exceed statutory income thresholds. The other
would modernize the calculation of State standard utility
allowances, which are important in calculating SNAP benefit
amounts. Under current policy in one State, an elderly person
is receiving SNAP benefits two and a half times as much as an
elderly person across the State line in a similar situation
simply because of the standard utility allowance.
Both proposals promote a level playing field for SNAP
participants, with all treated fairly and consistently. The
comment period for each is closed and FNS is analyzing comments
to determine next steps.
Other USDA nutrition programs also help veterans and I am
happy to address those as well.
In closing, I am confident we can provide Americans,
veterans, heroes, with the services and support that they
deserve. Not only a nutritional safety net, these programs can
help launch participants on a path toward better health and a
better life.
Thank you, and I am happy to answer any questions you may
have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Pamilyn Miller Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Administrator Miller.
Dr. O'Toole, you are now recognized for 5 minutes for your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS O'TOOLE

Dr. O'Toole. Good morning, Chairman Levin, Ranking Member
Bilirakis, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify before you today on ending
veteran hunger. I am accompanied by Ms. Christine Going, the
VHA Co-Chair of the Ensuring Veterans Food Security Workgroup.
There are three points I want to emphasize. First, not
having enough food to eat is very real for too many Americans
and for too many of our veterans. Second, the consequences of
this food insecurity extend far beyond just going to bed
hungry; its impact is seen in a litany of physical and mental
health conditions, preventable ER visits and hospitalizations,
and avoidable deaths. Finally, the Veterans Administration has
a strong and demonstrated commitment to do all we can to
address it. One veteran experiencing food insecurity is one too
many.
According to the most recent Department of Agriculture
survey data, more than 11 percent of all households and almost
one in three households at less than 130 percent of the Federal
poverty level experience food insecurity. Now, this is despite
the robust economy and low unemployment rates we have been
experiencing. Among veterans, while the overall rate is lower,
specific populations, including younger veterans with families,
women, low-income veterans, and those with underlying
depression and psychiatric illnesses, are particularly
vulnerable.
In one study, 27 percent of Iraq and Afghanistan war
veterans reported food insecurity. In another, 48.5 percent of
homeless and formerly homeless veterans lacked regular access
to food.
The consequences of food insecurity are substantial and
significant. Research has consistently shown the link between
lacking regular access to food and poorly controlled
hypertension, diabetes, HIV disease, asthma, depression,
anxiety, and suicidal ideation. Among older adults, it is
associated with reduced activities of daily living and being
over two times more likely to report poor health. Food
insecurity is a social determinant of health, that along with
not having stable housing, living poverty, experiencing
violence, and others are strong predictors for suicide risk
among veterans. Several international studies have explicitly
linked food insecurity and suicide risk.
It is within this context I would like to shift to what we
are doing about it.
In early 2016, the Veterans Health Administration launched
the Ensuring Veterans Food Security Workgroup to partner with
other government and non-profit agencies in identifying
veterans at risk, training VA staff, and coordinating resources
and initiatives. Milestones from these past 3 and a half years
include implementing an electronic medical record screening
tool for identifying veteran food insecurity. To date, almost
100,000 food-insecure veterans have been identified and
assisted, men and women who might otherwise have gone
unnoticed.
Streamlining enrollment of veterans into the Supplemental
Nutritional Assistance Program, or SNAP, including partnering
with USDA and MAZON to create veteran-specific educational
materials; training programs for staff, including a toolkit for
registered dieticians to support food-insecure veterans; and
expanding onsite or mobile food pantries at VA medical centers.
There are currently 57 food pantries in place at VA facilities,
including the 17 VA Feeding America pantries that alone serve
more than 40,000 veterans and their families 700,000 meals.
To conclude, having enough to eat is a basic human need and
in this country no one should be going without food. It is a
major determinant of health that needs to be viewed no
differently than how we consider access to medication or to
primary care. It is intimately linked to health, and the
ability to prevent and manage a variety of health conditions,
not the least of which include mental health and suicide risk.
Across the VA, we are committed to providing the highest
quality care our veterans have earned and deserved. Going back
to the 1921 Veterans' Bureau Act legislation, we have an
explicit duty and mandate to the health, well-being, and
welfare of those who served. While we proudly note the progress
made to address food insecurity among our veterans, there is
more we can and will do to decrease veteran hunger.
Moving forward, we need to increase the number of food
pantries at our medical centers to address the urgent need for
food, we need to assist and facilitate enrollment in SNAP to
ensure more consistent access to food, and we need to address
the root causes of food insecurity through social-determinant-
of-health-focused interventions.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and we are prepared to answer any questions the
committee may have.

[The Prepared Statement Of Thomas O'toole Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Dr. O'Toole. With that, I recognize
myself for 5 minutes to begin the question portion of the
hearing.
I did notice the citation that Congress previously rejected
veteran data tracking in the previous Farm Bill debate and I am
a freshman Member of Congress, that is true, so I was not here,
but it is my understanding as well that Congress rejected the
very rules that you are here defending today. I might still be
a freshman Member of Congress, but I do have some sense of the
actions taken by this body in recent years, particularly in my
role chairing this subcommittee.
Dr. O'Toole and Ms. Going, a couple questions for you. What
proportion of the veterans who screen positive for food
insecurity does VA assist with SNAP eligibility screenings,
application assistance, or referrals.
Dr. O'Toole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
All of our veterans who are screened positive are provided
assistance. I would like to defer to Ms. Going on some of the
specific interventions that our social workers and registered
dieticians do engage in that process.
Ms. Going. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Yes, any veteran who is screened positive is initially
offered consultation with a social worker and/or a dietician,
and in both cases then the care is customized to what the
veteran needs and one of the questions is are you currently
receiving SNAP. If they are, then we provide them additional
services; if they are not, then we assist them in applying for
SNAP benefits.
Mr. Levin. So, VA does then monitor ongoing food security
or SNAP participation for veterans who initially screen
positive for food insecurity?
Ms. Going. We do not monitor exactly who has SNAP or who
does not; it is part of the individual questioning, but it is
not data that is captured.
Mr. Levin. You do not. Okay.
How has the VA collaborated with USDA and with community
partners to create resources or materials to help raise
awareness and respond to veteran food insecurity as it exists?
Ms. Going. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have worked with USDA and MAZON to develop veteran-
specific material on how to apply for SNAP, and we have also
engage nationwide that each facility is responsible for
developing very specific lists of resources, because resources
are different based on each VA. Each facility has been asked to
establish that list based on their local resources.
Mr. Levin. It seems to me that is a good start, it seems
that we can always be doing better, and I guess what I wanted
to ask is what is preventing VA from taking more proactive
efforts to respond to the needs of veterans who screen positive
for food insecurity?
Dr. O'Toole. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would agree with you,
there is always more we can do, and I think that is actually
one of the efforts and activities that we are actively engaged
in through this workgroup. We clearly need to be as proactive
in connecting veterans to services, but I think also ensuring
that the consequences of food insecurity that may be manifest,
and worsening health or mental health, are also being
concurrently addressed.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that.
Administrator Miller, in considering the proposed rule
regarding SNAP time limits for able-bodied adults without
dependents, did USDA consult with VA or analyze the impact,
specifically the impact on veterans, and, if so, how many
veterans did you determine would be impacted?
Ms. Miller. We have data that does encompass the entire
SNAP population. As we were putting forth the rules and looking
at our regulatory impact analysis, we looked at our entire SNAP
population and how they would be affected, and in there it does
include veterans, but as I said, we do not have specific data
sets on veterans, because Congress has not given us that
authority to collect those types of information.
Mr. Levin. Did you consult with VA?
Ms. Miller. We did not consult with the VA.
Mr. Levin. Did you analyze the impact on veterans
specifically?
Ms. Miller. It would have been part of our entire SNAP
population data set that we collect.
Mr. Levin. But not specifically?
Ms. Miller. We do not have that data, because it is not
eligibility, we are not able to specifically assess that.
Mr. Levin. That is important to understand. How about for
the proposed rule on broad-based categorical eligibility?
Ms. Miller. The answer would be the same; again, we look at
the impacts on our broad SNAP population. If Congress were
willing to engage in technical assistance and have
conversation, so if Congress gives that ability to collect that
data, we are certainly happy to do so.
Mr. Levin. I assume the answer is the same for the proposed
rule on the standard utility allowance?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Levin. Despite the fact that you say that you did not
have the congressional authorization to carry forward a dialog
with VA, nonetheless you knew--your own statement, I believe,
you said 1.3 million veterans received SNAP in 2017; is not
that what you said?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Levin. Then you knew that veterans were a uniquely
important community as part of the SNAP program; did you not?
Ms. Miller. Our program serves all low-income Americans who
need assistance and so they would have been captured in our
data sets for the entire SNAP population.
Mr. Levin. So veterans have no significance, additional
importance to you, given their service to our Nation, where
even a phone call to VA was warranted?
Ms. Miller. We certainly want to make sure we are serving
all low-income Americans, including veterans. Our programs----
Mr. Levin. That is a no, you never contacted VA?
Ms. Miller. We did not contact VA.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that.
I will go ahead and yield to the ranking member for his
questions.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it.
Ms. Miller, we are interested in better data collection for
veterans, as you know, in SNAP, what is the most efficient way
to gather that information?
Ms. Miller. The best way to gather this information is
through the SNAP application process. We have more detailed
information through the SNAP application process, that is the
best way for us to gather that data. If we are to require on
the application that households report their veteran status as
a condition of eligibility, that does require a statutory
change and that is what we are lacking at this point.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Would it take an act of Congress to
get FNS and the states to collect that information? Why cannot
USDA require states to provide this data on their own?
Ms. Miller. Because it would be adding a condition of
eligibility to the SNAP application process, which requires a
statutory change. What we are embarking on is a study and it
would be a survey that would include a question that would help
us understand veteran status, and so we are embarking on that
now. That will help us maybe get to some of that data without
having to change the SNAP application process.
Mr. Bilirakis. Would FNS find it useful?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir, if we could collect the data, that
would be useful.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Second question. USDA just finalized
the able-bodied adults without dependence rule, why does USDA
believe the criteria for State waivers from the congressionally
mandated SNAP work requirement need to be changed?
Ms. Miller. What we have seen right now is we have a very
robust economy, there are more jobs available than there are
people who are seeking jobs, and so this is an opportunity for
us to really engage these able-bodied adults without dependents
with the resources to help them get into the career field. We
have got our SNAP Employment and Training Program, we can also
work through the VA's work programs, and so many other of our
Federal, State, and local partners, to help engage this
population.
We have seen areas with unemployment rates as low as 2 and
a half percent that have been waived. We think this really is a
good opportunity to engage these people and making sure that
ABAWDs are able to return to the workforce.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. For the benefit of the public, when do
these changes take effect?
Ms. Miller. The final rule will be implemented April 1st.
Mr. Bilirakis. April 1st?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Why are you making these changes when
the Farm Bill, the 2018 Farm Bill, made no changes?
Ms. Miller. We have the authority, our authority was
retained so that we could address this issue and so, using our
authority that we have, we are able to do this final rule.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Has this Administration done anything
to change the congressionally mandated work requirements that
were passed as part of the 1996, again, the Welfare Reform Act
implemented Clinton, Bush, and the Obama administrations?
Ms. Miller. No, sir. This final rule does not change the
work requirements, it does not change the time limits. As you
said, this first was passed on a bipartisan basis, signed into
law by President Clinton, and it has remained unchanged for
more than 20 years.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right, very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Pappas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pappas. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
share the concern of many folks here that too many veterans are
food-insecure. Too many are experiencing economic hardships,
including not knowing where their next meal is going to come
from.
I think we all need to leave here with a sense that there
is so much more to do for those who have worn the uniform of
this country, pledged everything to the United States, up to
and including their lives, and it is our job to be able to make
sure that they are taken care of.
I wanted to just build on a question that Mr. Bilirakis
asked you, Ms. Miller, about these rule changes. He asked you
for a rationale about why these changes were made, why you
sought to propose these rules, you responded by saying we have
the authority. I think we are not doubting the authority, but
can you explain a little bit more about the rationale and also
talk about the broader population that will be impacted, how
many will lose SNAP benefits as a result of these rule changes?
Ms. Miller. Sure. Again, using our authority, we were able
to implement this final rule, but what we are seeing is that
there, again, are more job openings than those who are seeking
jobs, and so knowing this is an able-bodied adult without
dependents, so we are talking about individuals between the
ages of 18 and 49, the states have a responsibility to be sure
they are screening everyone for their assessment for work. We
are hopeful that, if we can engage this population, we can
really put them on a path toward a better future.
States do have the ability to exempt a certain percentage
of their caseload if they are having difficulty finding work or
reentering work, but we have had employers reach out to the
SNAP program about how can we engage with SNAP participants and
make sure they are getting job training and skills that they
need to help fill some of the jobs that are out there.
Again, this is--just given the economy right now, this is a
great opportunity to engage this population.
Mr. Pappas. The chairman asked about data for veterans
specifically and you said you did not have that data, but you
do have numbers for the broader population of SNAP
beneficiaries and how that will decrease as a result of these
rule changes. What is that number?
Ms. Miller. Six hundred and eighty eight thousand is what
our estimate showed in Fiscal Year 2021 that may not meet the
work requirements and so may lose SNAP benefits.
Mr. Pappas. Six hundred and eighty thousand? We are clearly
talking about thousands of veterans among that population, I
think we can extrapolate that figure pretty safely, and we have
got to do all we can to make sure that those vets get what they
need. I appreciate the work of the working group, and what you
are doing to ask the question and identify ways to help our
vets.
I am wondering, Mr. O'Toole, if you could talk a little bit
about those vets that are not seeking care at the VA and what
the workgroup is doing to reach out to the broader population.
As we talk about, you know, mental health and suicide, for
instance, we know that most of the vets that are dying by
suicide are not connected to care at the VA, a similar
situation here with food insecurity and those vets that are not
being reached by these programs. How do we get to them and how
do we reach them?
Dr. O'Toole. Thank you, Mr. Congressman, for the question,
and I think it is an important one to acknowledge in that
Veterans Health Administration and those enrolled in care in
the Veterans Health Administration represent only a portion of
all those men and women who has served our country. The VA has
launched several initiatives, principally through our suicide
prevention program, as a means of engaging some of those
veterans at highest risk and in need and in crisis to try to
bring them into the system.
You are right to note that many of the suicides occurring
are occurring among veterans who are not enrolled in VHA.
Several initiatives undertaken to help bring some of those
veterans into our system, as well as to provide community
resources to them, include the other-than-honorable discharge
capacities for veterans to seek emergency care and other care
within the VA system, and I think bringing them in within that
venue is clearly an option and an opportunity.
I would like to defer, though, to Ms. Going for specific
issues within the workgroup that may speak to some of the
community partnerships you reference.
Mr. Pappas. Okay.
Ms. Going. Thank you, Mr. Congressman. The workgroup has on
an annual basis done education that is intended to the field,
as well as to the outside. Our educational opportunities were
advertised to our community partners, so that they could
participate. You did not have to be a veteran utilizing the VHA
to be able to listen and participate in our educational series.
We are currently working on a podcast that will also be
forward-facing and allow anyone to hear it, it is not limited
to just veterans receiving care within the VHA.
Mr. Pappas. Okay. Thanks for your work.
I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Pappas. We will get to Mr.
Bergman in 1 second.
I just wanted to make sure I understand one thing. You know
the number of veterans that receive SNAP, you know the number
of overall SNAP beneficiaries that you think will be impacted
by this proposed rulemaking, and yet you cannot tell me how
many veterans will be impacted by this proposed rulemaking. I
am going to ask both agencies, since you are both here, can you
commit to work together to inform this committee how many
veterans will be impacted by this proposed rulemaking?
Ms. Miller. We are happy to work together and look at the
data that we have, and follow up with you, sir.
Mr. Levin. Okay. We will follow up and we make sure that we
do everything we can to get that data, because it is very
important that this committee understands how many veterans are
impacted.
With that, I will yield to Mr. Bergman for his questions.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all of
you for being here. I appreciate Chairman Takano's reference to
the Guard and Reserve and I wish--unfortunately, he could have
been here to stay, but I guess this is going to be recorded on
C-SPAN or somewhere, so he can view it, if he chooses.
You know, we have got challenges. It is not news to anybody
and that is why we are having this hearing. When it comes to
the Guard and Reserve, as opposed to, let us say, servicemen
and women serving on active duty who just serve honorably and
then move on with their lives who could be impacted by the
subject matter here that we are talking about today, is there
any data out there that suggests, that is broken out by Guard
and Reserve when it comes to food insecurity? For those of us
who have served in the Guard and Reserve, you really do not--
you do not move your family, you know, when you get activated
and deployed, and when your activation, your mobilization is
complete, then you in most cases will return home to your
hometown, go back to whatever business you were in before, and
then continue on in your Guard and Reserve duty.
The stability of the home life, the family life of the
Guardsman or Reserve in some cases does not mirror, in many
cases does not mirror that of, you know, men and women serving
actively, and then leave active service and then find
themselves at risk. Is there any data out there that suggests
any correlation between the stability of home life in the Guard
and Reserve and active when it comes to this subject?
Dr. O'Toole. Thank you, Mr. Congressman, and I think your
point is well taken in terms of those specific needs and
issues. I would have to defer to the Department of Defense
(DOD) on any data that they have been collecting. I do know
that Feeding America has conducted some work and has been
involved in collecting some of that data, but, again, I would
have to defer to them on any specific----
Mr. Bergman. I guess----
Dr. O'Toole. We do not have that information.
Mr. Bergman. No. Thank you for your answering because,
actually, this is quite an opportunity for DOD, VA, USDA,
whoever else to collaborate on the sharing of data as it
relates to all men and women who serve in uniform, whether they
be active, guard, reserve.
You mentioned, Dr. O'Toole, about a tie between food
insecurity and suicide risk. You also have several--it has been
stated from you and from up here that many of these veterans at
risk are outside the VA health care system.
Have you tried anything or considered anything that would
allow different ways to reach the population outside the VA? I
know I heard podcast. But that is only--if that veteran is not
connected to the internet and is in a rural or remote area, any
different things that you have tried yet, whether they be
successful or not?
Dr. O'Toole. Thank you for the question, Mr. Congressman. I
think it is important as we think about food insecurity to also
realize that often times it is not occurring in isolation. As I
mentioned, some of the suicide prevention initiatives and
efforts of reaching out to the community are one example for
how we can be tapping into that population and trying to reach
out and engage in a community way.
Other efforts within VA include our homeless outreach to
not only veterans, men and women who served who are homeless,
but also those who are at risk of homeless through Supportive
Services for Veteran Families (SSVF) programming, through stand
downs and such.
I think the convergence of these issues and needs within
those outreach efforts do provide us an opportunity. You know,
is there more we can do, absolutely. I think it will always be
a challenge for us because there is a lot of people who choose
not to go to the VA despite services and capacities that are
there. I think these are many--these are some of several
efforts across different, you know, population group needs that
I think provide opportunities for us.
Mr. Bergman. Well, I guess--and you can take this for the
record, but what help can we as Veterans Affairs Committee give
to VA in this case to enable an outreach that is not currently
occurring because people are outside the system, what help can
we give you as VA to complete that outreach to those veterans
who are outside the system?
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Bergman.
I would now like to recognize Ms. Lee for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here. This is such an important issue for our veterans.
You know, I also sit on the Education and Labor Committee
and a few weeks ago we conducted an oversight hearing on the
Department of Agriculture's proposed SNAP rule that eliminates
broad based categorical eligibility. The finding was that it
eliminates access for about a million school children to free
and reduced lunch, and incredibility frustrating to be on the
committee with this rule that the Department did not include
that impact in its initial regulatory impact analysis. Then
after it did publish the analysis showing this effect, it
continued to pursue the rule.
That is just a--I just wanted to point out that
frustration. Then in my home State of Nevada 17,000 veterans
receive SNAP benefits, and we know that low income veterans may
be unemployed, working low wage jobs or have disability. SNAP
provides such an essential support that enables them to
purchase food for their families.
You know, given this pattern, I just want to raise a
question about the USDA's priorities. Why has the USDA
prioritized regulatory actions that would reduce State
flexibilities, limit access to SNAP and increase food
insecurity rather than actions that would be more proactive and
responsive?
Ms. Miller. Thank you for the question.
Our goal with these proposed regulations and the final rule
is to align the program with the statute. The statute is very
clear in setting income limits as well as asset limits for who
should be receiving SNAP. We are trying to align the program
with the statute and make sure that participants are treated
fairly and consistently across the country because we know that
folks in California are being determined eligible very
differently than folks who are living in Virginia, for example.
What we are trying to do is really make sure that everyone
is on a level playing field. Regardless of which State you live
in, SNAP participants should know the expectations of how they
should apply and what the requirements are because the statute,
you know, defines that for us.
We are trying to align the program with the statute and
make sure that everyone is treated fairly and consistently.
Ms. Lee. Basically, it is our duty to change the statute if
we want to see additional eligibility.
Ms. Miller. Yes, ma'am. Congress has that ability to do so.
Ms. Lee. Okay.
Ms. Miller. We are happy to always work with you all,
provide technical assistance, if there are any legislative
proposals you would like to pursue.
Ms. Lee. One question I have, so we know that there is
millions of Americans who are experiencing food insecurity,
including veterans, and are eligible to--for SNAP, but they do
not receive the benefits. How is the USDA addressing that SNAP
participation gap?
Ms. Miller. We want to make sure that our program does
reach those who are in need and those who qualify and are
eligible for the program. States have the ability and they do
some outreach in making sure that they work with different
partners, whether it be through other Federal agencies like our
collaboration has been with the VA in making sure that we have
provided some training to their case workers and so that they
know some of those requirements.
I think there is some outreach opportunities at the State
level and working with some of our other Federal partners.
Ms. Lee. The USDA is not taking any ownership of that. It
is really through those partnerships?
Ms. Miller. The law prohibits us from doing direct outreach
for SNAP as part of the 2014 Farm Bill.
Ms. Lee. Dr. O'Toole, I wanted to thank you for coming in
today and your work with the veteran food security work group.
I am particularly concerned given the findings of the 2013
study that vets with food insecurity tend to be younger, not
married, earning lower incomes at a lower military pay scale. I
cannot help but be concerned about student vets.
I wanted to ask you, you listed numerous actions being
taken by the VA identifying veterans who experience food
insecurity, and I applaud that. What can we do to capture
student veteran hunger?
Dr. O'Toole. Thank you, Congresswoman.
The population groups you mentioned are all very vulnerable
and part of that vulnerability comes from the many challenges
they experience as they transition from military to civilian
life, often times with--while still bearing the scars of battle
and many of the challenges that are associated with that,
whether it is Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or other
conditions and challenges. Being able to enter into gainful
employment, being able to fully engage are clearly an issue.
I think obviously the role of student veterans and the
dynamics that they are struggling with and shortfalls that may
occur in their capacity to sustain a household are equally
pronounced.
I would have to take for the record specific plans and
actions that we may be able to do specific to that population
group, but I appreciate you bringing it up.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
My time is expired. Thank you.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Ms. Lee.
I would now like to recognize my friend, Mr. Barr, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank Chairman
Levin and Ranking Member Bilirakis for holding this important
hearing and addressing this important issue of food insecurity
among our veterans. I particularly appreciate my friend, Mr.
Levin, for his passion because we talked about this before the
hearing today. I know he is very passionate about it. We all
care very, very deeply, especially when we find homeless
veterans in our communities, folks who interact with the VA and
veterans who do not interact with the VA, who struggle with
food insecurity.
Dr. O'Toole, I was obviously moved by your testimony that--
when you said that the VA's food insecurity screening tool
found that over the last 2 years one and a half percent of all
veterans are screening positive for food insecurity. I just
think, wow, you know, what about those veterans who do not even
get the screening. You have got additional food insecurity
there.
My view is that for a veteran that is not disabled,
especially a veteran who is not disabled without--and does not
have dependents, the best thing we can do for that veteran is
to get him a good job, a good job, a job that is a win for that
veteran, obviously, because it addresses that issue of food
insecurity and shelter insecurity and everything else.
It is great for the employer because these are heroes to
our country and they have got great skills to offer these
employers. You know, let us face it. The economy is doing
really, really well right now and we have a million more job
openings in this country than we have unemployed people. What
if we could fill those job openings with veterans? That is what
we need to do. That is what we have got to focus on doing.
I want to talk about what the USDA is doing to try to
encourage work among, not just our veterans, but others, and
getting folks back into the labor market.
Let me ask my first question to Ms. Miller. With respect to
this able-bodied adults without dependents rule, why does the
USDA believe that the criteria for State waivers from the
congressionally mandated SNAP work requirements need to be
changed?
Ms. Miller. Thank you, Congressman, and as you just
commented it was--it is really focused on the fact that we do
have a very robust economy right now, and there are more job
openings available than there are job seekers. This seems like
a perfect environment where we should be engaging this
population and helping them move into work and getting the
skills that they need.
We have programs such as our SNAP employment and training
program. States are required to run those programs. We do
provide them with formula funding as well as we have the
opportunity to provide matching funds as they continue to
expand and grow their employment and training programs to help
SNAP participants, these able-bodied adults without dependents
get the job skills that they need.
Mr. Barr. Let us go back, Ms. Miller, to your testimony
about--it is congress's job to change the statutory
requirements, if needed. I for one do not want to change the
statutory requirements. I think the waivers have actually
impeded people from getting back in the workforce.
Let us just go back to the statute that was a bipartisan
statute and let us just examine that for a minute. The statute
limits participation by adults 18 to 49. We are not talking
about seniors. We are not talking about anybody younger than
18. We are talking about a prime age worker, 18 to 49, without
a dependent and without a disability. We are not talking about
veterans with disabilities here. We are talking about non-
disabled, no dependent veterans between the ages of 18 and 49,
prime working years. Okay. There is a time limit, 36 months for
SNAP, unless, unless the individual is working or participating
in a work program for at least 80 hours per month, that is 20
hours a week, or volunteering. They can volunteer. They do not
even have to work. They just have to volunteer, do something
that gets them work capable.
Am I describing the underlying statute correctly?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir. Everything you have said is correct.
Mr. Barr. I do not think it is stingy, I do not think the
statute is stingy. I think the statute actually creates great,
positive incentives for able-bodied, work capable, no
dependents, prime age workers to do something to get them back
into a productive place where they can be self-sufficient. When
we are talking about food insecurity, to me that is what--that
is exactly what we need to be promoting.
To the extent that states are impeding that incentive
structure, I think that does a great disservice to these heroes
to our country and encouraging them to be more dependent than
independent.
One final question, Ms. Miller. In MAZON's testimony they
tell a story of a Navy veteran in Maine. The veteran's benefits
for SNAP were not extended even though the Department of Labor
ruled him unable to work. Would the proposed rule change for
State waivers impact people in similar situations?
Ms. Miller. That was--is an unfortunate situation, and so
the states have the responsibility to be sure they are properly
screening individuals for their fitness for work. We can--if
there are situations like that, we can certainly work with the
states to provide technical assistance because if he did have
information from Department of Labor, that would satisfy those
requirements of having that individual not be subject to the
final rule that we are talking about.
Mr. Barr. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Barr. I appreciate your comments
and working with you on this issue on a bipartisan basis.
I would now like to recognize Miss Rice for 5 minutes.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I do not have a question. I just have a comment. I cannot
believe that we are sitting here talking about this. We should
all be humiliated that we are talking about taking food away
from any man or woman, however able-bodied they may be, who
wore the uniform of this country.
We must strive to build communities that truly serve,
support and protect our veterans from the very first moment
they return to civilian life. I did not say that. Those are the
words of President Trump. For him to allow you to implement a
ban like this, basically, to take food out of the mouths of a
veteran is nothing short of un-American and inhumane. I do not
even--I cannot even believe we are sitting here talking about
this.
You are sitting here and you are talking about--you are
using terms like level playing field when you are talking about
taking food away from people. This is disgusting. We are
sitting up here saying, what can we do. I think we all know
what we can do and we should just do it so we do not have to
hear people like you talking about level playing fields when
you are talking about men and women who wore the uniform of
this country not being able to get food.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Miss Rice.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Meuser for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all.
Clearly a difficult issue, one in which I think we all
agree in the end, anyone who cannot afford to maintain a level
of nutrition and food, we--particularly a veteran we as a
country, we as communities engage in. I, myself, donate
regularly to food banks, and there are quite a few of them.
That is for sure. There are some food banks that are--that
exist for the purpose of veterans. I have one in my district
known as the Keystone Food Bank.
What we need to figure out is how to get it done, right, in
a way that is accountable. I have the Lebanon VA in my
district. It takes a very holistic view of veteran services.
They work with many community organizations to connect whenever
they feel that there is benefits that are not in line with what
the best interest of the veteran and the deserving.
Is that a best practice that is encouraged or modeled or
taught for other VAs to really take this holistic approach, ask
the questions, not just look at the data of what their income
levels are?
Dr. O'Toole. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. I
think it highlights both an important point and really
underscores what we view in the VA as our mission. We see our
role and job as going far beyond just making sure that we are
managing a health condition or a health problem, but really
trying to take care of the entire veteran. That extends through
many examples.
I would wholeheartedly concur with the great work that is
being done at the Lebanon VA and the leadership there and the
staff there and their commitment to those men and women who
served. It is a great testimony and example of what we are
trying to do. It gets back to the larger issue in the context
of food insecurity that we have to look at food insecurity not
only in isolation, but what are the root causes to it, and work
with the veteran and support the veteran through that context
of helping them secure, in addition, stable housing and stable
employment to addressing domestic violence issues, providing
the supports that they need so they can support their families.
That goes far beyond a prescription pad. I appreciate you
bringing it up. That is very much our commitment, and it is
also the strategic approach that we have taken to the food
insecurity screener and the interdisciplinary and team-based
approached to trying to address what is a much deeper problem
than just food.
Mr. Meuser. Yes. I also just want to, before my next
question, commend the Department of Veterans Affairs,
particularly over the last 2 years, the MISSION Act, the
Veterans Choice Act have been implemented on a bipartisan
basis, but very much led by Secretary Wilkie and your staff.
Most of you are veterans and, if not, you have dedicated your
lives more or less, your working lives, to serving veterans. I
see that throughout the Veterans Administration, and it is
appreciated.
Not only is it appreciated by me, since I have 55,000
veterans in my district, it is appreciated by the veterans and
their families. They have seen improvements, not just from the
Lebanon VA, but the VA as a whole. You know, it was not too
long ago, a couple of years ago, 3, 4 years ago that all we saw
were disasters within various veterans administrations. The
work that has been done, we are caring for our veterans better
now.
Is there work to do? Absolutely. Such things as the Improve
Act that we need to pass and provide more community services,
so as we have the hybrid approach toward the best possible care
for our veterans. I really commend you for your work and your
dedication, and thank you for your service.
The other thing I wanted to ask you, the USDA, who is very
active in my district, and the Department of Veterans Affairs,
do they work in unison? Is there a cooperative effort there in
this regard related to food?
Ms. Miller. Yes, sir, there is. We work closely. We have
had some training programs with some of the veterans VA case
workers so that they are familiar with our programs and helping
connect vets to our programs.
Mr. Meuser. All right. Great.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Meuser.
With that I would like to thank our first panel. I would
now like to call up our second panel. While everyone is
switching around we will take just a minute.
[Pause]
Mr. Levin. All right. Thank you, everybody.
On the second panel today we have Josh Protas, Vice
President of Public Policy at MAZON: A Jewish Response to
Hunger. Thank you for being here.
Also joining us is Denise Hollywood, Chief Community &
Programs Officer at Blue Star Families.
Finally, we have Vince Hall, the CEO of Feeding San Diego.
Thank you all so much for joining us. I am looking forward
to getting your perspective.
As you know we will have 5 minutes for your oral statement,
but your full written statement will be added to the record.
Ms. Protas, you are now recognized for 5 minutes, or Mr.
Protas, excuse me. Please use the microphone.

STATEMENT OF JOSH PROTAS

Mr. Protas. Thank you.
Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and distinguished
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. My name is Josh Protas and I am proud to serve
as Vice President of Public Policy for MAZON: A Jewish Response
to Hunger.
Inspired by Jewish values and ideals, MAZON takes to heart
the responsibility to care for the most vulnerable in our midst
without judgment or precondition. For nearly 10 years we have
prioritized addressing the long overlooked issue of hunger
among veterans and military families. The Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program or SNAP is the most crucial tool
in supporting veterans who struggle to put food on the table.
Unfortunately, it is under attack through administrative
actions that will increase hunger and hardship for struggling
veterans. I would like to tell you about one of these
individuals, Tim Keefe, a Navy veteran in Maine. I spoke with
Tim last week and he agreed to allow me to share his very
painful experience.
After being injured Tim could not return to work and fell
on hard times. He applied for SNAP so that he could afford to
buy food. Because the State of Maine chose not to waive the
time limit for able-bodied adults without dependents or ABAWDs,
Tim lost SNAP benefits after only 3 months. 3 months is the
limit, not 36.
He repeatedly asked to the numerous officials who passed
him along in the bureaucratic maze, what do I eat between now
and then? Nobody had an answer for Tim. Without SNAP, Tim had
no assistance and became homeless. He resorted to scrounging
for food and even catching squirrels to eat to get buy.
Reflecting on his time, Tim shared, ``There were many times
when I would go 2 or even 3 days without food. The food bank
has only limited resources. I had to add 7 holes on my belt to
keep my pants on.'' For people like Tim, SNAP can literally
save lives. We know that SNAP helps about 1.3 million low
income veterans, but a recent report suggests that nearly two-
thirds of veterans who struggle with hunger and are eligible
for SNAP are not currently enrolled. Nobody, and certainly no
veteran like Tim, should ever be forced to ask, what do I eat
because they cannot get the help they need from the country
they fought to protect.
MAZON urges Congress to, one, protect and improve SNAP.
USDA must withdraw the 3 harmful proposals that would strip
SNAP benefits from millions of Americans, including veterans.
Of particular concern is the rule that would restrict waivers
from current SNAP time limits. This rule is not nuanced. It is
not flexible. It is not a reflection of the realities of
struggling Americans. It is entirely inappropriate for USDA to
move forward with changes to SNAP without understanding how
they will impact America's veterans.
Food insecurity can often trigger a downward spiral of
economic hardship and despair which, unfortunately, can lead to
suicide. Improving access to SNAP for struggling veterans is an
important tool in the campaign to end veteran suicide and needs
to be prioritized.
Two, connect veterans to SNAP. We are pleased that the VA
took MAZON's advice in 2015 to start screening veterans for
food insecurity. The current process is not doing enough and
does not capture all veterans who struggle. VA must adopt the
validated 2 question hunger vital sign screening tool to more
accurately identify all veterans who are at risk of food
insecurity.
For veterans who screen positive, VA should require and
provide onsite SNAP eligibility and application assistance,
which is not happening broadly.
Three, share nutrition assistance information during
transition. VA should integrate materials about programs like
SNAP as part of the transition assistance program and other
veteran outreach efforts. Include this information as part of
the new solid star veteran suicide prevention initiative and
work with USDA and community partners like MAZON to develop
veteran specific resources about SNAP.
Four, listen to veterans. Negative public perceptions of
SNAP are ramped up by proposals to restrict the program for
only certain Americans. This creates a chilling effect and adds
to the stigma and shame that make veterans and others reluctant
to seek help that they need. This committee should hold a
follow up hearing to listen to veterans who have real lived
experiences with food insecurity.
Last, Congress must address the related issue of hunger
among currently serving military families that has been ignored
for far too long. MAZON believes this is an urgent matter of
national security, military readiness, retention and
recruitment.
The best way we can support and honor the veterans is to
ensure that they have what they need and never have to struggle
with hunger. For someone like Tim, that means ensuring access
to SNAP. When Tim turned 50, the state's SNAP time limit no
longer applied and he was able, once again, to get the
assistance he so desperately needed. Tim is in a much better
place now. He wants to make sure that others, veterans and non-
veterans alike, do not fall through the cracks like he did.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.

[The Prepared Statement Of Josh Protas Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you. I appreciate that.
I would now like to recognize Ms. Hollywood for her opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF DENISE HOLLYWOOD

Ms. Hollywood. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today. My name is Denise
Hollywood and I am the Chief Community & Programs Officer at
Blue Star Families.
Blue Star Families builds communities that support military
families by connecting research and data to programs and
solutions. Since its inception in 2009, we have engaged tens of
thousands of volunteers and served more than 1.5 million
military family members. Blue Star Families is nationally
recognized for our annual military family lifestyle survey,
which uses both quantitative and qualitative data to reveal a
snapshot of the current status of military families.
In our 2018 survey of our 10,000 respondents, we found that
7 percent of military family respondents and 12 percent of
veteran family respondents indicated that someone in their
household had faced food insecurity in the past year.
Additionally, 9 percent of military family respondents and
18 percent of veteran family respondents indicated that someone
in their household had sought emergency food assistance through
a food bank, food pantry or charitable organization.
In order to comprehend the issue of food insecurity among
veteran families, we must first understand the factors that
contribute to food insecurity while these families are still
actively serving in the military.
Such factors include high rates of military spouse
unemployment and under-employment, limited availability and
high cost of childcare, out of pocket relocation and housing
expenses, and unexpected financial emergencies. Many of these
factors arise from frequent relocation due to military orders.
According to the Department of Defense, active duty
military families relocate on average once every 2 to 3 years
typically across State lines or overseas. Frequent relocation
makes it difficult for military spouses to find and maintain
gainful employment, partly because employers are wary of hiring
individuals who have gaps in their resumes as a result of
previous moves.
If a military spouse works in a licensed profession, he or
she must also undergo the costly processing of re-licensing in
a new State. In 2018, we found that 30 percent of military
spouse respondents were unemployed. This figure dwarfs the
civilian unemployment rate which, in 2018, was less than 4
percent. 56 percent of military spouse respondents who would
have liked to be employed cited childcare as a reason for why
they were not currently working.
Meanwhile, 70 percent of millennial military family
respondents reported that having two incomes was vital to their
family's well being. Thus, the military spouse employment
crisis directly contributes to food insecurity by preventing
military families from achieving a vital second source of
income.
The financial difficulties of modern military families are
further compounded by frequent out of pocket relocation
expenses. Although the Federal Government covers the majority
of the expenses incurred due to relocation, one-third of
respondents reported spending over $1,000 in un-reimbursed
expenses during their last military move.
All of these factors, out of pocket expenses, rising costs
of childcare, spouse unemployment and others, can contribute to
food insecurity among currently serving military families.
Food insecurity among active duty military families does
not end when service members retire. To the contrary, the
financial difficulties of military families can be aggravated
by transition related challenges. It is critical that we work
to address the underlying causes of military and veteran family
food insecurity.
At the same time, however, this committee can take
immediate steps to address veteran hunger by protecting and
strengthening programs like SNAP that alleviate veteran hunger;
instructing the VA and USDA to be more proactive in their
efforts to identify veterans who are experiencing food
insecurity; and establishing VA partnerships with non-profits
to help reach veterans who are not receiving services through
the VA network.
The Federal Government must also work to expand its data
collection around military and veteran family food insecurity
so as to better inform policy responses to these issues. Blue
Star Families is well situated to help in this endeavor.
I would like to again thank the distinguished members of
the subcommittee for the efforts to eliminate military and
veteran hunger. Those who make significant sacrifices for our
country should never struggle to put food on the table.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Denise Hollywood Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you, Ms. Hollywood.
Now I would like to recognize Mr. Hall for 5 minutes, and
thank you for all your good work in my neck of the woods out in
North County, San Diego.

STATEMENT OF VINCE HALL

Mr. Hall. Well, Chairman Levin, thank you so much, Ranking
Member Bilirakis, and distinguished members of the committee.
My name is Vince Hall. I'm the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of
Feeding San Diego, which is a leading hunger relief and food
rescue organization in San Diego County. We are also a very
proud member of the Feeding American network.
For perspective, San Diego is 4,500 square miles. It has a
population of 3.4 million people, making it larger than 20 U.S.
states. It has one of the largest concentrations of veterans
and military personnel in the world. Our Navy, Marine, Coast
Guard bases and National Guard armories are a critical part of
this Nation's national defense infrastructure. Our county is
home to 143,000 active duty military, 260,000 military
dependents, 243,000 veterans, and 583,000 family members of
veterans. Over 1.2 million San Diegans, 37 percent of our
population, have direct ties to the military. It is a proud
heritage, but it comes with solemn responsibilities.
The greatest among these responsibilities is to ensure that
our veteran and military families have a dignified quality of
life that honors their sacrifices. All too often, despite the
efforts of our government, it falls to organizations like
Feeding San Diego and Feeding America to close this significant
gap between what our heroes have and what they need to provide
for their families.
I am proud of my organization, but I take no pride in the
fact that our country stations people in San Diego without
paying them enough to live in San Diego. I take no pride in
seeing ever larger numbers of veterans lining up at our Feeding
Heroes food pantries every year.
Now the good news is that Feeding San Diego has innovative
food rescue approaches to delivering healthy, fresh and
nutritious food that would otherwise go to waste. Last year we
rescued 24 million pounds of food that was going to leave the
food system and go to the waste system from stores, farms,
manufacturers and other sources.
With our faith-based and charitable partners across the
county, we distributed 26 million meals worth of food, 97
percent of which was rescued food that otherwise would have
gone to a landfill. According to the USDA, 40 percent of the
food in this country goes to waste every day. That is more than
enough to solve hunger for every man, woman and child in need.
Through our partnership with Feeding America, we rescue
food in San Diego County from 200 Starbucks stores every night
of the year, 260 grocery stores, 19 school district central
kitchens and dozens of other sources. We also rescue fresh
produce from 225 farms and packing sheds up and down the State
of California through our partnership with the California
Association of Food Banks.
We could not do this by ourselves. We are proud to partner
with 170 religious and charitable organizations across the
county who work hand in hand with us to implement this
innovative model. Many of these organizations are specifically
focused on the needs of veterans and active duty military
families, groups like the United Service Organizations (USO),
US for Warriors, Courage to Call, Military Outreach Ministries,
and Support the Enlisted Project.
Our distributions reach families through a dignified
farmer's market-style model, which allows individuals to select
the foods that are best for their families' needs. Our military
can access fresh, nutritious fruits and vegetables without
stigma or unnecessary bureaucracy through these pantries.
As strong as our efforts are, there is much more to be done
and there are serious threats to our progress. We are asking
Congress to do several things which would help us to finally
solve veteran and military family hunger. Foremost among these
is to oppose cuts to the SNAP program which threaten millions
of Americans, including many of the veteran and active duty
military families that we serve.
Feeding America is 200 food banks strong. For every one
meal that is provided by our entire network, the SNAP program
provides 9 meals. So even a relatively small cut to the SNAP
program threatens to create a staggering increase in demand at
America's food banks, a demand that we simply cannot meet.
I also encourage Congress to include needed improvements in
child nutrition re-authorization which will help to increase
food access for the children of military and veteran families.
I want to end my testimony by sharing Desiree's story.
Desiree participates in our Feeding Heroes' program. Her
husband is a communications officer in the Navy who makes just
over $34,000 per year. She has 4 kids and her husband has been
deployed now for nearly 8 months. She told us that she knew
life as a military spouse was going to have its challenges. She
never expected that one of those challenges would be feeding
her own children.
Thousands of military families face similar challenges. We
see too many kids standing in food lines while their parents
are serving on the front lines.
It has been an honor to testify today on behalf of everyone
we serve at Feeding San Diego, including Desiree and her
family.
Thank you.

[The Prepared Statement Of Vince Hall Appears In The
Appendix]

Mr. Levin. Thank you so much, Mr. Hall, for your leadership
and your work in San Diego. I am glad this has provided an
opportunity to highlight some of the great work you are doing.
Really for all 3 of you, thank you as non-governmental
leaders and experts for bringing your perspective today.
I want to thank the VA representatives for sticking around
to hear them.
Is anyone from USDA still here?
Let the record--yes, someone is from USDA still here? No.
Let the record reflect that no one from the United States
Department of Agriculture who administers the SNAP program took
the time to stay to listen to non-governmental organization
experts who see firsthand in the field how food insecurity is
impacting the veteran community. Let the record reflect that.
With now I would like to turn to some questions.
Mr. Hall, I was really delighted to join you recently to
tour your distribution center, and I enjoyed learning about all
the good work that you are doing and how you do it.
Are most veterans that you see that are referred to Feeding
San Diego, do they get there from VA or from elsewhere? Can you
comment on any stigma or any reluctance to seek assistance
among food insecure veterans?
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The referral system is very informal and it often happens
through peer networks. We have different groups of veterans
that we serve. Transitioning veterans who have just left the
service or perhaps as long as 5 or 10 years who are still
trying to find their footing in civilian life find us through
support organizations that they turn to shortly after their
discharge from active duty.
Senior veterans might come to us through neighborhood-based
senior programs, and it is only as we begin to serve them that
we learn that they are veterans who might be eligible for VA
benefits and services.
A lot of just person to person referrals cause people to
find their way to our food pantries, even the VA medical center
in San Diego consistently refers people to Feeding San Diego
for hunger relief services.
You hit on a key point, Mr. Chairman, and that is stigma;
that no one who has worn the uniform of the country feels pride
in accessing food through hunger relief charities. It is really
our duty, our obligation morally to support those who have
served this country to ensure that they do not need to turn to
charitable organizations to have a minimal quality of life
after they, themselves, have put their life on the line for
this country.
Only by partnering with these organizations that have the
trust of veterans do we find that we are able to create safe
environments where we minimize that stigma and maximize their
dignity. It is still always an ever-present challenge.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that.
Mr. Protas, you noted in your testimony that VA's current
screening tool of a single question only identifies veterans at
risk of very low food security.
Can you explain the difference between very-low and low
food insecurity and why it is important to identify and address
both.
Mr. Protas. Sure. Thank you for the question.
The difference is really a technical difference in the way
that USDA defines the two. Low food insecurity is defined as
households with reduced--that have reduced the quality,
variety, and desirability of their diets, but the quantity of
food intake and normal eating patterns were not substantially
disrupted.
Very-low food insecurity describes that at times during the
year, eating patterns of one or more household members were
disrupted and food intake reduced, because the household lacked
money or other resources for food.
The truth is, both of those categories are considered food
insecure and that people have to alter their eating habits,
which ultimately results in poorer nutrition and poorer health
outcomes.
The single question that is being asked, we think,
captures, really just those who experience very-low food
insecurity, and the rate--it is under 2 percent that they are
determining. We know that the rates for certain parts of the
veteran population, and veterans in general, are much higher
than that, so many people are falling through the cracks.
Mr. Levin. Thank you for that.
For both you and Mr. Hall, by USDA's own admission, its
recent proposed rule changes to SNAP will lead to significant
reductions in SNAP participation, which will, no doubt, include
loss of SNAP benefits for struggling veterans; although, as I
am sure you remember from our first panel, they do not know how
many, although they promise to get us that number, though they
are not here anymore to hear this.
Mr. Hall, as an organization that provides both, direct
food and also enrolls individuals in SNAP, what impact do you
think these changes are going to have for your organization,
for Feeding San Diego? Do you--and other food banks and
pantries across the country, do you have the capacity to make
up for these cuts while also maintaining the robust emergency
response that you provide to the San Diego community?
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The short answer to the question is no, we do not have that
capacity. It is so complicated to get somebody enrolled in SNAP
under the current eligibility criteria that we have had to
redirect our staff resources to not just helping people apply
for SNAP, but, instead, doing fewer applications and helping
more people through the entirety of the documentation process
to get them to the finish line where they can receive SNAP
benefits. We have actually scaled back our enrollment process
to meet the complex bureaucracy that surrounds the existing
SNAP program. This is going to add an entirely new layer of
complication, which we cannot afford to support.
Mr. Levin. Thank you.
Mr. Protas, what is the experience in Maine that you
highlighted in your testimony teach about the ability for
hunger-relief organizations to mitigate the impact to veterans
from SNAP policy changes?
Mr. Protas. Sure. Thank you for the question.
In 2015, then-Governor LePage, the Governor of Maine, chose
not to take State waivers for the time limits on SNAP, even
though the State was eligible for those waivers. The State saw
an increase in hunger that resulted. Thousands of Mainers,
including about 2800 veterans, lost access to SNAP.
It did not mean that they had a bettering of their life
circumstances. It did not mean that because they lost the
$1.40-per person, per-meal benefit, that they were inspired to
get work.
I think the short goal is to get people back to work who
can, but just taking food away from people does not magically
make them work, and that was the case that happened in Maine.
The story from Tim that I shared was a very personal story of
somebody who was hurt, but we know that there were thousands of
other veterans and tens of thousands of other Mainers who lost
access to SNAP and went hungry, as a result of that change.
Mr. Levin. Thank you very much.
With that, I would like to turn it over to the ranking
member, Mr. Bilirakis.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you--very much.
Mr. Chairman, I understand that the statute--and I agree
with you, the USDA should be here; they should have stayed--but
I understand they are barred by statute, they cannot request
the veteran status, and I would like to discuss that with you,
because we have to give them that authority to do so. I would
appreciate that. I understand it was taken out in the Farm
Bill, that authority. Let us get that done together.
Doing down the panel, and I guess we will start with Mr.
Protas--is that okay--would you support an increase in the
Federal Government's ability to require States to track the
veteran status of SNAP beneficiaries, and if not, why not?
Mr. Protas. I think I would support that. I think USDA has
ways to collect information right now that they are not. The
estimates about the 1.3 million veterans who participate in
SNAP currently comes from census bureau data from the American
Community Survey. There are ways to get this data and to get
information.
I think it would be fine to inquire about veteran status,
but that should not be the barrier to USDA in doing more to
examine this problem.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. I do want to commend all the groups
for all of your good work in helping our heroes. I really
appreciate it so much and we respect you tremendously.
Again, the question for Mr. Protas and Mr. Hall, Feeding
San Diego, do you believe that SNAP should be a temporary-
assistance program? Mr. Protas first.
Mr. Protas. I think for the vast majority of SNAP
participants, SNAP is temporary assistance and it works the way
it was designed, but there are some individuals--those who are
disabled, those who are not able to work--where it may provide
longer-term support.
Ideally, people get back to work and SNAP is a stepping-
stone, but if they do not have jobs in their communities and
there are not job-training opportunities, it is difficult.
There are many barriers people face to work.
Ms. Miller talking about employment and training programs,
and I think that is really important. We saw in the last Farm
Bill that there were 10 pilot programs for employment-training
programs and we should see what works out of those. We should
see the results of those employment-training programs.
The truth is, there are not job-training slots for every
SNAP recipient who wants to better their skills to get work. If
we really want to get people back to work, which I think is a
shared goal, let us invest in those employment and training
programs so that it is--so that SNAP is a temporary assistance.
Just taking food away from people is not the motivator that
is all of a sudden going to have somebody, then, seek work.
They are looking for work, they just do not have jobs or do not
have training opportunities in their communities or they face
barriers to work like transportation or childcare.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Hall, again, do you believe that SNAP should be a
temporary-assistance program?
Mr. Hall. I agree with the previous response that for
people with permanent disabilities, with seniors, with people
who do not have a path to self-sufficiency, SNAP is an
important part of meeting their monthly nutritional needs;
however, I also would say that we have a program where the data
in San Diego tracks the national average. That the average SNAP
person--participant is within the program for less than a year.
It is a successful program that is lifting people out of
poverty, and when we look at the number of SNAP recipients who
are not working, it is typically not the same people each
month, that is, that this is a program that fluctuates and new
people find themselves in crisis and people find their way back
into the workforce and then they are no longer in the program.
I think the program is functioning well and it is serving
its intended purpose.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. A question for Mr. Protas, and Ms.
Hollywood, any time you want to chime in, please do not
hesitate to. I want to give you an opportunity first, let us do
that.
Do you have any questions or do you want to add to that in
any way?
[Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. All right.
Mr. Protas, in your written statement, you provide the
story of Tim, a veteran, a hero from Maine. Why was the
Department of Labor, the determination not enough for him to
qualify for SNAP?
Mr. Protas. I think there was a misunderstanding between
State agencies and unfortunately we know that there is a lot of
confusion about disability status; in fact, Ms. Miller noted in
her testimony that veterans who receive full disability rating
are exempted from work requirements.
That is actually not the case. Any veteran who has a
disability rating and receives any benefit at all from the VA
is exempted from work requirements. We have the head of the
Food and Nutrition Service who did not properly convey that and
understand those regulations.
I think there is a lot of confusion and better information
needs to be distributed and USDA has a role to play, but then
State agencies that administer SNAP and other safety-net
programs have to play a role, as well, and I think the VA can
play a part in better communicating those guidelines so people
do not fall through the cracks like Tim.
Mr. Bilirakis. I just want to emphasize that all of us want
our veterans, obviously, and their families, to have food
security. It is just a matter of, I think we need, you know,
more hearings, and as the chairman told me, he would like to
have a panel of veterans to get their input on this.
I really appreciate your input, your testimony, both panels
today, and I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
Yes, I agree with your suggestion, as part of your
testimony, that we should be hearing from veterans, themselves,
so we would absolutely love to do that. In addition, I would
appreciate the chance to work with the ranking member to get
the data to know exactly how many veterans are being impacted
by this and, in fact, there are reasons why USDA or VA cannot
work together to provide that information. We need to
understand that, as well.
We did, at least, get while the USDA administrator was
here, the commitment that she would work with VA to try to get
that data to us. We will keep at it and it is going to take
more hearings, and I look forward to working with you together
on that.
With that, I would like to recognize Mr. Pappas for 5
minutes.
Mr. Pappas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to second that recommendation, that we
continue to look for ways to listen to the veterans, and I
appreciate the way that this panel has brought out some
personal stories of how veterans have been impacted by food
insecurity and economic hardship, and if there is an
opportunity for a roundtable or some way to pull together a
forum, Mr. Chairman, I would absolutely love to participate in
that.
I appreciate your comments here today, the work you do on
behalf of veterans and those who are struggling across our
country. We all know, and we heard in the last panel, that 36
million Americans rely on food stamp benefits in this country
every month, and that is at a time when we consider that the
economy is doing well. 1.3 million veterans accessed the SNAP
program, according to recent data, and we have got to make sure
that those vets continue to find ways to be connected, even as
this administration seeks to pull the rug out from under those
who are struggling, who rely on the SNAP program. I think it is
outrageous that they have moved forward with these Draconian
measures that target folks who are struggling and who are
really living day-to-day.
Mr. Hall, you said a few things that I hear a lot from food
pantries, from the food bank, from charities across my district
that understand that even at a time of significant economic
growth for many in our country, that there are those who are
struggling and that the SNAP program does not necessarily meet
the needs of those who are food insecure.
I am wondering if you could just continue to talk a little
bit about what changes to this program mean for organizations
like yours that are already stretched to the max, and why we
need to make sure that we are doing all we can to fill in those
gaps.
Mr. Hall. Thank you, Congressman.
It is a very difficult challenge to convey how the SNAP
program works in the real world. There are the complexities of
finding eligible populations, and we know that only a
percentage of eligible veterans in this country are
participating in the SNAP program. We know that the
documentation requirements that are required to successfully
enroll, the lag time that is created before you receive a
benefit card in many instances. In California, this is a
County-administered program and the County of San Diego is a
terrific partner with Feeding San Diego and has a full-time
employee in our food bank office to help us process SNAP
applications. Often it can take weeks and weeks to help
somebody who is in a crisis to get access to those SNAP
benefits.
We also see, sir, that the SNAP benefits off run out the
second or third week of the month and we see an increase in
demand at food pantries from SNAP beneficiaries because the
benefit amount is not enough to secure the quantity of food
that they need to properly nourish their families. It is a
situation where the program works well within the guidelines
that Congress has established for it, but Congress simply has
not created the program in a way that is designed to solve
hunger in this country. It is absolutely, at this moment,
essential, critical, supplemental aid for many, many veterans
and, frankly, for many active-duty military families.
If I may just add, for active-duty military families,
having their basic allowance for housing counted as income for
purposes of disqualifying them from SNAP is an absolutely
inexcusable affront. I know many of the members on both sides
of the aisle agree on this, but I do not understand why we have
not fixed it yet.
Mr. Pappas. Certainly no one is getting rich on the four-
to-five-dollar-a-day average that SNAP pays for food
assistance, and if anyone thinks that is an overly generous
benefit, they should try living on it.
I am wondering if we could zero in on the fact that younger
veterans--veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan, in particular--are
experiencing food insecurity at higher rates. Do you know why
that is the case and how can we do outreach to those
communities to make sure that they are getting what they need?
Mr. Protas. A recent study by researchers at the University
of Minnesota found food-insecurity rates about 27 percent for
veterans who were returning from the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and these are astronomically high rates and very
concerning.
It was mentioned before about the economy that is booming,
and I just want to say that the economy is not booming for
everyone. That jobs are not available in every community,
especially in rural communities, and we also have many people
who are transitioning from military service, who are taking
low-paying jobs and experience underemployment; maybe it is a
part-time job without benefits, maybe they are cobbling
together a couple of part-time jobs. That underemployment rate
was recently documented for recently returning veterans at a
rate substantially higher than the civilian population. I think
that is part of the situation here and we need to do a better
job for those who are transitioning to make sure that they are
aware of the benefits that can help them during that temporary
time of need.
Ms. Hollywood. Income invariability, I think--income
variability, too, I think is a key component here, because
people go from getting a steady paycheck on active duty and
then suddenly they are thrown into this crisis where they are
piecemealing various jobs together in order to get a solid
paycheck.
Mr. Pappas. Sure. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Pappas.
I would now like to recognize Mr. Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks to all of you for being here, because what we are
talking about--and especially the children of servicemembers--
if kids are hungry, they cannot learn, pure and simple. When
you think about the things we do in schools because the kids do
not have food at home to eat or when they go home on Friday
afternoon for the weekend and we send backpacks full of food
home with them because of their homelife situation puts them at
risk, so I thank you for what you are doing. I have kind of a
hodgepodge of questions here based upon the testimony that each
of you gave.
Mr. Protas, you used the example of Tim. Was he in the VA
system?
Mr. Protas. He was not receiving healthcare in the VA
system, no.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Was that by choice?
Mr. Protas. I am not sure that he qualified for medical
care through VA. His disability was not a service-related
disability; it was a job-related disability, so I am not sure.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Well, the reason I ask questions like
that is because, you know, data counts and when we use examples
of things, I want to make sure we do--because what we are
trying to do here as the committee--it does not make any
difference which side of the alley you are on--to understand
what our role here, as Congress is, to do the right thing, in
this case, for veterans and their families.
For the whole panel, could each of you give a rough
number--this does not have to be accurate--a rough-percentage
breakdown of the veterans that you interact with who are inside
or outside the VA system, kind of like I just asked about Tim--
60/40, 70/30--what do you think?
Mr. Protas. I think it is maybe 60/40--60 outside of the
VA, 40 in.
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Ms. Hollywood. Sir, our survey does not address that
specific question. Our survey, specifically--the data that we
gather, approximately 85 percent of our respondents are
military family members----
Mr. Bergman. They are active-duty?
Ms. Hollywood. Active-duty. Then the other 15 percent are
family members and the other 15 percent are active-duty and
veterans.
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Mr. Hall. Sir, a significant portion of our Feeding Heroes
program, sir, is active-duty military families. Within the
veteran community, we do not have a mechanism to track how many
are actively engaged with the VA versus those who are not, so,
unfortunately, I just do not have that data.
Mr. Bergman. What could the--and this is not a question to
be answered here, but, again, I would really appreciate a
response--because active-duty, Camp Pendleton, 32nd Street, you
know, Balboa Hospital, North Island, Coronado, okay, what
could--again, not to be answered now, unless you have a quick
solution you have already thought of--these men and women are
stationed there. They are active-duty. They are full-time. In
most cases or many cases, they are either living onboard base
or they are getting their Basic Allowance Housing (BAH) out in
town, okay. I am guessing BAH is relative to the cost-of-living
in San Diego, okay.
Is there anything that the--and these people are full-time
employees of the U.S. Government, so take it out of the
military and let us say we moved all the Forest Service
firefighters out there to be stationed temporarily in San Diego
to be jumpers in the event we had forest fires, okay: Could
they afford to live or is it just because San Diego is a cost-
of-living?
By the way, first of all, let me compliment you on your
talk about food waste and recapturing food, if you will.
Are you familiar with Anthony Bourdain's 2017, Wasted! The
Story of Food Waste?
Mr. Hall. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bergman. You know, that impacted me greatly when I
first saw it. What saddened me is we have got 8, soon-to-be 10
grandkids--and we are now great-grandparents, so we are now
looking at three generations down--what saddened me about that
movie was it cannot be shown in middle schools or any school,
for that matter, because of the language in it. So, if you
could impact your fellow filmmakers out there--not that you are
in the film business--to make it middle-school presentable,
because the messaging we are talking about here is building
resiliency.
In the military we have families who are committed to the
country. It is our responsibility to be committed to them, but
in building that resiliency within the family, within that
servicemember so the family can survive and thrive when the
servicemember has gone to the fight--and I know I am going over
a minute or so, Mr. Chairman, if you will allow me to
continue--but the idea is that when they leave active-duty,
they have served honorably, they are end of active-duty, and
they are out in the civilian workforce, can families, in your
particular case, afford to live in San Diego?
If they got out--they served 4 or 8 years honorably and
they got out at the E5 or E6 level or something like that, they
do not have a pension because they did not serve 20 years, what
do you tell them?
Mr. Hall. It is increasingly hard, General--I am sorry--
Congressman.
Mr. Bergman. No, that is okay. It is okay here. It is
accepted. You just cannot say that in the Armed Services
Committee.
Mr. Hall. Thank you, sir.
It is increasingly difficult to understand San Diego's
complex housing equation. Our cost-of-living is now about 40
percent higher than the national average, so it is unreasonable
to expect that folks in the economic condition that you have
described are going to be able to easily locate, find housing,
and support their families in San Diego.
Unfortunately, our active-duty military families do not get
to make that choice--they are stationed in San Diego--and when
their families arrive, the BAH is not sufficient to support
them. We have many families traveling from as far away as
Riverside and Imperial Counties to work.
Mr. Bergman. I know the roadways very well, but San Diego
has one problem because of your cost-of-living. San Francisco
probably has a similar problem. Places like New York, Boston,
D.C. have a similar problem to that, as well.
My district happens to be very rural and remote. We have a
slightly different problem; usually the tyranny of distance and
the availability of we need more, you know, good-paying jobs,
because the economy is on fire in a positive way, not in a
wildfire sort of way.
The point is--okay, I see a hand coming up--Mr. Protas.
When Mr. Protas is done answering, I will yield back, sir.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Bergman.
Mr. Protas. Sure. Just quickly, thank you for raising the
issue about currently serving military families. I agree with
Mr. Hall that the basic allowance for housing is a barrier and
we have tried in the past in the Farm Bill context, to have
that basic allowance for housing excluded as income.
There is been an opportunity in the National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA). We worked very closely with the
National Military Family Association and Congresswoman Davis
and Congressman Young for a bipartisan solution for a military
family basic needs allowance. It would be an allowance to help
junior-enlisted personnel who have larger households who really
struggle to make ends meet and do not qualify for SNAP, even
though they need it because the BAH is counted.
There is something that Congress can do. Congressman Levin
has been a cosponsor of that provision, and thank you very
much. We would love to see that taken care of in the next NDAA
to make sure that those military families are taken care of.
As you mentioned, too, the children in military families
are a next-generation issue. When families today who are in the
military are struggling or even for veterans who have children,
those children are much more likely to go into service
themselves, and if they experience food insecurity as children,
they are more likely to experience obesity and diet-related
health conditions that may not make them fit to serve. The
Mission: Readiness organization of retired admirals and
generals has really prioritized this. So, it is not only an
issue for readiness now, but for recruitment down the road.
Mr. Levin. Thanks.
Mr. Bergman, I resemble the remark of living in a high-cost
area. It is very true, but we are not going to solve all the
reasons for that. Certainly, it is not the auspices of this
discussion. I think this discussion is a fairly simple one,
which is: Are we going to allow veterans to go hungry?
I think the answer should be equally simple: We cannot
allow veterans to go hungry. Not one veteran in need should go
hungry, period.
With that, I would like to recognize Mr. Barr.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, again, Chairman Levin for your
leadership and holding this hearing.
I could not agree with you more: We should not have a
single veteran in this country food insecure.
I want to thank our second panel for your organizations,
for your dedication, for your work in fighting this problem. I
have to give a shout-out to my food pantries back home in
Kentucky, who I know serve many veterans. God's Pantry--Mr.
Hall, you may know Michael Halligan; he does a great job and it
is a great organization--and there is a great network of food
pantries within God's Pantry's network in Central and Eastern
Kentucky--and Tamara Sandberg, who leads our whole statewide
effort in this regard.
I also want to compliment our agriculture commissioner back
home in Kentucky who is doing some innovative things to address
food insecurity, Commissioner Ryan Quarles. He is working very
closely with our food pantry network back in Kentucky.
Mr. Protas, I want to kind of explore a little bit more,
the conversation that you were having with Ranking Member
Bilirakis about the temporary nature of SNAP, and, obviously, I
appreciate your comment that the temporary nature--and Mr.
Hall, as well--that the temporary nature of SNAP certainly is
applicable to able-bodied, work-capable adults, but obviously
should not necessarily apply to a senior citizen, someone who
is disabled.
I would just remind everybody that, of course, the
underlying bipartisan statute does not apply--the work
requirements do not apply to disabled individuals, as far as I
read it. That is not--it does not appear to be at issue.
I do take seriously, Mr. Protas, your good point that in
Maine, for example, and other places, where there may be--and
rural areas--I represent these exact places that you are
describing--in rural places, where even in a booming economy,
there is underemployment, there is difficulty in finding those
7 million job openings in those particular economic places. As
I read the proposed regulation from the USDA, it looks like
they are taking that into account, because it moves to an area-
specific request for waivers, rather than sweeping statewide
waivers.
I would invite you to comment on that.
Mr. Protas. Sure. One point about disability, those who are
recognized or properly recognized disabilities are exempted
from work requirements, but many people fall through the
cracks, and I think it would be wrong to discount that, that
there are many people with mental health disabilities or
physical disabilities that do not get fully recognized. Part of
that may be because of economic barriers, because they cannot
afford to go to a doctor to get the proper documentation. There
are many hoops that people have to jump through sometimes to
get their disability properly certified, so----
Mr. Barr. I think that is a fair point and we should
probably work together to address that, but when you are
talking about a bona fide, non-disabled person, you do agree
that this should be a temporary program?
Mr. Protas. It should be a temporary program for those who
are not able to work and who have opportunities available to
them.
As far as the proposed rule change, States--it is limiting
State flexibilities. It was not just flexibilities about
statewide waivers; there were area waivers that were currently
exercised.
I do not know in Kentucky if you feel that USDA has a
better sense about the job opportunities than your State
officials--I think the way the 1996 welfare reform law worked
is that there was a certain amount of flexibility for States to
seek those waivers, knowing the job opportunities in their
communities. They know best what is----
Mr. Barr. I think that is a fair point, but as I read the
proposed rulemaking, the move to area-specific request for
waivers make sense because the States can apply for those in
those pockets in Rural Kentucky where we do have difficult
labor-market conditions.
One other point I read in the regulation that is not
received a lot of attention, the proposed rule continues the
use of exemptions for adults who are having difficulty entering
the workforce. You are aware of that. I mean, that seems, to
me, to address a lot of the concerns that you otherwise might
have with the rule.
Mr. Protas. There is actually--there is a continuation of
those exemptions. I believe in the proposed rule, there is an
elimination of the carryover of exemptions. That is a concern;
it actually limits the number of exemptions.
I am not aware that every State has fully taken advantage
of those exemptions to waive. My concern and Mazon's concern is
that it is limiting State flexibilities and it is limiting the
options to help those who are really struggling.
Mr. Barr. Well, I really do appreciate your work and I
appreciate your feedback on this and I certainly will continue
to monitor USDA as it implements this because we obviously want
these great organizations to continue to serve our veterans
when there is a real need and we also want them to encourage
work where we can.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Barr.
Now, I would like to recognize Mr. Meuser.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We are, of course, the Veterans' Affairs Committee here,
where it focuses on veterans, not necessarily the entire
population, although we care greatly about that, as well. No
veteran should go hungry--I think that that is understood--and
whatever procedures and perhaps legislation or actions that
need to be taken, we need to simply do a better job in assuring
that that occurs.
Now, related to your organizations, and I stated earlier
that I am very familiar with various food banks, very often the
community has to step up and you need campaign fundraising
events and things of that nature and other Government
participation.
We are, to an extent, talking about a broader issue here,
and that is SNAP. The thing is, if you look back at the data on
the number--the average participant and the population of those
that receive SNAP benefits over the years, something does not
add up.
What I mean by that is this, if you go back to 1992, there
was a recession, so there were 25 million people on SNAP. As
the economy improved, as you would expect, the number of people
receiving the supplemental nutritional program reduced quite a
bit--went down to 17 million--in 2000. Then it crept up into
2007 to 26 million, and then we had the so-called Great
Recession, so, granted, you would expect it to increase;
however, it increased from 28 million in 2008, those on the
SNAP program, to 45 million in 2000--or excuse me--47 million
in 2013, 45 million in 2015. That is equivalent to the
population of 22 states, the entire population of 22 states was
on the SNAP program.
2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, we have a far-better economy than
we did 5 years ago. We have many jobs that are going
unfulfilled. The Farm Bill last year did have the idea of some
work requirements. I believe it was between the ages of 19 and
56, if you are able-bodied and not caring for children, you
needed to work and if you still worked--30 hours I think it
was--and if you still worked and your income met the demands,
then you would receive the SNAP benefits. It did not get
passed.
What we now have done over the last 2 years is not change
the criteria to my understanding, but enforced eligibility
requirements. We now have 34 million people, okay, last year,
34 million versus years past. So, in 2000, it was 17 million.
In 2019, after reducing it, double that--double that. That is
still 18 states--18 states, all population on the SNAP program.
I guess it is a--you have to understand it is a reasonable
question with hundreds of thousands of jobs being created, a
very strong economy, a 3.5 percent--not my district, mind you--
it is higher--so I get it. There is still a lot of work to be
done and more people need to be included in this strong
economy, but overall it is going very well, and so placing
reasonable work requirements on SNAP recipients--and by the
way, if they cannot get a job, the Farm Bill called for 20
hours of volunteer service would be sufficed and clearly would
not have raised their income levels that much. They still would
have been recipients.
I just find it hard to believe that we do not want to
really take into consideration levels of accountability and
have an organized approach so that the money is there for those
who need it. I make that comment and I ask for your comments in
response.
Mr. Protas. I think it is alarming how many Americans
struggle with food insecurity and I think rather than the
concern being directed at how many people participate in SNAP,
there should be concern about how many people struggle. Thirty-
six million Americans who are currently served by SNAP, you say
it is 18 states--that is larger than the entire population of
Canada.
What is wrong in this country that that many Americans
struggle to put food on the table?
In terms of the increases in SNAP participation----
Mr. Meuser. I could argue, what is wrong with the
organization and accountability and enforcement of eligibility
requirements is what is trying to be done.
Mr. Protas. Well, I think you also need to recognize that
SNAP helps the working poor and the vast majority of working-
age adults who can work, do work. So, we have low-income
households who are receiving extra help that they need from
SNAP, people who are working two or three part-time jobs.
There is something wrong with----
Mr. Meuser. My time is over, so I do recognize it, but it
is at a very, very high level--it includes will 18 states--34
million versus 20 years ago, 17 million; that is a bit of a
disparity.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Meuser.
With no further questions, we can begin to bring this
hearing to a close. I really want to thank our witnesses on
both, the first and the second panel, and I would like to--I
will have a brief close, but I would like to thank my friend,
the ranking member, Mr. Bilirakis, for a brief closing
statement.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Briefly--again, I really appreciate you holding this
hearing and, again, we got some answers today, but we need some
more answers--obviously, we need the data and then giving the
USDA the authority statutorily to provide this data, as well,
for our veterans.
Again, no veteran should go hungry. I mean, all of us agree
with that. I mean, we serve on this committee. It is our top
priority, I understand--at least mine and I know the
chairman's--to take care of our veterans and their families.
I do believe--and, again, we need to explore this even more
and I really appreciate your testimony--but I do believe long-
term--we have to think long-term--and I think all of you agree
that job training so that our veterans can provide for their
families in the future is really the key.
Short-term-wise, sure, absolutely. No veteran should go
hungry, and we will continue to work on this issue.
I appreciate everyone's input today, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Levin. I thank the ranking member for his work on this
and look forward to continuing to work with him on a bipartisan
basis to address this pressing issue.
I thank my colleagues on both sides of the aisle for their
thoughtful questions and comments today. You know, it is an
interesting day that we are holding this hearing. We are voting
on a war-powers resolution later today and I am thinking of the
men and women of extraordinary character who are serving this
country and sacrificing for our national security and the very
least we can do is provide our military families and our
veterans with food security; it is the very least we can do.
This committee asked earlier in this hearing how many
veterans will be impacted by the administration's proposed
changes to the SNAP program, and I appreciate that USDA agreed
to work with VA, to the very least, to try to provide us with
that data. That does not tell the whole story, does not go far
enough in my opinion.
Our veterans are more than statistics and, furthermore,
there are those veterans who are suffering from mental
illnesses who are undiagnosed. How is this decision going to
impact them? It would be definitely worth that discussion.
Hearing from veterans, themselves, I think is critically
important. I look forward to working with you all and to making
sure that that happens in the weeks and months ahead.
I am particularly concerned with how USDA will work with VA
to communicate better. I am concerned that USDA did not see fit
to have a representative here to hear from these non-
governmental experts in this area. It does not take an act of
Congress to pick up the phone, to communicate, to speak with
one another; it just takes a level of care and concern.
We set the highest expectations of our military to serve
our country and we need to set equally high expectations of
ourselves to serve them. We should not be allowing a single
veteran in need to go hungry ever.
If we want to serve veterans, we have to start by making
sure they are not hungry--this really is not that hard.
Again, I thank our witnesses for joining us today.
All members have 5 legislative days to revise and extend
their remarks and include additional materials.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statements of Witnesses

----------

Prepared Statement of Pamilyn Miller

Thank you Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and members of
the Subcommittee for the opportunity to discuss the role of the
nutrition assistance programs administered by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA) in serving the Nation's veterans. I am Pam Miller,
Administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service (FNS). FNS is
responsible for administering America's nutrition assistance programs,
which leverage the Nation's agricultural abundance to ensure every
American has access to wholesome, nutritious food, even when they face
challenging circumstances.
Every American owes an immeasurable debt to the veterans who have
served and fought to defend our Nation. The men and women who have
borne the perils and hardships to secure and protect our freedom and
our way of life have not only earned our respect and honor, they
deserve our support as they deal with the challenges of life after
military service.
At FNS, we operate programs that touch the lives of one in four
Americans every day. Our programs serve a broad range of households
with low-incomes to meet their nutritional needs - such as those of the
elderly, pregnant women, infants and young children - and operate in
settings where immediate access to food is important, such as schools
and child care facilities. While our programs are not targeted
specifically to veterans, they are available and designed to provide
benefits that veterans and their families may need, particularly when
they face difficult economic circumstances.
A recent USDA analysis of dietary intake data from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey found that, similar to other
Americans, veterans' well-being would benefit from improvements in
their diets. In particular, their consumption of added sugars and solid
fats is too high, and their consumption of fruits, vegetables, whole
grains and dairy products is too low relative to the Dietary Guidelines
for Americans.
The largest of our 15 nutrition assistance programs, the
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or SNAP, currently serves
about 36 million low-income people each month. Data from the American
Community Survey suggests that in calendar year 2017, about 1.3 million
veterans reported receiving SNAP at some point during the previous 12
months. This represented less than 3 percent of all SNAP participants.
In that same year, about 7 percent of all living veterans received
SNAP, while about 14 percent of all Americans received SNAP at some
point.
The Subcommittee has asked about the impact of the Administration's
SNAP reforms, both proposed and finalized, on veterans. Let me say at
the outset that because veteran status is not a condition of
eligibility for SNAP, meaning that veterans in need of food assistance
qualify for SNAP in the same way that other households do, based on
their income, assets, and other non-financial eligibility factors. For
that reason, we do not have veteran's status as part of the
administrative datasets that we use to estimate the impact of these
rules on different sub-groups of SNAP participants. Given the limited
number of veterans receiving benefits, survey data is also limited in
what it can reliably tell us. I will instead speak more generally about
the purpose and effects of our current and upcoming rules.
Let me begin by explaining the overall purpose of these regulatory
reforms, which is to use the authority we have under the current law,
including the 2018 Farm Bill, to administer SNAP, and all our nutrition
programs, as Congress intended and has specified in law. Overall, we
are seeking to achieve a more modern, equitable and effective SNAP
program.
The Food Stamp Program was launched in the 1930's, and today's
nationwide program was created in the 1970's. SNAP has grown and
evolved over time, and it is crucial to continue to make reforms to
improve customer service and integrity in the program. SNAP statute
provides USDA discretion to allow State agencies - SNAP's front-line
customer service organizations - flexibility in certain aspects of
administration. While this flexibility works well in several areas, in
some it has compromised the consistency of operations over time with
certain standards defined in statute, and even led to disparities in
benefits for similarly situated individuals and households simply
because of the State where they live. For this reason, and in
recognition of our responsibility to ensure the program operates
consistent with the law, a major portion of the Administration's SNAP
agenda seeks to strike a better balance between practical operational
flexibility and the national standards that define the program's
purpose and support its effectiveness. We have focused in three key
areas.
We recently announced changes to the criteria for when and where
states may apply for waivers of the time limit for able-bodied adults
without dependents between the ages of 18 and 49 - ``ABAWDs.'' This
rule does not apply to children, their parents, individuals over 50
including the elderly, pregnant women, or individuals with a
disability. The USDA definition in SNAP for individuals with a
disability automatically includes veterans who are totally disabled,
permanently homebound, or in need of regular aid and attendance, as
well as a surviving spouse or child of a veteran who is receiving VA
benefits and is considered permanently disabled, so they are also not
the subject to this time limit.
The statutory time limit only applies to work-capable adults
without children or other dependents. Long-standing SNAP statute sets
the limits for this subgroup to 3 months of benefits in a 3-year period
- unless they are working, volunteering, or participating in work
training for at least 20 hours per week, or participating in workfare,
for as little as 6 hours a week. States may waive these limits in areas
with an unemployment rate above 10 percent or where there are ``not
sufficient jobs.'' However, the previous regulations were defined so
loosely that counties with an unemployment rate as low as 2.5 percent
are included in currently waived areas. The recent final rule places
common-sense limits on such waivers. As a result of the new limits on
waivers, significantly more ABAWDs will be expected to work, volunteer,
and/or participate in a work program, or participate in workfare, in
order to receive SNAP for more than 3 months in a 36-month (3-year)
period.
Congress was clear that parents with dependent children in the
home, those over 50 years old including the elderly, those with a
disability, and pregnant women, are not subject to time limits. This
rule has no impact on such individuals, including the veterans among
them.
Congress also established a wide range of ways for individuals to
engage and maintain benefits; the rule did not make changes to existing
regulations in this area and FNS continues to encourage SNAP State
agencies to leverage SNAP-funded Employment & Training (E&T) programs,
as well as services provided by other Federal agencies, including the
VA work programs, State and county governments, and local providers, to
meet the needs of their participants working toward self-sufficiency.
In addition to providing for work and various training programs to
count toward the work requirement, current law and regulations also
include volunteering for just 6 hours a week through a workfare
program, perhaps at a local food bank, as a way to maintain SNAP
eligibility while gaining valuable work experience. Similarly, Federal
law explicitly exempts certain individuals from the time limit,
including those unable to work due to physical or mental challenges -
challenges that some veterans may face. An individual does not need to
be permanently disabled or receiving disability benefits to be exempted
from the time limit under this criterion. Moreover, when an
individual's ``unfitness for work'' is obvious to the SNAP eligibility
worker, States have the discretion to exempt the individual without
documentation from a medical office or other source. Federal rules
allow States this flexibility to prevent placing unnecessary burden on
individuals who are clearly unfit for employment but may be undiagnosed
and/or disconnected from supportive services or benefits, such as
people with apparent mental illnesses and the chronically homeless.
States are responsible for assessing an individual's fitness for work
methodically and comprehensively, typically when certifying applicants
for benefits.
To be clear, the rule did not change these responsibilities, nor
did it take away states' statutory flexibility to waive the time-limit
in areas of high unemployment and to exempt a percentage of their
caseload, as established in law, at their full discretion. What the
rule did accomplish was to establish clear standards for applying for
and receiving waivers. The strong economy is creating opportunities for
all, and this Administration's view is that now is the time to help
more Americans enter, re-enter, and succeed in the workforce -
including veterans.
Another rulemaking, which we are working to finalize, proposed to
eliminate a loophole called ``broad-based categorical eligibility''
that has been used to provide SNAP benefits to households without a
robust eligibility determination by the conferring TANF program. This
would end the practice of allowing households to be eligible for SNAP
by simply being handed a brochure from another Federal program.
Limiting this eligibility rule to those receiving specific, concrete,
and work-supporting benefits would retain categorical eligibility's
advantage of streamlining program administration, but in a fiscally
prudent way. And it promotes integrity by better aligning eligibility
with the income and resource standards set explicitly in statute. The
comment period for the proposed rule is closed, and the agency is
examining comments as we contemplate a final rule.
The third major reform we have proposed would truly standardize and
modernize the method for setting State SNAP standard utility allowances
across the country. For many years, SNAP rules have allowed states to
use their own methods to establish a standard utility allowance in lieu
of documenting actual utility costs. Such standards can be a useful
program efficiency, but the variation in State methods for determining
the allowance amount has resulted in the inconsistent treatment of
similarly situated households across State lines. Moreover, it has been
so long since State SUA methodologies were assessed that some states
cannot explain their original SUA or even the year it was set. USDA's
proposal would replace the patchwork of outdated and inconsistent State
methods for setting these allowances with a modernized, uniform
approach based on up-to-date data on actual household utility costs in
each State. The proposal would also replace an antiquated ``telephone
allowance'' with a telecommunications allowance that includes the cost
of basic internet service - no longer a luxury, but often a necessity
for school, work, and job search for families, including veterans and
their families.
The Department recognizes and earnestly undertakes its role to
provide SNAP benefits to those who truly need them, while ensuring that
SNAP participants have a launch pad to a better life.
Let me emphasize further that these are not the only improvements
we are pursuing in SNAP. One that may be of particular interest to
veterans that participate in SNAP is a pilot Congress authorized in the
Farm Bill for online SNAP purchasing. The Secretary articulated the
core principle behind this innovative effort - ``People who receive
SNAP benefits should have the opportunity to shop for food the same way
more and more Americans shop for food - by ordering and paying for
groceries online. As technology advances, it is important for SNAP to
advance too.'' The pilot began this spring in New York with three
retailer chains. The pilot will expand to more states in 2020. For
veterans who may face mobility challenges due to age or service-related
injuries or disabilities, or those living in rural areas, this kind of
service can be particularly important.
Similarly, SNAP is only one of many USDA nutrition assistance
programs that provide support to veterans and their families. Low-
income veterans starting new families may benefit from the WIC program,
which safeguards the health of low-income women, infants, and children
up to age 5 who are at nutritional risk by providing nutritious foods
to supplement diets, information on healthy eating, and referrals to
health care. We have worked with the WIC community, including State
administrators and clinic staff, business partners and participants, to
explore ways to enhance the food package and improve the WIC shopping
experience - with implementation of electronic benefit transfer (EBT),
a critical improvement strategy - and questions about access, and the
potential role of technology to simplify the client application and
participation experience. The President's Budget has consistently
funded WIC, our largest discretionary program, to ensure sufficient
funding for all eligible women, infants and children who wish to
participate.
The children and grandchildren of veterans can rely on the
nutritious meals provided through the Child Nutrition Programs,
including the school meals programs, the Child and Adult Care Food
Program, and the summer feeding programs, to get a healthy start in
life. USDA has worked closely with program operators to make sure that
they can serve children well. Through customer service roundtables and
other venues, we heard that school nutrition professionals needed
targeted adjustments to existing meal standards to ensure that school
meals were both nutritious and appealing to the students being served.
So Secretary Perdue extended school meal flexibilities related to
flavored milk, whole grains, and sodium. We also heard that the
education and training standards for nutrition professionals USDA
implemented under the last reauthorization put strain on small and
rural school districts where a disproportionate number of veterans
live, and we have responded by revising the rules, in accordance with
the law, to allow these districts more hiring flexibility. We are now
working on additional flexibilities in schools and in the Summer Food
Service Program.
FNS also collaborates and coordinates with other USDA agencies to
better serve veterans. The Department's Military Veteran Agricultural
(MVA) Liaison, first authorized by the 2014 Farm Bill, coordinates
across the Department to provide information, resources and support for
active duty military and veterans interested in agriculture, and to
facilitate relationships within and beyond USDA to make sure military
veterans have full access to resources and services to help them
succeed in civilian life. FNS works with the MVA Liaison to ensure
eligible service members and their families have an understanding of
nutrition assistance eligibility criteria, employment opportunities for
transitioning members as they arise, and available nutrition resources
to assist the family toward a healthy lifestyle.
FNS's work in support of our Nation's veterans is just one facet of
USDA support.
Veterans make up 13 percent of on-board employees, and the
Department provides on the job training through apprenticeship programs
as agricultural commodity graders, wildland firefighters and food
inspectors. Many USDA agencies have programs focused on veterans:

The Economic Research Service prepares valuable research
related to veterans, including the diet quality report that I
mentioned, and a forthcoming report that examines food security among
households with working-age veterans.

The National Institute of Food and Agriculture supports
veterans in the agricultural sector through programs such as the
Enhancing Agricultural Opportunities for Military Veterans Competitive
Grants Program (AgVets), the Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development
Program (BFRDP) - which devotes at least 5 percent of its funding to
serving military veterans, the National AgrAbility Project for military
veterans, and a range of other partnerships to support and strengthen
military families.

Under USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service,
veterans receive preference and higher payment rates for certain
conservation programs including the Environmental Quality Incentives
Program (EQIP), Agricultural Conservation Easements Program (ACEP), and
Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP). These voluntary conservation
programs provide financial and technical assistance to producers to
address concerns, strengthen operations, protect, and restore
conservation practices.

The Farm Service Agency provides farm loan programs to
help veterans purchase farmland, buy equipment, and make repairs and
upgrades.

USDA's rural housing programs can help veterans become
homeowners, repair or improve their existing homes, and offset the
costs of rent. Veterans starting or expanding rural businesses may seek
USDA funding and technical support in the form of loans, loan
guarantees, processing and marketing of products, and energy efficiency
improvements.

USDA's Office of Advocacy and Outreach works with states
and organizations to create programs to assist veterans with
transitioning to farming, ranching, and other agricultural jobs. One
key program is the Outreach and Assistance for Socially Disadvantaged
Farmers and Ranchers and Veteran Farmers and Ranchers Program, which
provides training, outreach and technical assistance to underserved and
veteran farmers and ranchers.

In closing, I would like to thank the Committee for the opportunity
to join you, and again emphasize our interest in and dedication to
providing America's veteran heroes with the service and support that
they deserve. I am confident that we can continue to do so while
advancing this Administration's broader nutrition assistance priorities
- to improve customer service for partners and participants, to protect
and enhance integrity, and to strengthen the bonds between FNS programs
and a better life through employment.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Thomas O'Toole

Good afternoon, Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today on the topics of ending Veteran
hunger, our partnership with the Department of Agriculture (USDA) to
provide nutrition assistance to Veterans, and economic factors that may
contribute to Veteran suicide. I am accompanied today by Ms. Christine
Going, VHA Co-Chairperson for Ensuring Veteran Food Security Workgroup.

Introduction

Food insecurity is a social determinant of health along with
homelessness. Research published in 2015 in the Public Health Nutrition
journal, found that Veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan
disproportionately report experiencing food insecurity. Approximately
27 percent of those studied reported food insecurity. These Veterans
tended to be younger, unmarried/unpartnered, unemployed or working in
lower incomes positions, and living in households with more children
compared to other veterans. Understanding the behavioral, social, and
environmental significance of social determinants of health is the
first step in keeping people healthy.
The link between food insecurity and health issues needs to be part
of any population health strategy. Research published in the 2017
Health Research and Educational Trust journal showed 40 percent of
factors contributing to health issues are social or economic, compared
to 20 percent that are medical care issues. This research confirms the
relationship between food insecurity and the poor management of health
conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, HIV, and depression. A
review of socio-economic factors, such as the inability to afford food,
physical environmental factors including lack of access to a grocery
store, and clinical care factors, such as the lack of access to care,
all have effects on overall health.
The cycle of food insecurity and is most prominent in low income
populations. As a person becomes more unwell, the likelihood of missing
work and health care costs increase, and the financial burden leading
to difficult financial tradeoff decisions all fuel the continuation of
the food insecurity cycle.

Food Insecurity Linked to Mental Health and Suicide Risk

Suicide is a complex issue with no single cause. It is a national
public health issue that affects people from all walks of life, not
just Veterans. Suicide is often the result of a multifaceted
interaction of risk and protective factors at the individual,
community, and societal levels. Thus, VA has made suicide prevention
its top clinical priority and is implementing a comprehensive public
health approach to reach all Veterans--including those who do not
receive VA benefits or health services.
VA's promise to enrolled Veterans remains the same: to promote,
preserve, and restore Veterans' health and well-being; to empower and
equip them to achieve their life goals; and to provide state-of-the-art
treatments. Veterans possess unique characteristics and experiences
related to their military service that may increase their risk of
suicide. They also tend to possess skills and protective factors, such
as resilience or a strong sense of belonging to a group. Our Nation's
Veterans are strong, capable, valuable members of society, and it is
imperative that we connect with them early as they transition into
civilian life, facilitate that transition, and support them over their
lifetime.
The relationship between food insecurity and known risk factors for
suicide in the Veteran population is emerging. According to research
published in 2016 in the journal, SSM-Population Health, Veterans who
report food insecurity are more likely to have poor mental and physical
health those without food insecurity--studies of the general population
revealed similar findings. In 2018, the Women's Health Issues journal
published research that found food insufficiencies contribute to higher
risks for mental health conditions in women Veterans. In addition, data
published in 2019 in the Aging and Mental Health journal found people
who experience food insecurity are more likely to report suicidal
ideation, suicidal behavior, or both. Research published in 2017 in the
American Journal of Preventive Medicine even found a dose-response
relationship--as food insecurity increases, one's mental health becomes
poorer and vice versa.
In 2018, VA published its National Strategy for Preventing Veteran
Suicide, which guides VA's efforts for suicide prevention. This 10-year
strategy provides a framework for identifying priorities, organizing
efforts, and focusing national attention and community resources to
prevent suicide among Veterans through a broad public health approach
with an emphasis on comprehensive, community-based engagement. This
approach is grounded in four key focus areas as follows:

Primary prevention that focuses on preventing suicidal
behavior before it occurs;

Whole Health offerings that consider factors beyond
mental health, such as physical health, social connectedness, and life
events;

Application of data and research that emphasizes
evidence-based approaches that can be tailored to fit the needs of
Veterans in local communities; and

Collaboration that educates and empowers diverse
communities to participate in suicide prevention efforts through
coordination.

Through the National Strategy we are implementing broad, community-
based prevention initiatives, driven by data, to connect Veterans in
and outside our system to health care with support on national and
local facility levels.

Ensuring Veteran Food Security Workgroup

In early 2016, VHA created the Ensuring Veteran Food Security
Workgroup. The purpose of the interdisciplinary group was to
collaborate with a number of government and non-profit agencies,
including but not limited to the USDA, the Department of Defense (DoD)
and a non-profit organization MAZON, to focus on the issue of food
insecurity, the identification of Veterans at risk, VHA staff training,
and the coordination of resources and initiatives to support the
Veterans for whom we care.
The VHA group membership includes staff from various VHA Offices,
including Nutrition and Food Services, Social Work Services, Community
Engagement, Homeless Patient Aligned Care Teams, Homeless Programs,
Nursing Service, Voluntary Service, Veterans Canteen Service, Employee
Education System, and ad hoc members from Health Informatics, as well
as research consultants.
The Ensuring Veteran Food Security Workgroup charter outlined the
objectives for the workgroup, which included the development of an
initial screening tool for Veterans relating to food insecurity; a
process for enrollment of eligible Veterans into the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP); the creation of agreements with
community non-profit organizations and other government agencies; the
establishment of nutrition support and resources specific to the needs
of Veterans with food insecurity issues; and the development and
coordination of existing and enhanced training programs for staff on
the policy and resources and collaborations that are created to support
food security among our Veteran population.
In October 2017, VHA rolled out a national food insecurity
screening tool as part of the regular screenings that occur during VA
Primary Care visits. All Veterans are screened on an annual basis
unless they are a resident of a nursing home or long-term care
facility. If the Veteran is screened positive for food insecurity, a
Veteran will be screened every 3 months thereafter. Veterans positively
identified for food insecurity are offered a referral to a social
worker and a dietitian, and VA further assesses for clinical risk and
complications.

Progress Made from the Ensuring Veteran Food Security Workgroup

As of November 30, 2019, the data show the following information:

Total number of Veterans screened - 6,224,359;

Total number of Veterans screened positive - 93,815;

A review of our data underscores some important observations.
First, the overall incidence of food insecurity among the entire
Veteran population appears to be low based on the six million Veterans
screened to date. However, there is extremely high food insecurity
among certain types of Veterans - specifically, our Operation Enduring
Freedom/Operation Iraqi Freedom/Operation New Dawn Veterans, homeless
Veterans, and Veterans with limited access to food (such as those who
lack of transportation or reside in a `food dessert') - whose rates of
reported food insecurity exceed the USDA national average for 2018 of
11.8 percent. Second, the screening tool utilized by VHA is different
from what is used in other surveys and was designed to capture real
time incidence of food insecurity to allow for referrals at the time of
screening. VHA's screen is different from the 18-question survey used
by the USDA which assesses food insecurity over a 12-month period
compared with VHA's screener which queries the previous 3 months. The
VHA screening question is based on the one question screener developed
by Kleinman et al. from Massachusetts General Hospital and validated in
a community clinic-based sample of 1750 families. That survey had high
sensitivity and specificity and time-to-time reliability when compared
with the USDA Household Food Security Scale. The VA team worked with
these researchers when modifying it for a VA ambulatory care setting
with findings from the VA trial published in peer reviewed literature.
The Workgroup has been involved in several activities that assist
food insecure Veterans. Among these are:

Ensuring that the screening tool has been installed at
every VHA site that offers primary care across the country;

Presenting to Congress at the Educational congressional
Meeting in support of the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 (the 2018
Farm Bill);

Supporting the expansion of the number of facilities
involved in the VA/Feeding America program, which establishes onsite or
mobile food pantries on VA property (There are currently 17 pantries
serving more than 40,000 Veterans and their families with roughly
700,000 meals. This is in addition to the approximately 40 reported
food pantries already onsites that are managed outside of the current
Memorandum of Agreement with Feeding America.);

Working with USDA and MAZON to create Veteran-specific
SNAP educational materials;

Establishing relationships with like-minded stakeholders,
including Food Research and Action Center, the National Military
Families Coalition;

Providing two national webinars to educate clinical staff
on the clinical reminder screening tool, the impact of food insecurity
on medical care management (diabetes/hypoglycemia), and the use of data
to drive change on the local level;

Developing a Toolkit for Registered Dietitians to support
food insecure Veterans; and

Presenting at the 2019 Anti-Hunger Policy Conference on
VHA's response to food insecurity among enrolled Veterans.

Next Steps

VA plans to continue working to identify Veterans with low food
security and connect them to resources that will alleviate food
insecurity. With that in mind, our goals and projects for the coming
year include:

Expanding food insecurity screening to acute care
patients and Veterans seeking health care through emergency
departments;

Continuing to support the expansion of the Feeding
America/VA relationship;

Maximizing the utilization of the food insecurity
screener throughout VHA to include generating local data that will
drive interventions;

Evaluating the possibility of modifying our current
screening tool language to be more specific in its ability to identify
the different degrees of food insecurity based on clinical feedback;
and

Conducting data analysis on the characteristics/
demographics of those Veterans screening positive for food insecurity.

Conclusion

VA believes food security, like housing, is a basic human necessity
and is a major determinant of health. There is a relationship between
food insecurity and the management of a variety of health care issues,
including mental health. One Veteran experiencing hunger or food
insecurity is one Veteran too many. VA is committed to providing the
high-quality care our Veterans have earned and deserve. We continue to
improve access and services to meet the nutritional needs of Veterans,
and we support all efforts to decrease Veteran hunger.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
am prepared to answer any questions you or the Committee may have.
______

Prepared Statement of Josh Protas

Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and distinguished members
of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Economic
Opportunity, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
My name is Josh Protas, and I am proud to serve as Vice President
of Public Policy for MAZON: A Jewish Response to Hunger, a national
social benefit corporation working to end hunger among people of all
faiths and backgrounds in the U.S. and Israel. Inspired by Jewish
values and ideals, MAZON takes to heart the responsibility to care for
the vulnerable in our midst without judgment or precondition. In
Deuteronomy 15: 7-8, we are commanded: ``If there is among you a poor
person, one of your kin, in any of your towns within your land which
God gives you, you shall not harden your heart or shut your hand
against them, but you shall open your hand to them, and lend them
sufficient for their needs, whatever they may be.'' Founded in 1985,
MAZON identifies emerging and persistent hunger needs and works to
promote policies to address these needs. This work is informed by
longstanding partnerships with hundreds of food banks, pantries, and
other anti-hunger direct service agencies as well as more recent
relationships with direct service providers and advocates for veterans,
military families, Tribal nations, rural communities, college students,
and seniors.
Our Board of Directors has made hunger among veterans and military
families a core priority for our education and advocacy efforts. We
hold a strong interest in the development of effective and
compassionate Federal food and nutrition policies for veterans and
military families. This is not MAZON's first time appearing before
Congress on this topic. Four years ago, Abby Leibman, MAZON's President
and CEO, spoke as a witness before the House Committee on Agriculture
Subcommittee on Nutrition to discuss military and veteran hunger. In
2015, MAZON sponsored the first ever congressional briefing on the
issue of veteran food insecurity, and in January 2018, MAZON
coordinated and moderated a congressional briefing about ``Veterans in
the Farm Bill.'' Each of these occasions proved to be significant in
shining a more prominent spotlight on these long-ignored issues and
resulted in positive steps by Federal agencies to take a more active
role in collecting data about and addressing veteran food insecurity.
While there has been some progress in addressing veteran food
insecurity in America made by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) since 2015, that
progress has been extremely modest compared to the severity of the
problem. If Congress and Federal agencies do not take timely and
concerted efforts to prioritize this critical issue, it will only get
worse and become more difficult to resolve. This is in part due to the
harmful impact of administrative changes to the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) promulgated by the current Administration,
which are condoned and even celebrated by some Members of Congress.
There are tens of thousands of veterans struggling to adjust and
survive following the transition from military service. Some have
recently returned from combat, while others are elderly and facing
challenges they thought they had long overcome. Far too often, this
struggle leads to despair because there is either an actual, or
perceived, lack of support; and available support is tinged with stigma
or shame, involves an overly complicated application process, or
veterans simply do not know that help exists or how to access it. The
result for those of limited financial means is often a downward spiral
that triggers despair, hopelessness, and tragically can lead to self-
harm or even suicide. In fact, recent findings from the National Bureau
of Economic Research suggests ways to address the troubling correlation
between economic hardship and ``deaths of despair.'' The study found a
significant reduction in non-drug suicides among adults with high
school education or less due to simple policy interventions that
improved their economic well-being: an increase in the minimum wage and
the earned income tax credit.\1\ As part of the efforts to address the
recent suicide epidemic by veterans and military service members,
policymakers must recognize the vital importance of Federal nutrition
assistance programs like SNAP in helping to meet their basic needs. It
is clear that Members of Congress should support policy proposals that
expand access and participation in SNAP in an effort to strengthen the
program, not weaken it. Failing to make improvements to SNAP, as well
as failing to ensure that veterans are aware of and connected to the
program, ignores a valuable and effective tool in the campaign to end
veteran suicide.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Dow, WH; Godoy, A; Lowenstein, CA; Reich, M. ``Can Economic
Policies Reduce Deaths of Despair?'' The National Bureau of Economic
Research. April 2019. https://www.nber.org/papers/w25787.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The scope of food insecurity among veterans is complex, and we
simply need more data to be able to respond effectively to the needs of
America's food insecure veterans. What we do know is that SNAP helps
about 1.3 million low-income veterans, based on American Community
Survey data, and that about 7 percent of veterans live in households
that receive SNAP. Florida has the largest number of veterans
participating in SNAP (116,000), followed by Texas (97,000), California
(94,000), Pennsylvania (63,000), and New York (59,000).\2\ Several
years ago, Blue Star Families helpfully added questions about food
insecurity to its Annual Military Lifestyle Survey. However, we should
not have to rely solely on this survey--the Federal Government should
routinely gather comprehensive national data to better inform proactive
and robust policy responses to this unacceptable--yet solvable--
problem.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Number of Veterans Living in Households Where Someone
Participates in SNAP (2016-2018).'' December 20, 2019. Center on Budget
and Policy Priorities updated data from 2018 report and analysis of
data from the Census Bureau's American Community Survey: https://
www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/snap-helps-almost-14-million-low-
income-veterans-including-thousands-in.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Data about veteran SNAP participation only tell part of the story.
Appallingly, we do not know how many veterans are struggling with
hunger, without the assistance of SNAP.
A recent issue brief by Impaq International notes that among food
insecure veterans, less than one-third were in households receiving
SNAP, and among veterans in households with incomes below the poverty
threshold, only about 4 in 10 were in SNAP-recipient households.\3\
These findings should be deeply troubling to this Subcommittee--this
means that the majority of veterans who experience food insecurity do
not get the help they need and to which they are entitled. These
veterans struggle needlessly, and we fail them as a country when we
leave SNAP benefits that they desperately need on the table. If we take
the figure of 1.3 million veterans who participate in SNAP and then
project--based on the findings by Impaq International--how many more
should be receiving SNAP benefits, an estimated 4.3 million veterans
experience food insecurity but do not receive SNAP. Nearly 4.3 million
veterans who could have assistance available to them are instead are
struggling in vain for unacceptable reasons. Connecting these food
insecure veterans with SNAP would support better physical and mental
health outcomes, employment and economic security, and overall well-
being. It would also realize significant long-term health care savings
by preventively addressing costly diet-related chronic health
conditions. This simple but impactful action should be a top priority
for the VA, USDA, and Congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Pooler, P; Srinivasan, M; Mian, P; Miller, Z. ``Veterans and
Food Insecurity.'' Impaq International. November 2018. https://
www.impaqint.com/work/issue-briefs/veterans-and-food-insecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, we are deeply concerned about special populations of
veterans that face heightened rates of food insecurity:

In a study of post-9/11 veterans at the Minneapolis VA
Healthcare System, over one in four veterans (roughly 27 percent)
reported problems with food security--about twice the rate of the
general population.\4\

\4\ Widome, R; Jensen, A; Bangerter, A; Fu, S. ``Food Insecurity
Among Veterans of the U.S. Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.'' Public
Health Nutrition, 18(5), p. 844-849. May 2014. https://
www.cambridge.org/core/journals/public-health-nutrition/article/food-
insecurity-among-veterans-of-the-us-wars-in-iraq-and-afghanistan/
F03B64DD63287F2BE5F2067F3E5AC5FB.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recent academic research has noted that more than one in
four women veterans struggle with hunger and that this prevalence of
food insecurity is associated with delayed access to health care and
worse health outcomes.\5\
,
\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Nerain, K; Bean-Mayberry, B; Washington, DL; Canelo, IA;
Darling, JE; Yano, EM. ``Access to Care and Health Outcomes Among Women
Veterans Using Veterans Administration Health Care: Association With
Food Insufficiency.'' Women's Health Issues, 28(3). February 2018.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29475630.
\6\ Petersen, H. ``Our Veterans Shouldn't Go Hungry.'' U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, Vantage Point Blog. December 4, 2019.
https://www.blogs.va.gov/VAntage/69018/veterans-shouldnt-go-hungry/.

A recent study about ``Hunger & Homelessness at Worcester
State University,'' which is part of a growing body of research about
food insecurity among college students, found that an alarming 67
percent of student veterans reported being food insecure. While this
represents a small sample size from a single college campus, it
illustrates the need for additional data about the concerning level of
need among student veterans.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Saltsman, A; Fowler, M; Dogali, M; Johnston, G; Wetherell, O.
``Hunger & Homelessness at Worcester State University.'' Urban Action
Institute of Worcester State University and WSU's Department of Urban
Studies CityLab. March 2019. https://www.worcester.edu/WorkArea/
DownloadAsset.aspx'id=13534.

Rural and remote areas also experience higher rates of
poverty and food insecurity than urban and suburban regions, and Native
American and rural veteran populations face greater barriers to
accessing many critical supports and services including employment,
healthcare, transportation, and nutritious food. Furthermore, American
Indian and Alaska Native veterans serve in the Armed Forces at higher
rates per capita than any other group and this population experiences
food insecurity at rates higher than any other demographic group in the
U.S. Though there has not been specific data collected about food
insecurity rates for Native American or Alaska Native veterans, it is
clear that there is a high level of need that exists and is not being
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
adequately addressed.

Recent research indicates that low-income, working-age
veterans raising children have more than twice the odds for very low
food security compared to non-veterans.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Kamdar, N; Lester, H; Daundasekara, S; Greer, A; Utech, A;
Hernandez, DC. ``Food Insecurity Among U.S. Veterans with Children:
Findings from NHANES 2011-2014.'' Poster presentation at American
Public Health Association Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA. November
2019.

Food insecurity and SNAP participation rates among veterans are
clearly tied to issues of unemployment and underemployment for many
veterans. While veteran unemployment rates have declined in recent
years, underemployment affects more veteran job seekers than non-
veteran job seekers. A recent report found that nearly one-third of
veteran job seekers are underemployed--a rate 15.6 percent higher than
non-veteran job seekers.\9\ Current SNAP work requirements do not
increase employment outcomes, nor do they reduce poverty or food
insecurity. USDA's rule change that would limit those who could be
exempted from existing work requirements, particularly individuals who
are underemployed or have difficulty maintaining regular schedules with
sufficient hours, would move us further in the wrong direction. Taking
food away from people makes it more difficult for them to find and
sustain meaningful work. Restrictive and arbitrary SNAP work
requirements only act as a barrier to accessing the program,
exacerbating the problem of food insecurity for veterans and others who
struggle instead of helping to solve it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Barrera, Cathy & Phillip Carter. ``Challenges on the Homefront:
Underemployment Hits Veterans Hard.'' Call of Duty Endowment &
ZipRecruiter. November 2017. https://www.callofdutyendowment.org/
content/dam/atvi/callofduty/code/pdf/ZipCODE_Vet_Report_FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP is the cornerstone of our Nation's nutrition safety net--it
helps approximately 36 million low-income Americans by providing a
modest allowance to help people pay for food. While the main goal of
SNAP is to provide nutrition assistance, there is a ripple effect in
communities that supports the Federal, State, and local economies--
every $1 spent in SNAP benefits generates $1.70 in economic
activity.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ ``Policy Basics: The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(SNAP).'' Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. June 25, 2019.
https://www.cbpp.org/research/food-assistance/policy-basics-the-
supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
SNAP also supports and encourages work, with a carefully designed
benefit formula that contains an important work incentive--for most
SNAP households, the program provides income support as they earn more
and work toward self-sufficiency.
Another important facet of SNAP is that it supports healthy eating.
For all Americans, research has made it clear that adequate nutritious
food is a vital prerequisite for good health and for reaching one's
full potential in life. For those with medical challenges, that
connection is even more crucial. The billions of dollars invested in
health care for veterans cannot, and must not, overlook the
relationship between food security and health. Modest investments in
nutrition support could mean the difference between emotional and
physical well-being and poverty and despair for countless veterans.
While SNAP is one of the most successful and efficient Federal
assistance programs, veterans often face unique barriers to accessing
the program. For a veteran trying to find out about and access SNAP,
the process can often be difficult and confusing. While SNAP guidelines
are set at the Federal level, each State designs its own application
process--the rules are complicated, they vary from State to State, and
the application can be lengthy, often requiring recertification. This
obviously makes for a complex landscape for an applicant.
We must work together to ensure that struggling veterans and those
who serve them: (1) know that SNAP exists, (2) know they might be
eligible for SNAP, (3) know where to apply for SNAP, and (4) know how
to apply for SNAP. No program can work effectively if it is too
difficult to access, if potential recipients are unaware that it
exists, and if it comes with restrictions that unintentionally leave
out vulnerable populations like veterans, among others.
In the past year, we have seen unprecedented administrative attacks
that would restrict and cut SNAP for millions of Americans, including
veterans. There is no more insidious rule than that which proscribes
harsh and arbitrary work requirements for childless unemployed and
underemployed adults age 18-49 (otherwise known as ``Able-Bodied Adults
without Dependents,'' or ABAWDs). On February 1, 2019, the Trump
Administration posted a notice for proposed rulemaking that, by USDA's
own estimate, would result in nearly 688,000 people losing access to
SNAP. MAZON submitted comments to USDA expressing deep concern that
this rule change would severely impact populations like veterans, who
often face unique challenges and may require more than 3 months to
secure employment that enables them to be self-sufficient. On November
12, 2019, my organization participated in a meeting with the Office of
Information and Regulatory Affairs (OIRA) to further explain our deep
concerns, then on December 4, 2019, USDA seemed to dismiss our formal
comments and tens of thousands of others as they issued a Final Rule.
In order to understand the misguidedness of this administrative
change, it is important to note that most SNAP recipients who are able
to work do, in fact, actually work. Under current law, childless adults
ages 18 to 49 are restricted to only 90 days of SNAP benefits in 3
years unless they can prove they are working or participating in an
employment and training program for 80 hours per month. States
currently have flexibility to request waivers from this harsh and
arbitrary time limit for communities that face high unemployment or
insufficient job opportunities.
It is clear that a significant number of those who are subject to
this rule are veterans. This rule is not nuanced, it is not flexible,
it is not a reflection of the realities of struggling Americans in
general, and it clearly does not recognize the realities of veterans in
that age bracket. These are men and women who often endure many
transitions before they secure long-term employment. They are among our
Nation's underemployed, picking up work when and where they can. MAZON
continues to urge USDA to withdraw the rule, and we are committed to
pursuing all available advocacy strategies to ensure that this
draconian measure is overturned. If the goal of USDA and the current
administration is to move able-bodied recipients of SNAP toward self-
sufficiency and into employment, there are clearly more effective
actions--including targeted investments in employment and training
programs that are sorely lacking in most communities--to prioritize
instead of the current ideologically driven approach.
Furthermore, we have proof that this type of policy increases
hunger and hardship.
The State of Maine offers a cautionary tale. In 2015, then-Governor
LePage chose not to seek a State waiver for SNAP ABAWD requirements,
even though his State was eligible for the waiver due to limited job
opportunities throughout the State. The devastating impacts of this
decision rippled across Maine, with increased demand on the charitable
emergency food network, which was already overburdened and straining to
keep up with the need. Mainers struggled to find work, in many cases
settling for low-wage jobs with limited or no benefits. Thousands of
individuals were forced to make painful tradeoffs--having to decide
whether to pay for food or medicine.
MAZON's partners in the State reported on the widespread food
insecurity that persisted and the harmful impact on Mainers in need,
including an estimated 2,800 veterans in Maine who were affected by the
newly imposed SNAP time limits. Preble Street--our local partner that
provides barrier-free services to empower people experiencing
homelessness, hunger, and poverty--has submitted a packet of materials
to be included in the official record for today's hearing, documenting
increased food insecurity among Mainers, including veterans, due to
this situation. These materials include personal testimonies from
several veterans who were directly impacted by the SNAP policy changes.
I would like to briefly tell you about one of these veterans, Tim
Keefe. I spoke with Tim last week and he agreed to allow me to share
about his very painful experience since he is not here to do so
himself. I urge this Subcommittee to hold another hearing on this topic
to be able to hear directly from veterans like Tim who have lived
experience struggling with food insecurity--it is critical to hear the
voices of those personally impacted by this issue.
Tim is a Navy veteran living in Maine. After being injured at work
and completing all measures included in the worker's compensation
process, Tim found himself unable to return to work and fell on hard
times. With no income, Tim applied for SNAP so that he could buy food.
Though the Department of Labor determined that Tim was medically unable
to work, he was told that this was not an acceptable verification of
disability status for SNAP. Because of the SNAP policy change made by
the State of Maine to no longer waive the time limit for ``able-bodied
adults without dependents,'' Tim lost his SNAP benefits after 3 months.
The question he repeatedly asked--to officials at the State SNAP
office, to officials at the Social Security office where he inquired
about the appeal process for disability claims, and to others in the
bureaucratic maze he was forced into as he sought assistance--was,
``What do I eat between now and then?''
Nobody had an answer for Tim, and he went through a very difficult
and painful period. Without SNAP, Tim had no assistance, and he became
homeless. Tim endured the harsh weather in rural Maine, living in a
tent until he was found and then moving again and again. He resorted to
scrounging for food and even catching squirrels to eat to get by. Tim
shared in his testimony before the Maine State legislature calling for
an exemption for veterans from SNAP work requirements, ``There were
many times, more than I'd like to try and count, when I would go two or
even 3 days without food. I had to add seven holes to the only belt
I've owned for this year to keep my pants on.'' Tim turned to the
Preble Street Veterans Housing Services that helped him with emergency
housing and he was able to get food from the local food bank. But that
only went so far. Tim noted that, ``the food bank has limited
resources. Last month I was able to eat two meals a day for 10 days and
one meal a day of rice and beans or a canned vegetable for the
remainder of the month. I am truly grateful for that food, but I know
that I am still lacking in nutrition and calories.''
After Tim turned 50, the SNAP time limit no longer applied to him
and he was able once again to get the assistance from SNAP that he so
desperately needed. Fortunately, Tim is in a much better place now. But
he wants others to know about the unnecessary and heart-breaking ordeal
that he went through to help inform policy change so that other
struggling individuals--veterans and non-veterans alike--do not fall
through the cracks like he did. Nobody should ever be forced to ask,
``but what do I eat?'' because they can't get the help they need from
SNAP.
MAZON has time and again raised concerns about the impact of SNAP
time limits for people like Tim who need assistance from SNAP. During
the 2018 Farm Bill process, we persistently urged the House and Senate
Agriculture Committees to protect and strengthen SNAP for all who need
it, including veterans. We testified before the House Agriculture
Committee and participated in Farm Bill Listening Sessions, raising
concerns about proposals that would make it harder for people to know
about, apply for, and access SNAP. As a result of thoughtful and
engaged debate and deliberation, in the end Congress agreed that
significant changes to the SNAP ABAWD waivers were unwarranted and
unwise. The final Farm Bill--which passed both chambers with historic
bipartisan margins of support--instead strengthens ten pilot programs
that are currently examining best practices for SNAP employment and
training.
We all can agree that those who make great personal sacrifices for
our country should not have to struggle to provide regular, nutritious
meals for themselves or their families. Therefore, we urge this
Committee to consider the following policy recommendations:

1. Protect and Improve SNAP

USDA must withdraw its three harmful administrative proposals
that would strip SNAP benefits for millions of Americans.
Congress must continue to reject these changes to SNAP that
would severely hurt veterans, among others. The policies are
misguided and ill-informed, and we simply do not know enough
about how populations like veterans will be impacted. It is
entirely inappropriate for USDA to move forward with
administrative changes to SNAP without making any effort to
understand how this will negatively impact the lives of
America's veterans.
Furthermore, Congress and USDA should increase the amount of
SNAP benefits to better support nutritious food purchases,
invest further in the SNAP Employment and Training Program to
build on successful models, with targeted Veterans E&T
initiatives, and support the Veteran Farmers Market Nutrition
Program initiative to incentivize purchase of fresh fruits and
vegetables from farmers markets.

2. Connect Veterans to SNAP

In response to MAZON's 2015 congressional briefing about
veteran food insecurity, the VA initiated the Ensuring Veteran
Food Security Working Group, piloting and later implementing
across the VA network a formal process to identify veterans who
are food insecure. While this represented an important initial
step, we are concerned that these actions do not go far enough
and that more oversight is needed.
The VA should adopt the validated two-question Hunger Vital
Signs screening tool, which is used by groups like the American
Academy of Pediatrics, in order to more accurately identify all
veterans who are at risk of food insecurity. The current
screening tool of a single question only identifies veterans at
risk of very-low food security, which is not sufficient. The
results of the VA food insecurity screenings indicate very low
rates of food insecurity and do not track with academic
research and other data, including from Blue Star Families
Military Lifestyle Survey. Too many struggling veterans fall
through the cracks with the current screening protocol and the
VA must adopt a more comprehensive and validated screening
method. The VA must also require a more comprehensive
intervention and response for veterans who screen positive for
food insecurity, including onsite SNAP eligibility screening
and application assistance in addition to a broader nutrition
consultation and/or referral to a local food pantry or other
local services. MAZON recommends the initiation and funding of
a VA pilot program to demonstrate and evaluate such a SNAP
application assistance program.
There has been evidence of confusion and misinformation about
veteran eligibility for SNAP, particularly regarding the
consideration of VA disability ratings and the exemption from
SNAP time limits for able-bodied adults without dependents. To
provide clarification and help ensure that fewer veterans
experience food insecurity, USDA should prepare and distribute
guidance specific about veterans and SNAP eligibility to USDA
regional offices, State SNAP agencies, VA centers, veteran
service organizations, and community partners.

3. Integrate Nutrition Assistance Information into Transition
Materials and Training

The transition to civilian life poses significant challenges
for many veterans, and many do not feel that they have adequate
preparation and resources to help them succeed. Key findings
from a recent Pew Research Center survey of veterans
highlighted difficulties experienced by many veterans during
the transition to civilian life--only about half of veterans
say the military prepared them well for their transition to
civilian life; post-9/11 veterans were more than twice as
likely than pre-9/11 veterans to say that readjusting to
civilian life was difficult; and about one third of veterans
say they had trouble paying the bills after leaving the
military, yet only 12 percent indicated that they received food
assistance from the government. Furthermore, about 40 percent
of veterans say that the government has not given them enough
help.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\  Parker, K; Igielnik, R; Barroso, A; Cilluffo, A. ``The
American Veteran Experience and the Post-9/11 Generation.'' Pew
Research Center. September 10, 2019. https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/
2019/09/10/the-american-veteran-experience-and-the-post-9-11-
generation/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of its efforts to meet the needs of veterans who are
recently transitioning, underemployed, or vulnerable, the VA
must proactively address the issue of veteran food insecurity.
The VA should integrate information about Federal nutrition
assistance programs like SNAP as part of the Transition
Assistance Program (TAP) materials and trainings; include
information about Federal assistance programs like SNAP as part
of the VA's new ``Solid Start'' suicide prevention program; and
work with community partners and USDA to create and actively
distribute veteran-specific resources about food insecurity and
SNAP. All relevant VA staff must be trained on issues of food
insecurity, so that they know and understand SNAP and its
rules.

4. Listen to Veterans

The stigma associated with receiving SNAP poses an intangible
yet formidable barrier that is especially pronounced for the
veteran population. Negative public perceptions of SNAP have
been heightened in recent years as a result of rhetoric
associated with regulatory changes proposed by the Trump
administration designed to restrict access to SNAP. This
creates a chilling effect and adds to the stigma that makes
veterans and other individuals in need reluctant to seek help
and apply for SNAP.
This Subcommittee, or the full House Veterans' Affairs
Committee, should hold a follow up hearing on the issue of
veteran food insecurity to include the perspective of
individual veterans who have real lived experience with this
issue, researchers who have examined food insecurity within the
veteran and general populations, and additional veteran service
organizations to explore models for community partnerships
around outreach and SNAP enrollment.
4We also urge USDA and the VA to collaborate with veteran
service organizations and anti-hunger organizations to develop
a strategic outreach plan for veterans who do not receive care
or services through the VA, including peer-to-peer outreach.
Such efforts ideally could take place within the context of a
Federal interagency task force focused on veteran food
insecurity, modeled on the successful example of the United
States Interagency Council on Homelessness that has made great
strides toward the goal of ending veteran homelessness in the
U.S. Exploration of such an interagency approach to addressing
veteran food insecurity would be a worthy next step for this
Subcommittee, in collaboration with the House Committee on
Agriculture's Subcommittee on Nutrition, Oversight, and
Department Operations.

5. Explore Related Issues

Last, I implore Congress--especially members of this
Subcommittee who also serve on the House Armed Services
Committee (Reps. Bergman, Brindisi, Banks, and Luria)--to
address the separate but related issue of food insecurity among
currently serving military families. This is another long-
neglected issue of national security, military readiness,
retention, and recruitment, and we at MAZON have proposed easy,
common-sense policies for Congress to enact as soon as
possible.

In closing, I would like to again thank Chairman Levin and Ranking
Member Bilirakus for inviting me to share MAZON's perspective on this
critically important issue. The failure to address veteran food
insecurity undercuts our next generation of Americans who want to serve
in the Armed Forces and presents a challenge to our national security.
Children from families where a parent served in the military are much
more likely to enlist for military service than counterparts from
civilian households. But low-income, working age veterans raising
children have much higher odds of experiencing very low food security
compared to non-veterans.\12\ As we are reminded by Mission: Readiness,
an organization of over 750 retired admirals, generals, and other top
military leaders, obesity--which is directly related to food insecurity
and poor nutrition--limits the pool of eligible recruits for military
service and negatively affects our national security.\13\ Failing to
address the crisis of food insecurity and obesity for our Nation's
children--especially the children in military and veteran households
who are more likely to serve in the military--threatens our national
security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Kamdar, N; Lester, H; Daundasekara, S; Greer, A; Utech, A;
Hernandez, DC. ``Food Insecurity Among U.S. Veterans with Children:
Findings from NHANES 2011-2014.'' Poster presentation at American
Public Health Association Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA. November
2019.
\13\ Maxey, H; Bishop-Josef, S; Goodman, B. ``Unhealthy and
Unprepared.'' Council for a Strong America. October 2018. https://
www.strongnation.org/articles/737-unhealthy-and-unprepared.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While food pantries across the country provide critical food
assistance to veterans and others in need, they were only conceived as
a temporary and emergency response to the widespread problem. Veteran
food insecurity will not be solved by food pantries that are already
struggling to keep up with current demands and cannot make up for the
gaps in our safety net programs, which continue to be at risk of
harmful changes and cuts.
Allowing veterans who have made great personal sacrifices in
service to our Nation to struggle with hunger is shameful, insulting,
unnecessary, and costly. Indeed, it is unconscionable. If our Federal
agencies and Congress do not take more proactive steps to identify
veterans who may experience food insecurity and to connect them with
available benefits and resources, we do these veterans and our Nation
as a whole a grave disservice.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
______

Prepared Statement of Denise Hollywood

Chairman Levin, Ranking Member Bilirakis, and distinguished Members
of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Economic
Opportunity, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today.
My name is Denise Hollywood, and I am the Chief Community and
Programs Officer at Blue Star Families (BSF). BSF builds communities
that support military families by connecting research and data to
programs and solutions, including career development tools, local
community events for families, and caregiver support. Since its
inception in 2009, BSF has engaged tens of thousands of volunteers and
serves more than 1.5 million military family members.
With strong ties to all branches of service, active duty, veterans,
and their families, BSF is nationally recognized for its annual
Military Family Lifestyle Survey. The largest of its kind, the survey
provides both quantitative and qualitative data that reveals a snapshot
of the current State of service members and their families. The annual
Military Family Lifestyle Survey is used at all levels of government to
help inform and educate those tasked with making policy decisions that
impact service members and their families - who also serve.

Financial Issues a Top Stressor for the First Time

In our 2018 Survey of over 10,000 respondents, we found that 62
percent of military family respondents and 65 percent of veteran family
respondents reported experiencing some or a great deal of stress
regarding their family's current personal financial condition.
Moreover, ``financial issues/stress'' was ranked as the top stressor
for the first time among military families. When comparing military
family respondents to their civilian counterparts, military family
respondents reported higher rates of difficulty making ends meet than
civilian families (13 percent of military family respondents compared
to 7 percent of civilian families).
Such financial distress can lead to food insecurity among active
duty and veteran families. In 2018, 7 percent of military family
respondents and 12 percent of veteran family respondents indicated that
someone in their household had faced food insecurity in the past year.
Additionally, 9 percent of military family respondents and 18 percent
of veteran family respondents indicated that someone in their household
had sought emergency food assistance through a food bank, food pantry,
or charitable organization.

Unaddressed Factors During Active Duty May Contribute to Veteran
Families Facing Food Insecurity

In order to comprehend the issue of food insecurity among veteran
families, we must first understand the factors that contribute to food
insecurity while these families are still actively serving in the
military. Such factors include:

high rates of unemployment and underemployment among
military spouses,

limited availability and high costs of childcare,

out-of-pocket relocation and housing expenses,

unexpected financial emergencies.

Many of the factors contributing to military family food insecurity
- including spouse un/underemployment, lack of affordable childcare,
and out-of-pocket expenses - arise from frequent relocation during the
service member's tenure of service. According to Department of Defense
statistics, active duty military families move an average of once every
two to 3 years, typically across State lines or overseas.
Frequent relocation makes it difficult for military spouses to find
and maintain gainful employment - partly because employers are wary of
hiring individuals who have gaps in their resumes as a result of
previous moves. If a military spouse works in a licensed profession, he
or she must also undergo the time-consuming and often costly process of
relicensing whenever they relocate to a different State.
In 2018, we found that 30 percent of military spouse respondents
were unemployed (not working but had actively sought work in the past 4
weeks); and among the 46 percent of military spouse respondents who
were employed full-time or part-time, more than half (56 percent)
reported that they were underemployed (meaning they were overqualified,
underpaid, or underutilized in their current position). Compare these
findings to the civilian unemployment rate, which, in 2018, was less
than 4 percent.
The military spouse employment problem is further exacerbated by a
scarcity of affordable childcare. In 2018, 56 percent of military
spouse respondents who would have liked to be employed cited the lack
of quality, affordable childcare as a reason for why they were not
currently working.
Finding affordable childcare can be particularly difficult for
military families shortly after they move. Among those service member
respondents who resided in their community for less than a year, 79
percent of female service members and 65 percent of male service
members were not able to find consistent childcare.
Meanwhile, 70 percent of millennial military family respondents (37
years old and under) reported that ``having two incomes was vital to
their family's well-being.'' Among military spouse respondents who were
not working but would like to be, only 10 percent reported that they
were financially secure with just their service member's paycheck.
Thus, the military spouse employment crisis directly contributes to
food insecurity, by preventing military families from achieving a vital
second source of income.
The financial difficulties of modern military families are further
compounded by frequent out-of-pocket housing expenses. As of 2019, the
Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) has been reduced to 95 percent of
local area rent. This means that military families are increasingly
forced to pay out-of-pocket for quality housing. In 2018, we asked:
``What amount of your monthly out-of-pocket housing costs, including
utilities, are not covered by your BAH?'' We found that:

43 percent of respondents had out of pocket costs of less
than $500 per month;

8 percent had out of pocket costs between $500 and $1,000
per month; and

2 percent reported out of pocket costs of over $1,000 per
month.

Furthermore, military family respondents identified the cost of
housing as their top financial stressor after military spouse un/
underemployment. Your colleague, Rep. Susan Davis (D-CA-53), once
summarized the issue as such: ``The military pay system is not designed
for junior enlisted members with families in high-cost areas.''
Finally, although the Federal Government covers the majority of the
expenses incurred due to relocation, one-third (31 percent) of our 2018
respondents reported spending over $1,000 in unreimbursed expenses
during their last move. These respondents likewise reported relocating
an average of four times due to military orders. Thus, over an average
of four moves, military families may spend upwards of $4,000 in out-of-
pocket moving expenses.
All of these factors - out-of-pocket expenses, rising costs of
childcare, spousal un/underemployment, and others - can contribute to
food insecurity among currently serving military families. Food
insecurity among active duty military families does not end when
service members retire. To the contrary, the financial difficulties of
military families can be further compounded by transition-related
challenges.

Government Safety Net Programs Are Not Adequately Meeting Family Needs

It is no doubt critical that we work to address the underlying
causes of military family food insecurity (by eliminating out-of-pocket
expenses, increasing the availability of affordable childcare, and
improving spouse employment outcomes). However, these issues are
persistent and will take time to resolve. In the interim, Congress
ought to tackle the issue of veteran food insecurity upstream by
removing senseless legislative barriers which prevent many military
families from qualifying for Federal nutrition assistance, despite
being food insecure.
As detailed in a 2016 report by the Government Accountability
Office (GAO), BAH is currently treated as income for the purpose of
determining eligibility for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program (SNAP). As such, many military families are barred from
qualifying for SNAP, despite being food insecure. Meanwhile, housing
vouchers for low-income civilians are not treated as income for the
purposes of determining SNAP eligibility. Furthermore, BAH is not
treated as income for Federal income tax purposes or for determining
eligibility for most Federal assistance programs. Current policy for
SNAP eligibility thus establishes an unnecessary and harmful barrier to
nutrition assistance for struggling military families.
In 2018, Blue Star Families and MAZON endorsed an amendment to the
farm bill which would have excluded the Basic Allowance for Housing as
income when calculating SNAP eligibility. That effort failed, and the
final 2018 farm bill further confounded the issue by only omitting the
first $500 of a service member's BAH from being treated as income for
the purpose of determining SNAP eligibility.
Undeterred, Blue Star Families and MAZON then endorsed the Military
Family Basic Needs Allowance (MFBNA), which would have alleviated
military family food insecurity by supplementing the base pay of junior
enlisted members at or below 130 percent of the Federal poverty line.
BAH would not have been treated as income when calculating eligibility
for the Basic Needs Allowance. Moreover, the Defense Finance and
Accounting Service (DFAS) would have automatically notified service
members of their eligibility - thereby removing the need to disclose
one's financial circumstances to command. Thus, the MFBNA was
structured in a streamlined and efficient manner to eliminate common
barriers to nutrition assistance, including shame, stigma, and fear of
retribution.
While the MFBNA was included in H.R. 2500 (the House version of the
NDAA), it was ultimately excluded from the final draft of the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2020 - which instead
commissioned a report on military family food insecurity. While we
commend the inclusion of such a provision and loforward to providing
assistance to Congress and the DoD as they seek to undertake this
effort, such a report will be of little consolation to those military
families who are struggling at this very moment to put food on the
table.
We therefore call upon Congress to take immediate action to support
active duty and veteran families facing food insecurity by adopting the
following recommendations put forward by our friends at MAZON:

1. Protect and strengthen programs (like SNAP) that seek to
alleviate veteran hunger;

2. Instruct the VA and USDA to be proactive in their efforts to
identify veterans who are experiencing food insecurity and
thereon connect them with SNAP;

3. Establish VA partnerships with VSOs and anti-hunger
organizations to help reach veterans who are not receiving
services through the VA network.

The Federal Government must also work to expand its data collection
around veteran and military family food insecurity, so as to better
inform policy responses to these issues.
I would like to again thank the distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee for their efforts to eliminate military and veteran
hunger. Those who make significant sacrifices for our country should
never struggle to put food on the table. Blue Star Families welcomes
the opportunity to lend our expertise to Congress as they seek to
resolve this critical issue.
______

Prepared Statement of Vince Hall
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
