- GO-LIVE MARCH 2020:. THE STATUS OF EHRM READINESS

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GO-LIVE MARCH 2020:.
THE STATUS OF EHRM READINESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-48

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-378                WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

MARK TAKANO, California, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Ranking
KATHLEEN M. RICE, New York               Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania, Vice-      GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida
Chairman                         AUMUA AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
MIKE LEVIN, California                   American Samoa
MAX ROSE, New York                   MIKE BOST, Illinois
CHRIS PAPPAS, New Hampshire          NEAL P. DUNN, Florida
ELAINE G. LURIA, Virginia            JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
SUSIE LEE, Nevada                    JIM BANKS, Indiana
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       ANDY BARR, Kentucky
GILBERT RAY CISNEROS, JR.,           DANIEL MEUSER, Pennsylvania
California                       STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota        CHIP ROY, Texas
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      W. GREGORY STEUBE, Florida
Northern Mariana Islands
COLIN Z. ALLRED, Texas
LAUREN UNDERWOOD, Illinois
ANTHONY BRINDISI, New York

Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director
Jon Towers, Republican Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TECHNOLOGY MODERNIZATION

SUSIE LEE, Nevada, Chairwoman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California           JIM BANKS, Indiana, Ranking Member
CONOR LAMB, Pennsylvania             STEVE WATKINS, Kansas
JOE CUNNINGHAM, South Carolina       CHIP ROY, Texas

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2019

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Susie Lee, Chairwoman..................................     1
Honorable Jim Banks, Ranking Member..............................     3

WITNESSES

Honorable James Byrne, Deputy Secretary, Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     4

Accompanied by:

Dr. Robert J. Fischer, Director, Mann-Grandstaff VA Medical
Center, Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Michael Tadych, Director, VA Puget Sound Health Care
System, Department of Veterans Affairs

Dr. Steven Lieberman, Acting Principal Deputy Undersecretary
for Health, Veteran Health Administration, Department of
Veterans Affairs

Mr. John Windom, Executive Director, Office of Electronic
Health Record Modernization, Department of Veterans
Affairs

Dr. Laura Kroupa, Chief Medical Officer, Office of Electronic
Health Record Modernization, Department of Veterans
Affairs

Mr. John Short, Chief Technical Officer, Office of Electronic
Health Record Modernization, Department of Veterans
Affairs

APPENDIX
Prepared Statement Of Witness

Honorable James Byrne Prepared Statement.........................    29

GO-LIVE MARCH 2020:

THE STATUS OF EHRM READINESS

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 20, 2019

U.S. House of Representatives
Subcommittee Technology Modernization
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:36 p.m., in
room 210, House Visitors Center, Hon. Susie Lee [chairwoman of
the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Takano, Cunningham, Schrier,
Kilmer, Larson, Banks, Watkins, Rodgers.

OPENING STATEMENT OF SUSIE LEE, CHAIRWOMAN

Ms. Lee. Good afternoon. This hearing will come to order.
Before we begin, I would like to ask for unanimous consent for
members of the Washington delegation to participate in today's
hearings, should they be able to attend, and, without
objection, so ordered.
Today, the subcommittee continues its oversight of the
Department of Veterans Affairs implementation of the Electronic
Health Record Modernization (EHRM) program. We have reached a
critical juncture in the implementation. We are now a little
more than 4 months from the plan go live in Spokane,
Washington, on March 28th, 2020.
Over the last 18 months, many activities have occurred in
support of this effort. I commend the VA and thank you for
being here for your approaching this as much more than an IT
upgrade. It is an opportunity to modernize the way the VA
provides healthcare to veterans and has the potential to
improve healthcare outcomes throughout our Nation.
However, many questions remain about VA's readiness to
operate the Cerner Millennium system in a clinical environment.
The outstanding punch list of configuration, interface
development, testing, and training does not fully express just
how complex and necessary each of those elements are. If any of
those items are not completed in a timely manner, it will be
very difficult for the VA to bring the system online in a
manner that does not compromise patient care.
In just a couple weeks, the VA will need to pass through a
major milestone, the first of two integrated validation events
or dry runs. These events will essentially allow the VA to
assess how the new system works and if the VA is ready to go
live.
I know that Cerner has been engaged in testing individual
modules, but we need the entire integrated system to be tested
so that it can be used for training. We cannot make the same
mistake that the Department of Defense (DOD) did in its Initial
Operational Capability (IOC) where it tested on a mock-up
system.
As I have said since I became chair of the subcommittee,
the most important thing is that the VA get this right, not
that it hits an arbitrary deadline. I am concerned that the VA
has not given itself enough time to fully test the system, nor
have they allowed time for all users to adequately train on it.
I think the full complexity of this project became apparent
when the VA decided to roll out capabilities in two different
sets. While it certainly makes it more digestible to make two
smaller bites, that does not alleviate the pressure of
infrastructure, staffing, and community-access concerns at
Mann-Grandstaff. Those issues need to be resolved or mitigated
for a successful rollout to occur.
This subcommittee needs an honest assessment of where
things stand with readiness at the individual facilities. There
are also joint decisions and actions that the VA and DOD must
make together, including data strategy and rules governing the
connection to existing systems. I believe that if the VA and
DOD had invested more fully into joint governance, these
potential pitfalls could have been mitigated, yet here we are
right now and must take the necessary steps to address these
issues moving forward.
I am also concerned about the level of communication
between the VA and our veterans. While having an integrated
health record someday will improve veteran care, the process of
implementing it will be far from painless for its users.
As I learned when I traveled to Madigan Army Medical Center
earlier this year, there were a lot of patient-care pain
points, including referral management, pharmacy access, and
patient communication. I still have not seen enough information
from VA to understand how these issues have been addressed for
the VA go live.
Before us today we have accountable officials from each
level of implementation. I am pleased to have the deputy
secretary joining us today as the lead accountable official on
this program. I especially want to hear your perspective on the
State of readiness.
We also have officials representing the clinical operations
of the VA, the program office, and most important, the facility
leadership. I look to our facility leadership as the last
bastion of patient care and safety.
Both, Dr. Fischer and Dr. Tadych have been observing the
day-to-day process of EHRM implementation and I want to hear
your perspectives on your facilities' preparations. I expect
each official at the witness table to provide an honest
assessment of where things stand and what more needs to be
done.
While there are no certainties in any IT implementation,
there should be no surprises, due to a lack of preparation. We
will judge whether this program is ready to meet the needs of
clinicians and veterans by what we hear today.
I thank all of you for being here and I look forward to
your testimony. I would now like to recognize my colleague
Ranking Member Banks for 5 minutes to deliver his opening
remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JIM BANKS, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
First, I want to thank our witnesses for joining us this
afternoon. This is a large and distinguished panel. I
especially want to thank Deputy Secretary Byrne and Directors
Fischer and Tadych.
Dr. Fischer and Mr. Tadych, our goal is to make sure you
have everything you need to be successful.
I am cautiously optimistic that a March 28, 2020, go live
is still achievable in Spokane. That being said, a few weeks
may make the difference between a relatively smooth go live and
a rough go live. A rough go live is clearly not in anyone's
interests.
The schedule is a tightly linked series of milestones from
now until March. Configuration and design decisions were made
to be made even after the end of the workshops. Dozens of more
systems interfaces must be built and authorizes to connect to
the network must be received from DOD. Each of the precursors
must be completed in order to proceed with testing and
training.
It is easy to imagine some of these targets may slip. If
that happens, I urge VA and Cerner to take the time necessary
to get it right, rather than adhering to a symbolic deadline. I
understand VA's rationale for going live with an initial set of
Cerner capabilities known as block one in Spokane. Somewhere
has to go first and Spokane is first.
The need to navigate back and forth between Vista and
Cerner will undoubtedly impact this user experience. That is
why it is so important that the Spokane employees be able to
train on the actual production system before go live, not
merely a mock-up training system. If a few more weeks are
needed to make the training more meaningful, I take the VA to
take it.
Similarly, if an interface cannot be completed in time or
DOD does not grant an authority to connect when needed, I hope
VA will seriously consider taking additional time to complete
the task, rather than allowing that particular Cerner module to
fall out of block one and into block two.
There is no question that the Spokane Medical Center has a
bumpier road ahead of it and by virtue of going first than the
medical centers that will follow. That means Spokane needs
resources. I have been hearing VHA leaders make significant
commitments to provide Spokane with the resources and that is
encouraging. Little time remains before March 2020 to translate
these commitments into action.
I very much appreciate Dr. Lieberman joining us today and I
hope to get some conclusive assurances as to when additional
funding and personnel will be provided to mitigate the
disruptions.
Finally, I would like to turn to the subject of the Federal
EHR Modernization Office. It is clear to me that the firm's
interim leaders, Dr. Evans and Ms. Jowers, are making a
positive impact. Notwithstanding their tiny staff and
shoestring budget, they have taken the initiative to unblock as
many decisions as they can between VA and DOD.
However, after several letters, staff meetings, a hearing,
and a roundtable discussion with leaders from both departments,
I am still uncertain what the ultimate plan for the Federal
Electronic Health Record Modernization (FEHRM) is, and the
behind-the-scenes maneuvering that I have observed in recent
months over which department will control the office concerns
me. After being assured since the summer that the signing of
the firm's charter was close at hand, I was surprised to
receive a letter last week informing me that its organizational
structure will be finalized over the next 6 months and its
processes will be forthcoming over the next year.
If that is the case, given where we are in the calendar, I
think the size and scope of the FEHRM should be scaled
according to what is achievable at this point. The original
vision of a large, centralized program management office
sitting on top of the existing VA and DOD Electronic Health
Record (EHR) program offices and absorbing their joint
functions no longer seems realistic. An empowered, small, agile
firm seems to be more realistic.
Regardless of when the FEHRM takes shape and how big or
small it may be, the one thing that has always been clear is
its mission should be broadly focused on the exchange of health
information for patient-centered care. It was a mistake to
narrowly focus the Interagency Program Office's mission on EHRs
and we would be foolish to repeat that mistake.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Banks.
I would now like to introduce the witnesses we have before
the subcommittee today. Mr. Jim Byrne, the deputy secretary of
the Department of Veterans Affairs. With the deputy secretary
is Dr. Steven Lieberman, acting principal deputy under
secretary for health within the Veterans Health Administration;
Mr. John Windom, executive director of the Office of Electronic
Health Record Modernization (OEHRM); Dr. Laura Kroupa, chief
medical office, OEHRM; and Mr. John Short, chief technology and
integration officer for OEHRM; Dr. Robert Fischer, director of
Mann-Grandstaff VA Medical Center; and Mr. Michael Tadych,
director of Puget Sound's VA Medical Center.
We will now hear the prepared statements from our panel
members. Your written statement in full will be included in the
hearing record, without objection.
Secretary Byrne, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES BYRNE

Mr. Byrne. Madam Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, good afternoon, and
thank you for this opportunity to testify about VA's
transformation of our electronic health record system, and
thank you, also, for your unyielding support of veterans and
their families.
It has now been about 18 months since VA awarded a contract
to implement the same EHR solution being deployed by the
Department of Defense. We awarded this contract because this
solution keeps patient data in a single hosting site using a
common system. It enables easier and more efficient sharing of
health information between VA and DOD, creating seamless
transitions and servicemembers become veterans. It improves
delivery and coordination of care, scheduling of appointments,
reimbursement to providers, and efficient healthcare research,
and it provides clinicians with the data and tools to support
timely, safe, quality care.
Our goal at VA is to improve veterans' lives. We can do
that by delivering an EHR that is easier for veterans, VA
clinicians, employees, and Community Care providers to
understand and use. This is the right thing to do for veterans.
VA has accomplished several key milestones in support of
our electronic health record modernization effort. First, we
have awarded and are executing 20 task orders, leveraging the
indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity contract structure,
which assures firm, fixed pricing, as requirements are
validated. This strategy affords us the flexibility to
efficiently moderate work and deployment plans.
Second, we have continued to refine our organizational
structure for success. In June 2018, we established our VA
Office of Electronic Health Record Modernization, OEHRM, to
ensure that we successfully prepare for and manage deployment
of our new EHR solution.
John Windom leads OEHRM, reporting directly to me, while
working closely with the Veterans Health Administration and our
Office of Information Technology and ensuring coordination with
the Department of Defense. That coordination with DOD is
critical for transparency between departments, open
decisionmaking, risk mitigation, and rapid implementation of
recommended changes.
Our two departments have also instituted an interagency
working group facilitated by the Federal Electronic Health
Record Modernization Office, the FEHRM, to ensure we achieve
interoperability objectives, address challenges, and reduce
potential risks.
We are working with DOD to fully develop a firm joint
governing strategy to further promote rapid and agile
decisionmaking. We will jointly present our final plan to
Congress, including our implementation, phase execution, and
leadership plans.
Third, we are continuing to refine implementation planning
and strategy to carry us through the decade that it will take
to fully implement the new EHR solution and enable us to
integrate new technical advances as they are made. Critical to
this is working proactively with DOD and private sector experts
to reduce potential risks by using lessons learned from DOD and
others.
Madam Chair, in my travels to VA sites across the country,
I have encountered a palpable sense of excitement about our
electronic health record modernization, and as I have said
before, I have had hospital directors, administrators, and
clinicians ask me how their facility can be moved up on the
schedule for fielding the EHR solution. Because they work
closely with veterans and their families, they recognize the
vast potential for improvements in timeliness, quality of care,
reducing risk, treatment of chronic conditions, research, and
in many other areas of care. They want it now because they know
it will help veterans.
Fourth, we established 18 EHR councils to support the
development of national standardized clinical and business
workflows. These councils are primarily comprised of clinicians
who provide care for our veterans and represent each of the
functional areas of the EHR solution, including behavioral
health, pharmacy, ambulatory, dentistry, and business
operations. The council members supported the 8 national
workshops we planned and executed to educate diverse clinical-
end users and validate workflows to ensure our EHR solution
meets our needs. We will continue to seek information, advice,
and recommendations from VA employees and clinicians who
provide care to veterans every day.
Last, VA identified infrastructure challenges at our
initial operating capability sites to require upgrades to
support the optimal use of VA's new EHR solution and to date,
VA improved system performance by increasing network bandwidth
and upgrading aging infrastructure which has led to reduced
log-in times at our IOC sites from over 30 minutes to 15
seconds.
In closing, thank you all once again for your support of
veterans and VA and for helping us tremendously with generous
and flexible funding for this important EHR solution. We
recognize the imperative for transparent and careful use of
those appropriated funds and we are all committed to
strengthening the VA system in support of veterans, their
families, caregivers, and survivors. Our new EHR will help us
do just that and strengthen the ties that bind veterans to
their VA.
Thank you, and we look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of James Byrne appears in the
Appendix]

Ms. Lee. I will now recognize Chairman Takano for 5
minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Chairwoman Lee, Ranking Member
Banks. Thank you for letting me join you today. Unfortunately,
I have another obligation so I cannot stay very long, but I am
committed to the success of this project and I wanted to be
here for as much time as I am able.
I was in a chairman's or chairperson's meeting this morning
and I brought up the Tech Modernization Committee meeting and
our chairwoman of appropriations leaned over and said, I want
more details on this, because she remembers the previous times
that the integration did not work. I want you to know that
senior members of this Congress have burned in their memory,
the failure of our previous attempts to integrate the records.
Mr. Deputy Secretary and all witnesses, thank you for
joining us today and thank you for your commitment to this
project and our veterans and I hope we are going to get it
right. Our committee has been tracking the progress of VA's
modernization efforts for almost 20 years. We are cautiously
optimistic that VA is engineering the goal of a single health
record for servicemembers and veterans with its implementation
of the Cerner Millennium product.
I echo Chair Lee's concern that it is critically important
that VA get this right. Budgets and timelines are important,
but we cannot afford to get this wrong; our veterans expect and
deserve better.
For Secretary Byrne, I want to ask you: How confident are
you that Mann-Grandstaff is going to be ready to go live in
March and that it will be a successful go live?
Mr. Byrne. I am very confident, sir.
Mr. Takano. What makes you say that?
Mr. Byrne. We have a governance construct that is in place
that provides oversight and drills down into the various issues
and challenges we have. We very much appreciate that this is a
major, major undertaking for any agency or any healthcare
system, but we have metrics that we are tracking very closely.
We have go to green plans for those that are behind or not on
track and at this point, I have a tremendous amount of
confidence in the team that we have assembled to do this.
The cooperation between Office of Information and
Technology (OIT), Veterans Health Administration (VHA), and the
OEHRM office is superb. What I can also share with you, too--it
may have been by circumstance that I can explain if you would
like--that we picked Veterans Integrated Services Network
(VISN) 20 in Washington State and the facility in Spokane. I
have had an opportunity to visit with the director, his
leadership team, and many of the employees. If I had to pick a
facility to launch it in, I would have picked that site.
Mr. Takano. All right. Thank you.
Dr. Fischer, Mann-Grandstaff in Spokane, when--this is
about Mann-Grandstaff, the Spokane site--when the committee
staff visited your facility this summer, they heard from your
staff that there were grave concerns about staffing shortages
in productivity loss during the go live process. Is there a
plan to bring temporary staff onboard at Mann-Grandstaff or to
use staff from other VA or DOD facilities to cover gaps?
Dr. Fischer. Sir, we have a plan to augment our staffing by
hiring permanent staff to the tune of 108 full-time
equivalents. Many of these staff members are in high-turnover
areas, so depending on the requirements at 6 months, 9 months,
12 months after go live, we would allow those positions to
attrition over time.
We also are leveraging telehealth. We have a telehealth hub
in Boise. We are bringing 30 traveling nurses to the campus. If
asked, I would say I am optimistic, as well.
Mr. Takano. I am pleased to hear you have augmented your
staff with permanent full-time equivalents and there must be,
then, what exists is a plan anticipating this loss of
productivity that would happen at a go live.
Would you share that plan with the committee.
Dr. Fischer. Sure. The augmentation plan is under execution
right now. I do not want to misdirect the committee. We have
hired roughly 50 percent of that 108 Full Time Equivalency
(FTE) augmentation and we continue to recruit right up through
go live.
Mr. Takano. Not only do you have a plan, but you are
executing the plan?
Dr. Fischer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Takano. Just have us--if you could get us the plan----
Dr. Fischer. Sure.
Mr. Takano.--and the sort of fuller, flushed-out plan that
you have so the committee could review it.
Dr. Fischer. Along with the VISN and Veterans Affairs
Central Office (VACO) leadership, we started to model what we
thought efficiency loss would be as we went live as the first
pilot site for EHR modernization. We know in speaking with
Fairchild leadership after I arrived, they had recently
implemented the DOD solution, Cerner solution, and we felt that
a 30 percent estimate for some periods of time seemed quite
reasonable.
Based on that we went service by service and looked at what
that would mean in terms of augmented staff to limit purchased
care during that period of transformation.
Mr. Takano. My time is up. What I just want is your
assurance you will get us the plan.
Dr. Fischer. Oh, no problem. It has been written and
established for many months.
Mr. Takano. That is what I am asking. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Fischer. You are welcome, sir.
Mr. Takano. I yield.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I now recognize Ranking Member Banks for 5 minutes for his
questions.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Deputy Secretary Byrne, I believe you coined the term
``purple people'' or ``purple person'' earlier this year in
testimony to another committee. I understand that a purple
person is meant to mean someone who represents the priorities
of DOD and VA equally and is an honest broker in inter-
departmental debates.
Am I describing that correctly?
Mr. Byrne. Yes, sir. It is modeled off of a concept of as,
the joint chairman--the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff
and DOD--exactly right--they may wear the uniform or be paid by
a particular service, but they watch out for the broader
interest of our Nation's military.
Mr. Banks. Great. Do you believe that Dr. Evans, the
interim director of the FEHRM is a purple person?
Mr. Byrne. He is an incredible person and he was not
necessarily selected for his purple characteristics, per se,
nor was Ms. Joers, but they have proven to be an incredible
team that, together, I think give the balance that we need for
the decisions that need to be made during this interim period
of time.
To answer your question, the focus was not on looking at
them as a purple person. I would suggest it is possible that he
has grown into that purple person as we look for a more
permanent leadership going forward.
Mr. Banks. They do not necessarily fit the description or
the intent of what you meant by a purple person?
Mr. Byrne. For the interim, that was not, from my
perspective, was not one of the major, driving factors.
For the permanent position, that is a requirement;
something we will demand from that. Yes, there was a look at
both of those individuals who are now in the interim FEHRM to
ensure that they were mature, professional, balanced; they
could embrace making the decision for the best.
I guess I do not want to put too much of an emphasis that
we hired them because they were purple; they very much come
with stripes from their respective organizations. The big focus
will be on the permanent positions. That is where the purple is
a requirement.
Mr. Banks. As I said in my opening remarks, I commend Dr.
Evans and Ms. Joers for their initiative and I am interested in
how the strategic vision for the FEHRM has changed over the
course of this year.
Is the FEHRM now intended to be a decisionmaking authority,
similar to how it functions now or a program management office
in your best estimation?
Mr. Byrne. The first: a decisionmaking body. We have a
program management office that is in place led by John Windom,
seated to my left.
Mr. Banks. Good. Got it.
Secretary Byrne, in February and March of next year, the
EHR program in the Spokane Medical Center is supposed to go
through the final milestones in a go/no-go indicators to
determine whether everything is in order for the March 28 go
live.
What is your role and authority in making that decision?
Mr. Byrne. You are talking about a delay or a stop
production is what I presume you are asking?
Mr. Banks. A go/no-go decision ongoing live.
Mr. Byrne. I have the authority as the accountable official
under the Appropriations Act of 2018, but a go or no-go
decision would be made by the secretary with the
recommendations coming from me and several people on this panel
today.
Mr. Banks. What would you say Dr. Evans' role in authority
would be in making those decisions?
Mr. Byrne. He does not have the authority to stop the
trains, but he is in a position like a lot of people are,
particularly those who are out in the field, particularly those
who are seated to my right, that if there is a patient-safety
issue, we expect and demand that they raise their hand and we
address whether we need to have a delay or stop things in
process.
Dr. Lieberman, I ask you this as Dr. Stone's
representative. What is Dr. Stone's role in authority in making
that decision?
Dr. Lieberman. Dr. Stone is very involved with this
process, all of our meetings; is just so involved, so invested
in this. We all want to see this program succeed.
Certainly, we are supporting the field leadership, again,
sitting to my right. We are looking for them to tell us whether
they think that they have what they need to go live or not go
live and we will certainly advocate for their recommendations.
Mr. Banks. Dr. Fischer, what would you like to add about
your role in making the go live decision?
Dr. Fischer. Well, Dr. Stone and the Office of EHR
Modernization have made it clear that I would have an
opportunity to make a recommendation whether we were prepared
or not.
I am an obstetrician by training. I know what it is to
assess risks and to make difficult decisions and I am prepared
to do so in this case.
Mr. Banks. All right. My time is expired. I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I will now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
Secretary Byrne, what has been--and this is more for the
record--what has been your role in the preparations for go
live?
Mr. Byrne. I have been intimately involved in the
governance construct that we have set up metrics, milestones,
to move this initiative forward; mostly, at the strategic and
operational level, but I have had some involvement at the
tactical level, as well.
What I mean by that is we have, three times a week, we have
a meeting of over 200 folks that have an equity in this matter
to work through and wrestle on particular focused issues. I
have also had the good fortune of visiting the Cerner facility
where they have hosted workshops for workflows in Kansas City,
at least twice. And then as I mentioned earlier, I had the
opportunity to visit both of the sites. I met the leadership
team in Spokane and Seattle, the leaders, and many of the
employees.
My job is an oversight role--give direction, be sure we are
on the right track, support those leaders that are actually
making decisions and making things happen--but I am the
accountable official and I very much understand and appreciate
that role.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. So, given that--your involvement,
looking forward to March 2020, what do you envision as the
process that you will undergo to finally sign off on go live?
Mr. Byrne. So----
Ms. Lee. Let me follow up, and I just want to ask one more
question: And what scenario would you not sign off?
Mr. Byrne. The easy answer to that second question is if
anything is going to impact a patient's safety, that is a no-
go; that rules over everything.
We are going to stay on the current trajectory and path
that we are on. We are on a go to green, go live for March 28th
trajectory right now with the governance structures that I can
burrow into as deep as you would like to discuss.
The answer to your question is, I want to keep it on the
path and the trajectory that we are on right now.
Ms. Lee. OK. Earlier in response to Ranking Member Banks'
questions, you said, well, you do not have the authority. I
want to know, are you comfortable telling leadership that EHR
deployment needs to be delayed?
Mr. Byrne. Yes, that is correct, and maybe I should put
some context on the authority. I have not had that specific
discussion with the secretary about it because it has not
ripened yet.
He may well say, you are the accountable official, you make
the final call, but it will be one of the two of us to be
making that final decision and we are both accountable for it,
regardless of who makes it.
Ms. Lee. Great. Thank you.
Dr. Fischer, in the event that you believe things are not
ready, do you have the authority or are you comfortable telling
departmental leadership that EHR deployment needs to be delayed
at Mann-Grandstaff?
Dr. Fischer. Extremely comfortable.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Tadych, the same question: In the event that
you believe things are not ready, do you have the authority and
are comfortable telling leadership that EHR deployment needs to
be delayed?
Mr. Tadych. Yes, I am.
Ms. Lee. Dr. Lieberman, in the event that you believe
things are not ready, do you have the authority and are
comfortable telling leadership that the deployment needs to be
delayed?
Dr. Lieberman. Absolutely. We all work really well together
and we are very transparent about this, and we make it clear
that if anybody has a concern, we want to hear about it.
Ms. Lee. Dr. Windom, I am sure you are wondering what I am
going to ask you: Do you have the authority and are you
comfortable?
Mr. Windom. Well, I do appreciate you elevating me to
doctor status, ma'am----
Ms. Lee. Oh, yes, sorry.
Mr. Windom.--but I am not a doctor.
Ma'am, I have had a number of chances to appear before you
and the committee and this remains an end-user decision. This
remains a clinical decision. This is about end-user adoption.
I am very comfortable with the teamwork here on the panel
and back at VA is that it will not be a decision that is--
surprises any of us because we are talking every day, and so we
will understand how we migrated to the point and we would owe
you that engagement and I know----
Ms. Lee. But are you comfortable calling for a delay,
should you personally feel that?
Mr. Windom. I would be comfortable, but I would make sure
that the delay--I am not a doctor. I have doctors around me who
I would be counting on to advise me appropriately. I would be
comfortable, but would be seeking their counsel.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. And Dr. Kroupa, same question: Do you
feel you have the authority and are comfortable asking for a
delay, should you believe that it is needed?
Dr. Kroupa. Absolutely.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. My time is now expired and I am going
to recognize Mr. Watkins for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Mr. Windom and Dr. Lieberman, VHA staff has a significant
amount of mandatory training, in addition to the Cerner
training. That said, the Cerner training absolutely must
happen, so what will you be doing to monitor and support VHA
staff to make sure that they are participating and actually
benefiting from the training?
Mr. Lieberman. As you stated, the training is critical and
no one can use the system until they complete the training and
they will also have to complete an examination. That is just
critical; nobody should be touching the new system without that
kind of training.
We have planned--I have actually led the national effort to
come up with how we can mitigate the known loss in productivity
that will occur for months before going live, and so we are
prepared to staff up in response to that, to make sure
everybody has the time to go through the complete training.
Mr. Windom. Sir, we have got a change management team led
by Dr. Jill Durant under the auspices of Dr. Kroupa's team.
They have been putting many, many hours into developing a
training portfolio in coordination with Cerner.
I can tell you, we had a chance to observe the DOD go live
at Wave Travis from the headquarters. One of the major emphasis
points was you have to have the training prior to accessing the
system. We intend to follow suit. The efficiencies of their
deployment reflect that that is the right way to do business.
Mr. Watkins. Right. How heavily have you and the VHA
leadership been involved in establishing the Cerner training
domain and the training programs?
Mr. Windom. Sir, I am going to defer to Dr. Kroupa after
this remark is that Dr. Kroupa leads--Dr. Kroupa is a Title 38
employee; she effectively works for Dr. Stone and Dr.
Lieberman. The tie-in between her efforts and the council's,
who are largely VHA employees, makes our integrated efforts
just that more integrated.
If I could defer to Dr. Kroupa on maybe some details, I
would appreciate it.
Dr. Kroupa. Certainly. The training program for our users
has been designed by Cerner with our team intimately involved
and for every role, they get a certain number of hours of
training. You know, a registration clerk may get 8 hours of
training. A specialized cardiac nurse may get 40 hours of
training. We have gone through the math of assigning roles to
all of the staff at Mann-Grandstaff and laying out how many
hours of training they will need.
Then they, as Dr. Lieberman mentioned, they have to pass a
competency test at the end of that training. If they do not
pass, they get more training, they get more support, and more
help until they are comfortable with the record.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you. Now, I am have Kansas and Topeka,
Leavenworth, and Kansas City are all in the later waves of the
Cerner implementation, but we will be watching the Spokane go
live closely for lessons learned.
How will you and your team be monitoring and responding to
situations that arise during and after the March 2020 go live?
That is for anybody--perhaps, Mr. Windom or Dr. Lieberman.
Mr. Windom. I come from 33 years in the Navy. This is
probably the most dynamic environment I have ever been in.
Medicine is constantly evolving.
I think the flexibility we have in our relationship with
Cerner and that the contract affords us those lessons learned
should always be brought forward and will always be brought
forward to subsequent deployments. So, really, no matter where
you are on the deployment cycle, you will benefit from the
lessons learned of previous deployments, and not only the
previous deployments, but our relationship with DOD and, oh, by
the way, the innovation of not only VA, but the commercial
environment.
We think we have got a multi-pronged approach, sir, that is
going to support us making sure we deliver to VISN 15 what they
will need in the best possible way at the best possible time.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you. Dr. Lieberman, the same question,
please: What role will you and the VHA leadership play in the
monitoring and responding to issues during the Spokane go live?
Dr. Lieberman. We have meetings with Spokane and Puget
Sound three times a week--``we'' being the larger we--for an
hour, talking about what are the challenges that are being
faced, what is it going to take to get us over the finish line.
Those meetings will continue afterwards; they are very detailed
and very helpful.
We will be studying lots of things after go live and these
folks here will know how to approach us. If anything needs to
be raised, we quickly will raise it up the ranks. We will be
studying everything, including even how we mitigated the
productivity, so we can learn for future deployments, did we do
it right, should we modify it for the future.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you. I yield.
Madam Chair, I yield. Thank you.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Ms. Schrier for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you all for coming. I am from Washington
state--not from Spokane--but I am excited that this pilot is
happening in our State and it sounds like you are putting a lot
of effort into launching this. Frankly, if there was ever a
group of people or veterans who needed a smooth launch and the
best care in this transition, it is our veterans. We have about
a half a million veterans in Washington State, about a tenth of
them in my district.
Now, I am also a doctor, so I am probably the only person
up here who is used Cerner and has been through some of these
go lives and however smooth you want them to be, there is bumps
in the road. I am thrilled to hear about superusers and to have
Cerner staff onsite and even anticipating lower productivity,
because that does happen.
I wanted to get a sense of how this will feel for the
patient, for our veterans, and also for the doctors, like, how
this really plays out in the exam room, and so, I as I was
thinking through some of the issues that we have had, a veteran
who has had a complicated operation, for example, has a very
thick medical record and then comes to a VA for continuing
care, the only thing I could parallel that to would be a baby
with congenital heart disease who is at Children's Hospital--
they have Cerner also--and that baby comes to me with a stack
of medical records this thick. The way we had to do it was to
literally--I would go through the record, pick out the most
important pieces, we would scan them and then I would have this
big, long record in Cerner.
How will clinic notes get transferred over? Will it just
populate the Cerner notes field or will you have a big, long
100-page file to go through when the patient is in the office?
Mr. Byrne. Can I answer your question, ma'am, from a
strategic level and then, of course, pass it off to a real
doctor--I am a doctor of jurisprudence; that does not account
for much--you had asked the question about how this--would help
with the veteran patient.
The hope is that they have no idea that this is going on at
all, but we know--you know--that they are going to be getting
much better care and treatment as we revolutionize the amount
of information that the providers have when they are treating
the patient. They will have that whole picture of this veteran
and that is where the magic is. The veteran will maybe notice
it because they are getting better care in the big picture, but
my understanding is they are not going to notice--I hope they
do not notice anything when they go in for their next treatment
and care in April, May, and June.
Ms. Schrier. OK. I need a doctor to answer on this, because
you know it is easier to click through note to note to note and
see the title on it than it is to have a file of 100 pages that
you have to scroll through.
Dr. Fischer. Ms. Schrier, I would like to answer your
question, and I will, but I am going to defer to Laura Kroupa,
because she has that information, having been so active with
our national councils.
Laura.
Dr. Kroupa. Yes. This is going to be different than many
other transitions. We have spent time bringing over data, to a
great extent, from our VistA legacy system. In addition, we
already have the Joint Legacy Viewer (JLV), which is a viewer
that we can read both, DOD and VA data, so that will be a tab
within Cerner. You can just click on it and it will go right to
that patient JLV to see old data.
We are also bringing over every record from every veteran
from all time in VistA. It is already in the Kansas City data
base and so over this next year, we will be able to have
basically 20 clinical domains of data in the record in the
longitudinal order. You know, I think our users are going to
find that they have much more data than they have had before,
better organized data, and there is not going to be a lot of
time spent bringing--transcribing old data into the record.
Ms. Schrier. Will things like lab results come in, in table
form so you can see old labs in the same table as new ones? The
same thing with problem lists and medication lists?
You have thought everything through this. I am feeling very
optimistic. I wanted to ask if you have a backup plan? Our
backup plan was that to a year, at least, we had the paper
record that also came into the room, so if we really needed it
as a crutch, we would have it.
What is your backup plan if the electricity goes down--
whatever the headache may be?
Dr. Kroupa. I can take that.
The Joint Legacy Viewer is a read-only, so that is going to
be available. In addition, we also have a backup plan where we
have viewers that back up the Cerner system, so that if
something gets cut, we will be able to see it on those--so
special computers will have a backup plan--a backup copy of the
record.
Ms. Schrier. Well, thank you very much all for your service
and your help and for taking care of our veterans, and I
applaud you and wish you luck. Thank you.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Ms. McMorris Rodgers
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Rodgers. I thank the chair and the ranking member for
allowing me to participate in today's hearing. I also want to
thank all the witnesses for being here, especially Dr. Fischer,
who has been keeping me updated along the way and I appreciate
the fact that you are on the front lines of this significant
effort which is so important----
Dr. Fischer. Thank you.
Ms. Rodgers.--to the veterans that I have the privilege of
representing in Eastern Washington.
I represent more than 70,000 veterans. I am also proud to
represent Fairchild Air Force Base, the Mann-Grandstaff Medical
Center, as well as the Walla Walla Medical Centers. I recognize
that we are on the forefront of this exciting, but also
challenging endeavor. We have now over $16 billion in upgrades
and investments in making this transition, and certainly this
is an important piece of making sure that the VA is able to
deliver efficient and effective care. My goal is to always see
us rolling out the red carpet to our veterans and the proper
implementation of this electronic medical record will be really
important.
I have a few questions that I just wanted to raise this
morning to Dr. Lieberman, Dr. Fischer. I understand Dr. Stone
has committed to ``flood Mann-Grandstaff with resources to
cushion the impact of the Cerner rollout.'' I was glad to hear
that. Certainly, you know, we have had our challenges in
staffing up through the years.
First, the medical center was exceeding its budget target
by approximately 75 full-time equivalent and I do not know when
that budget was involved, but I just wanted to ask where we are
currently. Recognizing that we have had staffing difficulties
through the years at Spokane, I think the worst thing would be
for the VA to cut existing positions.
Can you assure me there will be no cuts to existing
positions?
Dr. Fischer. Good afternoon. I will tell you, without
hesitation, that there are currently no constraints on hiring
at Mann-Grandstaff to include maintenance of our baseline
mission staffing and that augmentation that I spoke about
earlier. We understand that as the first pilot site we have to
get this right and we have to maintain patient safety. This
would be the exact wrong time to constrain hiring in my opinion
and I have had nothing but full support by VHA, OEHRM, and VA,
in general.
Ms. Rodgers. Great. Can you just give me a breakdown right
now of, in terms of position, permanent versus temporary staff,
VA employees versus contractors?
Dr. Fischer. I can give you some of that, and I am willing
and certainly happy to provide that in writing. Right now we
have roughly 1,235 full-time equivalents on our campus and our
Community Based Outpatient Clinics (CBOCs). On our
organizational chart we have somewhere around 1,400 positions.
We have been, over the last 5 years, experiencing
significant growth and when you do that, your vacancy rate
tends to fluctuate somewhat until you reach a steady State. We
are anywhere between 87 and 91 percent staffed at any given
time, based on where we are with growth.
Ms. Rodgers. Okay. Perhaps, you can get me that breakdown
later.
Dr. Fischer. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Rodgers. Do you have any thoughts on how we can
expedite the hiring process, recognizing that March 2020 is
right around the corner for some of the 108 new employees?
Dr. Fischer. Well, VA has consolidated human resources, and
so we can leverage our VISN and other VISNs to help us with
expedited recruitment, which they are in the process of doing.
Ms. Rodgers. Okay. I know there is been discussions about
assigning up to 30 nurses from VA's Travel Nurse Corps and
possibly--locum tenens physicians to Mann-Grandstaff on a
temporary basis.
Can you give me a sense as to when that is going to happen
and how many personnel will be assigned?
Dr. Fischer. Well, the 30 traveling nurses are--we are
planning to have them arrive roughly 3 months before go live.
We are exhausting all opportunities to enhance our recruitment
and our staff onboard. But as you know, some of these solutions
are untested in the face of EHR modernization and that is why
we feel that permanent hires, as well as leveraging telehealth
and some of these other somewhat untested expansion for
clinical care, are important to exhaust all opportunities.
Ms. Rodgers. Okay. I know there is also been discussions
about personnel from Seattle, potentially in VISN 21 and
California or Nevada being temporarily housed at Spokane. Do
you believe this is going to happen?
Dr. Fischer. I am optimistic.
Ms. Rodgers. Do you know when?
Dr. Fischer. I do not at this moment.
Ms. Rodgers. Okay. Well, thank you, and I appreciate all
your hard work and commitments.
Dr. Fischer. I very much appreciate your support, ma'am.
Ms. Rodgers. Thank you. I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Cunningham for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you. Thank you to each and every one
of you all for not only showing up here today, but for all of
the work that you all do to improve the delivery of care to our
veterans who deserve the highest quality of care possible. I
appreciate all of your efforts.
I have got the privilege of representing the low country in
South Carolina, the first congressional district, which has the
highest number of veterans of any district in the entire State
and so it is incredibly important to me that the VA's health
record modernization is well executed. To that end, I would
like to turn to the leaders of the VA facilities, or I would
like to refer to them as the tip of the spear of these
modification efforts to locations across the country such as
Ralph Johnson VA Hospital in Charleston can benefit from your
example, specifically, on the subject of veterans outreach.
Dr. Fischer, can you let us know what your staff is doing
to communicate with the veterans that receive care at Mann-
Grandstaff about the go live?
Dr. Fischer. Sure. Thank you for the opportunity.
I meet monthly with our veteran service organizations and
they are rather robust in the State of Washington. They are
deeply embedded among the veteran population. We have veteran
town halls, at the CBOC locations, rural health clinics, as
well as in Downtown Spokane.
I can tell you from my perception of the veteran
perspective as I talk about Cerner Corporation and the
complexity of modernization and typically their eyes tend to
glaze over. A veteran only wants to know will he have access or
will she have access to care. I believe that they assume that
the documentation of that healthcare will exist and I do not
know that they care whether it is through Computerized Patient
Record System (CPRS) or through the Cerner product. We are
outreaching frequently and I think as we get closer and have
more granularity about what an appointment will look like at go
live, we will absolutely share that information with our
veterans.
We also have a bi-weekly newsletter that is widely
distributed and often veterans access that newsletter. We have
Facebook. We have a button on our page for Cerner and
electronic health record modernization. We are doing our best
on outreach and as we learn more, we will share that with our
veterans.
They do know--I have represented that there will likely be
inefficiencies at the time of go live and that we rely on them
to help us modernize the health record and modernize VA health
care and they are generally very, very supportive in that
regard.
Mr. Cunningham. Thank you for that.
Have you communicated that veterans should consider
reordering medication before the go live?
Dr. Fischer. We have not yet, because we are still waiting
for the final look at what pharmacy renewals will actually look
like at go live. There is still lots of work being done, and I
would defer to Laura Kroupa if she has any more information
related to the pharmacy piece.
Dr. Kroupa. There will be probably some changes in how they
order their medicine just for a few months, and so we are
planning on putting out some information through the pharmacy;
also, we will probably send something out in their co-pay bills
that will inform them about changes coming to both, billing and
in-pharmacy. We are looking at a variety of different ways to
get the word out.
Mr. Cunningham. Okay. Thank you for that.
Mr. Tadych, what has your staff done to communicate with
the veterans that receive care at Seattle or American Lake?
Mr. Tadych. Very similar to what Dr. Fischer mentioned. In
addition, we have regular tele-town hall meetings that we reach
out to a large number of meetings, typically, four to 500
veterans who participate are tele-town halls. The Cerner
implementation is a point of discussion during those town
halls, as well as involving our veteran family engagement or
community-veteran-engagement board and our veteran family
advisory council in the discussions.
Mr. Cunningham. Okay. I appreciate all of your efforts and
I want to thank you again for everything you all do for our
veterans and thank you again for appearing today to answer
questions.
I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Kilmer for 5
minutes.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Madam Chair, and I would like to
thank you and Chairman Takano for allowing me to sit in.
This is a big deal for the region I represent. Nine days
ago we celebrated Veterans Day. I am honored to represent more
military veterans than any Democrat in Congress. I think we are
a much stronger region as a consequence of the men and women
who serve and who choose to make my region their home. The work
we do to make sure we have the backs of those who serve is the
most important work we do and I want to thank each of you who
are testifying today for your work in that regard.
Why am I here? Well, we saw when the DOD did the rollout of
their electronic health record in my region, a bit of a bumpy
rollout and I appreciate the work that the DOD has done since
then, along with its industry partners to try to right those
issues, to identify some lessons learned in hopes that the
rollout elsewhere is more smooth.
I think we owe it to our vets to make sure that we do not
have a repeat performance of what we saw within the DOD system.
I do not think there is any reason to repeat those mistakes and
I guess that is what I wanted to hear more from you is what is
the VA doing, specifically, to make sure it is ready for the
rollout this spring and what lessons were learned from the DOD
experience and how are they being applied within the VA?
In particular, I am hoping you can speak to how do we make
sure that the DOD lessons learned are not repeated? I know I am
conscious that it is a different contractor, and I want to make
sure that even though it is a different contractor, we are
still learning the lessons we learned from the last
experiences.
Mr. Byrne. I can tell you that we do have a very close
relationship with DOD and we are incredibly conscious of those
lessons learned. I think Mr. Windom might be able to be a
little bit more specific on the history of that relationship
and the lessons, in particular, that we have learned.
We did have the luxury of visiting Madigan 2 month or so
ago and we now see where they are and they did share several of
those lessons with us.
Mr. Windom.
Mr. Windom. Thank you, sir.
Sir, we appreciate your concern and we very much are in a
similar posture. One thing I want to applaud DOD is being
willing to share their lessons learned, their challenges, and I
can tell you it just did not start with us incorporating those
yesterday. We started incorporating those lessons learned
before contract award.
Within the framework of the terms and conditions of our
contract are things like help desk support. You may have seen
some of the gaudy statistics regarding trouble tickets. We made
sure we put in a robust help desk support mechanism because we
want end-users' questions answered the first time the right
way. That eliminates frustration.
I can tell you field participation, another major lessons
learned, and I will let Dr. Kroupa--making sure the field
understands what is coming, making sure they are well-trained,
well-educated in what is to come so they are not--they do not
reject what is about to transpire.
You have heard me emphasize time and time again, this is
about end-user adoption, infrastructure readiness. A state-of-
the-market, state-of-the-art electronic health record does not
run better on an old infrastructure. Congress has been
incredibly supportive, financially, in providing us the
requisite sources of funding to upgrade our infrastructure well
in advance of the deployment of EHR. You heard that in the
deputy secretary's comments regarding log-in times. Just the
upgrades of the infrastructure have improved log-in times
thousands of percentage from minutes--30 to 40 minutes to 15 to
30 seconds.
There are a myriad of other areas. I want to give my
compatriots here an opportunity, because from a clinical and
then John Short, from a technical perspective, they really, I
think, can give you the rest of the story.
Dr. Kroupa.
Dr. Kroupa. I think the main lesson we took from the DOD is
that we made sure that we included frontline clinicians in the
design and build of the record. We spent a lot of time with the
clinical councils, meeting on a recurring basis to make
decisions. We included DOD on those councils so they could hear
directly from their compatriots about how it worked in their
system and could make decisions together. We also brought in
industry, best-practice associates from other healthcare
systems to help us make those decisions.
John.
Mr. Short. I will just add a couple of items. As an
example, DOD, at first when they rolled out they did just-in-
time infrastructure. Just-in-time infrastructure for most
people's experience is just-in-delayed infrastructure, and so,
they learned to go to 3 to 6 months ahead of schedule. We
mirrored that, most of the infrastructure already in place for
the go live sites. We are already working in wave one, wave
two, and wave three sites already, putting that infrastructure
in place. So many elements like that.
Another example was making sure we are going to go live
over the weekend, to have the IT contracts in place where you
can call those vendors in on the weekend to make sure that is
available. So, that is another lesson learned. DOD is
constantly providing those to us and we are using those.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Windom. Sir, may I add just one thing, because I think
it is important. The Wave Travis deployment that DOD just
executed--phenomenal.
So, the experiences at Fairchild, they have taken onboard
their own lessons learned and they have been willing to
continue to share those. We have watched them return to
efficiency levels within 6 weeks that far exceeded
expectations. I just wanted to make sure that was known, that
they have not rested on their laurels either, and we continue
to learn and share.
Mr. Kilmer. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Okay. I now recognize Mr. Larson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Larson. Madam Chair, thanks for indulging us from
Washington State and we are obviously very interested in this
program and we appreciate you allowing us to ask questions and
waiting for us to get from other markups. There is actually
other things going on in the Hill today, so it is really great.
I am sorry that I am late and maybe--this question, but the
rollout in Washington State and especially in Puget Sound has
been delayed and with regards to that delay, is there anything
that you need--I guess this is for Mr. Tadych--I cannot see
that far without my glasses. I lost my glasses--oh, there you.
How you doing? Sorry for being so informal today.
Is there anything else you need to ensure that the rollout
happens on time or actually, now in the fall, as opposed to any
delays?
Mr. Tadych. We have had very good support throughout from
both, OEHRM and VHA through this process. The discussions
around the different capability blocks was a very collaborative
approach and based on concerns we raised, the leadership at
both, VHA and OEHRM, were willing to delay our implementation
until those different blocks could be--different capabilities
could be delivered to us.
Mr. Larson. Are you anticipating learning anything in
Spokane that you would pick up and put down in the fall?
Mr. Tadych. Absolutely.
Mr. Larson. Do you have an idea of what those are?
Mr. Tadych. I am sure there will be many bumps in how they
implement with primary care and other areas that will be very
valuable to our implementation process.
Mr. Larson. Thank you. How about in terms of the
capabilities that you are rolling out in Spokane, any of those
that you anticipate that are not in Puget Sound that you would
pick up and put down in the Puget Sound?
Mr. Tadych. I think with the capabilities, one of the
lessons learned will probably be around some of the how
patients flow, workflows that we need to address more than
anything. Those capabilities should be well in place by the
time that Puget Sound goes live.
We will also have to look at how the capability block two
workflows work at that point as we get ready to go.
Mr. Larson. I noted that Bellingham and we have a vet
center are on the list at some point. Do you know what the
timeline is for those?
Mr. Tadych. I do not know about the vet center.
Mr. Larson. Okay. Does anybody know about the vet centers?
How are they?
Dr. Kroupa. The vet centers do not actually write into the
electronic health record; they are records are separate. They
will have the ability to see, but they are not going to be
actually entering information into the electronic health
record.
Mr. Larson. Okay. All right.
Dr. Kroupa. Those are kept separate on purpose.
Mr. Larson. What purpose is that?
Dr. Kroupa. So that veterans can go to the vet centers and
have confidential information that is not revealed anywhere
else.
Mr. Larson. Then, finally--and, again, I apologize if this
has been asked--but perhaps, for Mr. Windom, what efforts has
the VA taken to familiarize, you know, older veterans with the
changes with the new system?
Mr. Windom. Sir, I think that one thing we recognize is
that communications to the veterans that will be called to use
upon the system is imperative. One of the struggles with comms
is not to get there too soon. So, we intend to really saturate
the area, in a matter of a couple of months or 6 weeks out to
make sure people are well-versed on what is about to occur.
Mr. Tadych and both, Dr. Fischer and Dr. Kroupa, have
already commented on the fact that they are having town halls,
they are meeting with the VSOs. I meet quarterly with the VSOs.
I have already asked them to help me best understand how to
engage the veterans.
We appeal to you. If you have ideas, we would love to sit
down with you and listen to those, because I can assure you in
no way, shape or form do we think we have cornered the market
on how to communicate. We welcome your thoughts on enhancing
our communication profile, and so we look forward to a
following discussion on that. We look forward to continue to
share our ideas.
Mr. Larson. Yes. I just finished six more veterans town
halls in my district and they all went very well, in part,
because Mr. Tadych was there helping us out. One of the things
that happens at these town halls is--case work; these are more
policy-oriented and we talk about changes in the VA, and we end
up getting sometimes surprised by those questions because maybe
our offices have not been briefed or maybe we missed something.
I would just really encourage full outreach to
congressional offices so we know who to send these folks to
when we get the calls, as well as, so that we have some basic
information on the implementation to help me out.
Thanks. I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize Ranking Member Banks
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Deputy Secretary Byrne, I have a series of questions about
VA's My HealtheVet patient portal and the Cerner HealtheLife
patient portal. Please feel free to direct any of these
questions to members of your team if appropriate.
When Cerner goes live in Spokane, what health records will
a veteran be able to access in the Cerner patient portal and
what records will he or she need to use My HealtheVet to
access?
Mr. Byrne. Thank you for that question. I think Dr. Kroupa
might be best to answer that.
Dr. Kroupa. Certainly. In Spokane at the go live, the
veterans will be able to access through the Cerner portal,
their Spokane records. If they want to look back at a previous
secure message or something from another VA, they will access
My HealtheVet.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Doctor, which types of appointments will
veterans be able to schedule using the Cerner portal and which
appointments will they need to use the My HealtheVet to view or
make?
Dr. Kroupa. I believe that they will be able to make
appointments in Spokane in the Cerner portal, but I can take
that for the record to be sure on that one.
Mr. Banks. Fair enough.
Which patient portal and which other systems will veterans
of Spokane need to use to schedule a Community Care
appointment?
Dr. Kroupa. Well, I do not know that they currently use a
portal to do all of their Community Care appointments now, so I
will have to take that for the record unless, John, if you
know?
Mr. Banks. Okay. Mr. Short, you are making a lot of
progress with VA.gov in expanding the online self-service tools
for veterans. Has anyone figured out how to integrate all of
that with the Cerner HealtheLife patient portal?
Mr. Short. Currently, sir, there is work being done on
development to be able to allow them to use those tools. It is
in the development phase right now. We will provide additional
information for the record, if you would like.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Secretary Byrne, OEHRM has the lead
responsibility for the Cerner implementation, but it is by no
means alone in this effort. How much funding has been
transferred or allocated from the veterans electronic health
record account to other VA offices to support the work?
Mr. Byrne. I think Mr. Windom might have some specifics on
that.
Mr. Windom. I will have to take that for the record, sir,
for exact accounting, but what I will say is this, is that as
we discussed in previous hearings, it made sense to leverage
the contracting of vehicles that existed within OIT. We have
allocated moneys to use their vehicles with strict
accountability between the two organizations being maintained,
but that made sense to get infrastructure off the ground sooner
rather than later.
In addition, as we expressed at various hearings, we had a
debt to VHA for allowing us to use their clinicians to support
our requirements, development efforts, clinical workshops,
efforts. We have, actually, written guidance in place to how
we, if you will, reimburse VHA and other organizations for
their efforts. We will gladly share that, sir.
Mr. Banks. I appreciate Mr. Windom taking that back for the
record and providing us with a complete list.
My next question is for Dr. Kroupa and Dr. Fischer. Please
tell me about the training system, meaning the version of the
Cerner EHR that will soon be available to Spokane personnel to
train on. How similar is it to the Cerner EHR that will go live
next year?
Dr. Kroupa.
Dr. Kroupa. The training environment is being imaged now.
It is being based on the decisions that we made at the
workshops, so it is going to be very--have a high level of
fidelity to the production account and so, it should--it is a
VA-specific build. It is not the Cerner major product or the
DOD product. It is being imaged, based on our design decisions.
Mr. Banks. Okay.
Mr. Windom. Yes, I would add, sir, that in advance of our
build, what we did was set up what we call a ``flight
simulator,'' which is a training environment that incorporated
the DOD build so that people could start getting oriented on
the Cerner Millennium solution. We put that in place and have
allowed clinicians access to that, if you will, as a preface to
the training they will receive on their actual build.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I now recognize myself.
As the subcommittee understands that patient information
will be flagged as either VA or DOD, depending on where the
treatment occurred and where the data originated, Mr. Short, is
that a correct assessment?
Mr. Short. Yes, ma'am, that is correct.
Ms. Lee. A provider in either department can access a
patient's full record and full medical history, regardless of
whose flag is on the data, either through Millennium or use in
the JLV; is that correct?
Mr. Short. For the purposes of patient care, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Lee. We have heard that a patient who has been treated
at both, the VA and DOD would have to request their records
separately from the two departments due to restrictions caused
by data ownership policies; is that accurate?
Mr. Short. I believe that is accurate, ma'am. I will take
the full question for the record to validate that for you.
Ms. Lee. This is concerning to me, because the goal of
Congress in establishing the EHRM programs was to establish one
single record that follows servicemembers as they enlist in the
military, perform their service, transition, and then for the
rest of their lives.
Secretary Byrnes, if a portion of the veteran's health
record is held by DOD and another is held by VOA, is that truly
a single, unified record?
Mr. Byrne. As I understand it, it is all in an enclave
right now. It was ingested from DOD and we have had some
records that we have had ingested from the Department of
Veterans Affairs.
For the ability of the record to go to a Department of
Defense healthcare provider and then back into the enclave and
then back into a VA facility for care and back in again, that
is the interoperability component of the enclave that I
understand we should have the capability of doing. Granted,
that is challenging, that is a capability that I believe we
intend to have if we do not have it already.
Now, Mr. Short is that----
Mr. Short. That is correct, sir.
Madam Lee, the question, I believe, was if a veteran asked
for their entire record from the DOD to VA, could one part of
the DOD or VA pull the whole record? We will have to take that
one for the record.
Dr. Kroupa. Yes, there is a lot of law and regulation
around what each agency can release, and so I think that is
where there is been a lot of discussion about how to adjudicate
that and who has providence over different parts of the record.
Ms. Lee. Yes, I mean, I just--you know, to me, if a patient
needs to go to both, the VA and DOD, to get their complete
record, we are not establishing--we are not meeting the goal of
the system. It sounds like there are some----
Dr. Kroupa. I can tell you that we have had discussions
with Dr. Evans about what might be some possible ways to try
and improve that. Because, of course, those laws and
regulations were never written at a time when we had the same
instance of an electronic health record. We are going into a
new era here.
Ms. Lee. Okay. To the extent that there needs to be a
change in laws and regulations, obviously, we would like to
understand exactly what needs to happen so we can be of
assistance and expedite that.
Secretary Byrne, are there policies in place or in
involvement regarding this joint ownership or is this something
that we are at a standstill because of these laws and regs?
Mr. Byrne. I would like to toss that to Mr. Windom, if I
can, ma'am.
Mr. Windom. Madam Chair, this is at the forefront of data
syndication discussions. I can tell you this consumes Dr. Neil
Evans, who is the FEHRM chair. He is squarely leading this
effort.
I want to make sure you walk away with the understanding
that the patient still owns his data, the access to his or her
data. The access to that data is still controlled by the
patient. The roles of care are being worked out of who will
have access and whether there is any legislation relief that we
need.
We owe you a follow up discussion, but that is a follow up
discussion that I would really want Dr. Neil Evans, with us in
a support role, to come and brief you on, because I think he is
squarely at the forefront of working with DOD.
Ms. Lee. Is Dr. Evans the person who is responsible to
setting the policies and finalizing them? Who is responsible?
Mr. Windom. What I would offer, ma'am, in his role as the
FEHRM lead, he is the responsible element that is brokering the
relationship and the understanding between DOD and VA, such
that we have a single conduit. I think VA and DOD are prepared
to for his lead, but I do not want to speak for the Dep. Sec.,
but he has been empowered and he has been acting as the FEHRM
director for months in advance of this point.
We are comfortable with the movement in this arena. I don't
want to overspeak the situation. I think we owe you greater
granularity on how we are going to get there, but we appreciate
your offer of legislative support because no one contemplated
this single enclave, this single hosting site and we may need
your involvement in support of delivering.
Ms. Lee. Okay. As soon as those policies are ready, we
would love to have a copy of them----
Mr. Windom. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Lee.--or a further discussion on what needs to be done.
Mr. Windom. We understand. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Lee. Just--I am not going to recognize Ranking Member
Banks for 5 minutes.
I am going to close out with one more question about
staffing, Dr. Fischer. Did you have a hiring plan in place
before Mann-Grandstaff was selected to go first?
Dr. Fischer. Not for augmentation of staff, ma'am, no. That
occurred approximately 1 month after the Cerner contract was
signed.
Ms. Lee. Okay. And just a question: You have 108 FTEs that
you are going to hire. Where are you on that?
Dr. Fischer. We have hired over 40 of the 108 and there are
several recruitments that are in various phases of having those
folks on the campus and fully starting work.
Ms. Lee. When do you want to--like, what is the goal date
to have these 108 in place? Is it January? Is it March? Is it
December?
Dr. Fischer. As soon as possible. We are aggressively
pursuing those hires.
You know, this is kind of a living document. When we looked
at the model and staffing requirements in June 2018, as time
progresses and we learned more about the initial capability set
and the other information, we have morphed some of those
positions. It is a living document.
We just identified the last 20 and we are pursuing those
recruitments. I do not think it is a static requirement and I
do not think it should be, because we are all learning as time
progresses.
Ms. Lee. Yes, I guess my question is, you have a March 28th
rollout. You know that you need to provide training for all of
the staffing. Are you planning on a month of training? Are you
planning on 2 months? Like, obviously, you need to have the
staff in place to train to implement the program.
Dr. Fischer. Well, end-user training, in addition to a few
hours of computer-based training, is 1 week in length. I think
we will find time to get new employees trained up in Cerner
before they start work.
Ms. Lee. How long did it take you to get those 40 of the
108 onboard from initiation to in your building?
Dr. Fischer. Well, I think it depends--oh how long does it
takes to recruit----
Ms. Lee. How long from when you decided you needed the
people to--you advertised, you interviewed, till they are in
your building? I am just sort of curious.
Are you on track to fill those 108?
Dr. Fischer. Ma'am, I can give you an estimate. I would
prefer to give you something that is more reliable. I do not
perceive a significant delay between identification of a
position and recruitment and presence oncampus, providing care
and/or support, but it certainly depends on what I am hiring.
If you ask me how long it takes to hire an oncologist, it
might take forever based on our market. If you ask me how long
it takes to hire an administrative assistant, we can do that
pretty quickly.
It is hard to come up with a generalized answer. But there
are no significant obstacles that I am aware of when we have
identified a recruitment action to getting someone onboard.
Ms. Lee. Okay. Thank you.
Well, thank you all for being here for providing this
informative update and answering our questions. We look forward
to continuing to have the conversation, particularly with
respect to the data migration and data--I know it is not
ownership--data stewardship areas, because, ultimately, again,
this is all about having one seamless record for veterans from
enlistment to active-duty to becoming--transition, and then for
the rest of their lives.
If we are going to have this management issue back and
forth, we are really not achieving the underlying goal of this
whole project. I am wishing you all the best of luck and we
will continue to work together and we look forward to hearing
about your success, come March 28th. Thank you.
All members will have 5 legislative days to revise and
extend their remarks and include extraneous material. This
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

?

=======================================================================

A  P  P  E  N  D  I  X

=======================================================================

Prepared Statement of Witness

----------

Prepared Statement of James Byrne

Madam Chair Lee, Ranking Member Banks, and distinguished Members of
the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today in
support of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) initiative to
modernize its electronic health record (EHR) through the acquisition
and deployment of the Cerner Millennium (Cerner) EHR solution. I am
accompanied today by Dr. Steve Lieberman, Acting Principal Deputy
Undersecretary for Health, Veteran health Administration (VHA); Mr.
John Windom, Executive Director, Office of Electronic Health Record
Modernization (OEHRM); Dr. Laura Kroupa, Chief Medical, OEHRM; Mr. John
Short, Chief Technology and Integration Officer; Mr. Michael Tadych,
Director, Puget Sound Veteran Administration Medical Center (Seattle);
and Dr. Robert Fischer, Director, Mann-Grandstaff Veteran
Administration Medical Center (Spokane).
I want to begin by thanking Congress, and specifically this
Subcommittee, for your continued support and shared commitment to the
success of the Electronic Health Record Modernization (EHRM) program.
Because of your unwavering support, VA is able to continue its mission
of improving health care delivery to our Nation's Veterans and those
who care for them while being a responsible steward of taxpayer
dollars.

Background

On May 17, 2018, VA awarded an Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite
Quantity (ID/IQ) EHR contract to Cerner. Given the complexity of this
endeavor, VA awarded this ID/IQ to provide maximum flexibility and the
necessary structure to control cost. Through this acquisition, VA will
adopt the same EHR solution as the Department of Defense (DoD). The
solution allows patient data to reside in a single hosting site, using
a single common system and enables the sharing of health information;
improves care delivery and coordination; and provides clinicians with
data and tools support patient safety. VA believes that implementing
this single EHR solution will allow for seamless care for our Nation's
Servicemembers and Veterans. Since the last EHRM update on June 12, VA
has accomplished several key milestones.

Task Orders

VA has cumulatively awarded 20 Task Orders (TO). VA leverages the
ID/IQ contract structure awarding firm-fixed-price TOs as requirements
are validated. This strategy affords VA the flexibility to moderate
work and modify implementation and deployment plans efficiently. Since
June 12, VA has awarded and begun execution on 12 new TOs to include:

TO 9 - Registry and Report Development for IOC:
development, testing, and execution in support of registries and
reports required for EHRM IOC. More specifically, these tasks include
project management, registry development, report development, training,
and development of measures.

TO 10 - Additional Data Migration Development for IOC:
additional data migration development, testing, and execution in
support of data migrations required for EHRM IOC. These tasks include
project management and IOC site-specific data migration/ingestion
development.

TO 11 - Cerner Standalone Scheduling Pilot Site Surveys:
conduct Cerner Scheduling Solution (CSS) site survey (SS) activities
for the Chalmers P. Wylie Veterans Outpatient Clinic and the Ohio
Veterans Affairs Medical Center and both sites' associated facilities.
These deliverables include the Technical Kickoff, Pilot Plan Tailoring,
Pilot Site Technical SS, Pilot Functional SS, and Milestone Decision
Review.

TO 12 - Current State Review (CSR) Waves 1 - 3: conduct
technical and functional CSR activities for sites in Preliminary Waves
1 - 3. These activities will include the Technical Kickoff, Wave Plan
Tailoring, Wave Technical CSR, and Wave Functional CSR.

TO 13 - Cerner Scheduling Solution (CSS) Project
Management, Planning, and Strategy: provide project management and
planning support services for the VA CSS solution. These services
include CSS Project Management, CSS Enterprise Management Support, CSS
Functional Management Support, and CSS Technical Management Support.

TO 14 - Revenue Cycle Workflow Strategy Support Services
for IOC: provide resources to support system and process design to
accommodate the unique needs of the Veterans Benefits Administration,
the Office of Community Care, the Consolidated Patient Account Centers,
and the Veterans Health Administration.

TO 16 - EHRM Wave 1 Deployment: conduct Wave 1 deployment
activities for the following VISN 20 Sites and associated facilities:
Jonathan M. Wainwright Memorial VA Medical Center (VAMC) and White City
VAMC.

TO 17 - Data Syndication Development and Execution for
IOC: provide additional data syndication development, testing,
execution, and sustainment required for EHRM IOC.

TO 18 - Revenue Cycle Development for IOC: test and
deploy additional revenue cycle functionality in support of VA revenue
cycle requirements for IOC.

TO 19 - Encoder and Clinical Documentation Improvement
(CDI) Services for IOC: develop, test, and deploy encoding and CDI
functionality in support of VA EHRM revenue cycle requirements for IOC.

TO 20 - Revenue Cycle Managed Services for IOC: develop,
test, and execute managed services in support of VA revenue cycle
requirements for IOC.

TO 21 - EHRM Wave 2 Deployment: conduct Wave 2 deployment
activities for the following VISN 20 Sites and associated facilities:
Portland VAMC, Vancouver VAMC, Roseburg VAMC.

Current State Review

In July 2018, VA and Cerner conducted a Current State Review at
VA's IOC sites to gain an understanding of the sites' specific as-is
State, and how it aligns with the Cerner commercial standards to
implement the proposed to-be State. The team conducted organizational
reviews around people, processes, and technology. They observed and
captured current State workflows; identified areas that will affect
value achievement and present risk to the project; identified benefits
from software being deployed; and identified any scope items that need
to be addressed.
VA reviewed final reports analyzing the CSR in October 2018 and
discovered there are infrastructure readiness areas that require
slightly more investment due to aging infrastructure and areas that
will not require as much investment as initially predicted. To date,
improved network and system performance by increasing network bandwidth
and upgrading aging infrastructure resulting in reduced login times at
IOC sites from 30-45 minutes to 15 seconds. VA conducted an analysis of
industry and DoD/DHA health IT infrastructure to develop EHRM
Requirements and Specifications which will optimize usage of the new
EHR solution. As a result of these standards, enhancements were made to
the local area network (LAN) and wide area network (WAN) at IOC sites,
to minimize potential latency with data transfer from IOC sites to the
Cerner Data Center. VA procured approximately 21,700 desktops and
laptops of which over 50 percent are configured and in use by end
users.

Organizational Structure and Strategic Alignment with DoD

On June 25, 2018, VA established OEHRM to ensure that we
successfully prepare for, deploy, and maintain the new EHR solution and
the health information technology (IT) tools dependent upon it. OEHRM
reports directly to VA Deputy Secretary and works in close coordination
with the Veterans Health Administration and Office of Information
Technology.
To ensure appropriate VA and DoD coordination, we emphasize
transparency within and across VA through integrated governance and
open decisionmaking. The OEHRM governance structure has been
established and is operational, consisting of technical and functional
boards that will work to mitigate any potential risks to the EHRM
program. The structure and process of the boards are designed to
facilitate efficient and effective decisionmaking and the adjudication
of risks to facilitate rapid implementation of recommended changes. As
a result, since the June 12 hearing, the two Departments have supported
closure of 20 out of 27 critical VA/DoD joint decisions.
At an inter-agency level, the Departments are committed to
instituting an optimal organizational design that prioritizes
accountability and effectiveness, while continuing to advance unity,
synergy, and efficiencies between VA and DoD. The Departments have
instituted an inter-agency working group, facilitated by the
Interagency Program Office/the Federal Health Record Modernization
(FEHRM) Office, to review use-cases and collaborate on best practices
for business, functional, and IT workflows, with an emphasis on
ensuring that interoperability objectives are achieved between the two
agencies. VA's and DoD's leadership meet regularly to verify the
working group's strategy and course correct when necessary. By learning
from DoD, VA will be able to address challenges proactively and reduce
potential risks at VA's IOC sites. As challenges arise throughout the
deployment, VA will mitigate adverse effects to Veterans' health care.

FEHRM

DoD and VA are developing a FEHRM joint governance strategy to
further promote rapid and agile decisionmaking. This structure will
maximize DoD and VA resources, minimize EHR deployment and change
management risks, and promote interoperability through coordinated
clinical and business workflows, data management, and technology
solutions while ensuring patient safety. The FEHRM program office will
be responsible for effectively adjudicating functional, technical, and
programmatic decisions in support of DoD and VA's integrated EHR
solutions. DoD and VA will jointly present the final construct of the
plan to Congress, including our implementation, phase execution, and
leadership plans.

Implementation Planning and Strategy

It will take OEHRM several years to fully implement VA's new EHR
solution and the program will continue to evolve as technological
advances are made. The new EHR solution will be designed to accommodate
various aspects of health care delivery that are unique to Veterans and
VA, while bringing industry best practices to improve VA care for
Veterans. Most medical centers should not expect immediate major
changes to their EHR systems.
VA's approach involves deploying the EHR solution at IOC sites to
identify challenges and correct them. With this IOC site approach, VA
will hone governance, identify efficient strategies, and reduce risk to
the portfolio by solidifying workflows and detecting course correction
opportunities prior to the deployment at additional sites.
Specifically, At the IOC sites, VA will implement new workflows in
discrete capability sets, also known as blocks. This phased
implementation plan supports end-user adoption of new functionalities
and interoperability between DoD and VA. As mentioned, VA and Cerner
have conducted Current-State Reviews for VA's IOC sites. These site
assessments included a current-State technical and clinical operations
review and the validation of each facility's capabilities list. VA
started the go-live clock for the IOC sites, as planned, on October 1,
2018.
Further, VA is continuing to work proactively with DoD and experts
from the private sector to reduce potential risks during the deployment
of VA's new EHR by leveraging DoD's lessons learned from its IOC sites.
Most recently, on May 29, 2019, VA held an Industry Day with over 750
registered industry executives and leaders. OEHRM presented a status
update on the program. Cerner and Booz Allen Hamilton joined OEHRM to
inform eligible vendors on ways to potentially provide contracting and
subcontracting support to the EHRM effort.
VA is leveraging several efficiencies including revised contract
language to improve trouble ticket resolution based on DoD challenges;
optimal VA EHRM governance structure; fully resourced program
management office with highly qualified clinical and technical
oversight expertise; effective change management strategy; and using
Cerner Corporation as a developer and integrator consistent with
commercial best practices.
During the multi-year transition effort, VA will continue to use
Veterans Information System and Technology Architecture (VistA) and
related clinical systems until all legacy VA EHR modules are replaced
by the Cerner solution. For the purposes of ensuring uninterrupted
health care delivery, existing systems will run concurrently with the
deployment of Cerner's platform while we transition each facility.
During the transition, VA will ensure a seamless transition of care. A
continued investment in legacy VA EHR systems will ensure patient
safety, security, and a working functional system for all VA health
care professionals.

National Workshops

In September 2018, VA held its Model Validation Event, where VA's
EHR Council met with Cerner to begin the national and local workflow
development process for VA's new EHR solution. There was a series of
working sessions designed to examine Cerner's commercial recommended
workflows and evaluate the current workflows used at VAMCs. Because of
Model Validation, VA planned eight national workshops to educate
diverse clinical end-users and validate workflows to ensure VA's new
EHR solution meets the Department's needs.
VA completed the eight national workshops that spanned nearly 1,500
sessions and over 50,000 cumulative work hours by over 1,000 frontline
clinicians and end users from across the enterprise. VA was supported
by DoD, who brought lessons learned and context to the DoD's EHR
configuration, and by industry advisors who shared commercial best
practices. Through these workshops consensus was reached on over 1,300
design decisions and over 850 workflows were standardized to best meet
the needs of our Veterans. VA also held seven of eight local workshops
to validate national design decisions and configure to meet local site
requirements. This educated local sites in how their facilities would
use the new EHR solution to deliver quality health care to their
Veteran population.

Change Management and Workflow Councils

Because the program's success will rely heavily on effective user-
adoption, VA is deploying a comprehensive change management strategy to
support the transformation to VA's new EHR solution. The strategy
includes providing the necessary training to end-users: VAMC
leadership, managers, supervisors, and clinicians. In addition, there
will be on-going communications regarding deployment schedule and
anticipated changes to end-user's day-to-day activities and processes.
VA will also continue to work with affected stakeholders to identify
and resolve any outstanding employee resistance and any additional
reinforcement that is needed.
VA has established 18 EHR Councils (EHRCs) to support the
development of national standardized clinical and business workflows
for VA's new EHR solution. The Councils represent each of the
functional areas of the EHR solution, including behavioral health,
pharmacy, ambulatory, dentistry, and business operations. VA
understands that to meet the program's goals we must engage frontline
staff and clinicians. Therefore, the composition of the EHRCs will
continue to be about 60 percent clinicians from the field who provide
care for Veterans, and 40 percent from VA Central Office. As VA
implements its new EHR solution across the enterprise, certain Council
memberships will evolve to align with contemporaneous implementation
locations. While deploying in a particular VISN, the needs of Veterans
and clinicians in that particular VISN will be incorporated into
national workflows.
Further, in response to lessons learned from DoD and commercial EHR
deployments, VA designed the VA Innovative Technology Advancement Lab
(VITAL) to provide advanced, hands-on education for VA informatics and
analytics leaders as a lesson learned from DoD. The VITAL program
consists of four, three-day, in-person sessions and a capstone project.
The capstone project allows for participants to solve real-world
problems, so they gain confidence and competence to take full advantage
of the advanced capability in the new EHR solution. These participants
are an important component of the super user community as they can
support their peers during training, Go-Live, and sustainment
activities. Initially 76 trainees were divided across four cohorts to
participate from across 40 point-of-care clinical and support functions
from VISN 20 sites.

Centralized Scheduling Solution

VA accelerated the timeline to implement a resource-based
scheduling solution across the enterprise in advance of the delivery of
the full EHR solution. VA currently manages clinical scheduling using
the Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture
(VistA). According to a VA study VistA scheduling does not provide VA
with the requisite functionality, usability, and overarching business
benefits. Additionally, the outdated user interface and cumbersome
manual processes create inefficiencies and prevent schedulers from
viewing the medical provider's complete picture of available
appointments.
As a result, in 2018, VA piloted the Medical Appointment Scheduling
System (MASS), a commercial resource-based, scheduling solution in
Columbus, Ohio, to replace the clinic-based VistA scheduling system.
This pilot site demonstrated that a resource-based solution improved
timely access for Veterans, increased provider productivity, and
enhanced scheduling accuracy. Further, the resource-based solution:

Increased visibility of available appointments,

Allowed providers a comprehensive view of their entire
day, and

Enabled staff to efficiently manage resources needed for
appointments.

Because a resource-based solution supports delivering better health
care for Veterans, VA will implement the Centralized Scheduling
Solution (CSS) to bring these benefits to all Veterans.
VA's EHR modernization contract contains the licenses to implement
CSS across the enterprise to fulfill interoperability objectives. Like
MASS, CSS is a resource-based scheduling solution and will be
implemented in a number of VA facilities in advance of full EHR
modernization capabilities. The Chalmers P. Wylie Ambulatory Care
Center, in Columbus, Ohio, will serve as the pilot site for CSS, with
Go-Live scheduled for April 2020. The Louis Stokes VA Medical Center in
Cleveland, Ohio, will serve as the next and larger pilot site for CSS.
VA will leverage the architecture and lessons learned from the MASS
solution by collaborating with key stakeholders from the MASS
implementation to ensure these lessons learned are incorporated in VA's
new scheduling initiative.
VA established a dedicated pillar, or division, within OEHRM to
provide oversight of CSS integration, deployment, and change management
activities. Further, the pillar will collaborate with partners such as
the Veterans Health Administration, Office of Information and
Technology, and the Veterans Benefits Administration to successfully
implement the CSS solution. Accelerating CSS implementation will enable
VA to provide a resource-based scheduling solution across the
enterprise sooner, and also replace VistA Scheduling Enhancements
(VSE), which is the current temporary bridge for scheduling needs.

Funding

With the support of Congress, OEHRM has not experienced funding
shortfalls that would impact the success of the EHRM initiative.
Additionally, OEHRM appreciates Congress for providing the program with
three-year funding. This flexibility in funding execution is critical,
as it allows OEHRM to fund key operations on a timeline that aligns
with a successful implementation.
OEHRM's enacted Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 budget has allowed the
program to continue the preparation of VA's EHR solution at VA's three
IOC sites. VA's Fiscal Year 2020 budget request of $1.6 billion would
provide the necessary resources for the post Go-Live activities of the
IOC sites, the in-process deployment of seven sites, 18 new site
assessments, and 12 site transitions scheduled to begin in Fiscal Year
2020.
OEHRM reviews its lifecycle cost estimate at least once per month
to reflect actual execution and to fulfill its programmatic oversight
responsibilities. OEHRM will continue to provide Congress with regular
updates to ensure our commitment to transparency.

Conclusion

Again, the EHRM effort will enable VA to provide the high-quality
care and benefits that our Nation's Veterans deserve. VA will continue
to keep Congress informed of milestones as they occur. Madam Chair,
Ranking Member, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee today to discuss one of
VA's top priorities. I am happy to respond to any questions that you
may have.
