- SAVING TAXPAYER DOLLARS IN FEDERAL REAL ESTATE: REDUCING THE GOVERNMENT'S SPACE FOOTPRINT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SAVING TAXPAYER DOLLARS IN FEDERAL REAL ESTATE: REDUCING THE
GOVERNMENT'S SPACE FOOTPRINT

=======================================================================

(114-22)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 16, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-073 PDF                    WASHINGTON : 2016

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                             Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
TOM RICE, South Carolina             RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
JOHN KATKO, New York                 JARED HUFFMAN, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
------                                7

Subcommittee on Economic Development, Public Buildings, and Emergency
Management

LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania, Chairman
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina             Columbia
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania       DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia           DINA TITUS, Nevada
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina             Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex       VACANCY
Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Hon. Jeff Denham, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California, testimony..........................................     4

Panel 2

Hon. David Mader, Controller, Office of Management and Budget:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Norman Dong, Commissioner, Public Buildings Service, U.S. General
Services Administration:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................    32
David J. Wise, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office:

Testimony....................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................    38

Panel 3

Maria Foscarinis, Executive Director, National Law Center on
Homelessness and Poverty:

Testimony....................................................    22
Prepared statement...........................................    51

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hon. Jason Chaffetz of Utah......................................    26

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SAVING TAXPAYER DOLLARS IN FEDERAL REAL ESTATE: REDUCING THE
GOVERNMENT'S SPACE FOOTPRINT

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 16, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Economic Development,
Public Buildings, and Emergency Management,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:05 p.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Lou Barletta
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Barletta. The committee will come to order. The purpose
of today's hearing is to explore how we can save billions of
dollars by shrinking our Federal real estate footprint. I think
we have a tremendous opportunity this year to come up with a
bipartisan bill that gains the support of the House, the
Senate, and the President. We have the same goal: to get excess
and underutilized properties out of the hands of Government and
onto the local tax rolls or local service providers. This can
be a win-win solution for the taxpayer, local governments, and
homeless assistance providers.
First let me thank Chairman Chaffetz of the Committee on
Oversight and Government Reform for working closely with this
committee on this important issue. He planned to be here to
testify, but, unfortunately, was called at the last minute to
work on another crucial issue. Without objection, I would like
to submit his written statement for the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. I also want to thank Chairman Denham for his
work and leadership on this issue. And, finally, I want to
thank all of our witnesses and particularly OMB [Office of
Management and Budget] Controller Mader for being here today.
We know reducing the Federal real estate footprint is a
critical issue and can result in real and significant savings
for the taxpayer. For example, since the beginning of last
Congress, our committee has saved more than $2.5 billion by
approving leases and other projects that reduce and consolidate
space. That was no small feat, and it took this committee,
working with GSA [General Services Administration] and OMB, to
realize those savings.
Our subcommittee has hosted a series of roundtables,
working with GSA, to send the message of optimizing space and
replacing expiring leases with good, long-term deals. In some
ways, the leased side of Federal real estate is easier to
address. When leases expire, an opportunity is created to
reduce space and negotiate good lease deals to lower costs.
And, with 100 million square feet of leased space expiring in
the next 5 years--50 percent of GSA's leased inventory--the
opportunity for taxpayer savings is huge. In light of that, I
recently introduced the Public Buildings Reform and Savings
Act, which will create a leasing pilot program GSA can use to
cut the best deals for the taxpayer.
Today, however, we are focusing on a much more difficult
problem: getting rid of Federal real estate we no longer need.
According to the most recent Federal Real Property Summary, the
Government owns more than 254,000 buildings, comprising 2.5
billion square feet of space, costing the taxpayer $14.4
billion annually. However, we are also told in the same summary
that only 5,000 buildings are actually underutilized, despite
the fact that 27,000 assets are labeled as ``inactive.'' It is
clear the data needs improving, but it is also clear, based on
work by GAO [Government Accountability Office] and others, that
there are a lot of vacant or underutilized buildings across the
Nation that go unreported.
We don't have to look far to see prime examples of this
right here in Washington. Just down the street sits the vacant
Cotton Annex on land worth more than $100 million. On
Pennsylvania Avenue it took more than a decade and an act of
Congress to turn the money-losing Old Post Office building into
a profit center for the taxpayer. The West Heating Plant in
Georgetown sat vacant for more than a decade, and it wasn't
until this committee shined a spotlight on it that GSA finally
sold it for almost $20 million.
When these properties sit vacant or underutilized, no one
wins. The agencies and taxpayer pay to maintain them, no tax
dollars are infused into the local economies, and they are not
made available for sale or even screened for other purposes,
such as to serve the homeless. Previous estimates indicate we
are wasting more than $1.6 billion a year on these properties,
but if GAO reports are any indication, this is probably a low
estimate.
Today we hope to hear from our witnesses what is the scope
of the problem, what are the obstacles to reducing the real
estate footprint, and how do we overcome those hurdles. A few
challenges we have seen include upfront costs to make
properties available, including money to move people out of
underutilized buildings, land-banking--agencies holding on to
valuable but vacant properties, because they think someday they
will need them--and a disposal process that is cumbersome,
time-consuming, and keeps properties from being sold. Chairman
Chaffetz and Chairman Denham in the past have each offered
proposals to address these issues, and I am pleased to see them
working together on this issue.
The administration proposed legislation in 2011 and
reiterated the importance of that legislation in the fiscal
year 2016 budget. In fact, in the fiscal year 2016 budget, the
administration states that, despite the progress made through
efforts like Freeze the Footprint, an independent board would
allow us to achieve long-desired opportunities for reform and
deficit reduction.
I want to again thank all the witnesses here today. We have
a great opportunity to finally get a bipartisan bill through
Congress and address this longstanding problem.
I understand we have some Members who sit on our full
committee who may want to participate in today's hearing. I ask
unanimous consent that Members not on the subcommittee be
permitted to sit with the subcommittee at today's hearing,
offer testimony, and ask questions.
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. Without objection, so ordered. Thank you.
I now call on the ranking member of the subcommittee, Mr.
Carson, for his opening statement.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Chairman Barletta. Welcome to this
afternoon's hearing. Today we will examine the GSA's
implementation of the administration's policy on restraining
the growth of the Federal real estate footprint. We will also
look at possible impediments to improving these efforts.
In 2003, the GAO placed real property management on its
list of high-risk governmental activities, where it remains
today. Both this committee and GAO have repeatedly expressed
serious concerns about how Federal real property has been
managed. I am pleased, therefore, that the administration has
made a concerted effort to right-size the Federal real estate
portfolio.
First, the Office of Management and Budget--OMB--issued a
memorandum requiring all Federal agencies to freeze their
Federal real estate footprints.
Secondly, the administration proposed legislation to create
a board that would operate similar to the Base Closure and
Realignment Commission, or BRAC, to expedite the sale of
underutilized and excess properties.
Thirdly, the administration has released further guidance
that Federal agencies should reduce their footprint. It has
been very clear that the administration is serious about
addressing these high-risk activities.
However, the CBO [Congressional Budget Office] and various
former GSA officials have raised concerns about the potential
effectiveness or need for this proposed board. These former
senior officials have testified before other committees, and
have consistently questioned whether there is a real problem or
not. They have questioned whether a significant number of
underutilized Federal properties actually warrants the creation
of a new Federal bureaucracy. GAO has also raised concerns
about reliability of the data, and the Federal Real Property
Profile [FRPP], which describes most of the real property owned
by the Federal Government, and is considered by OMB to be a key
management tool.
Without a rigorous inventory and analysis, it is impossible
to know whether the Federal Government is really sitting on
billions of dollars of underutilized properties, and if there
is a market for these properties at all. As the Federal
Government's landlord, GSA has a responsibility to guide
agencies toward making good decisions that reflect both the
will of the administration and Congress.
The Federal Government must make better decisions on how to
house these Federal agencies. With the advent of hoteling,
alternate work schedules, and teleworking, it is very possible
for Federal agencies to have a smaller footprint than ever, as
the need for Federal workers to be in one fixed location
decreases.
I remain open to a legislative fix if that is what is
necessary to address the real documented concerns about the
management of real property. However, I also want to ensure
that any legislation offers the proper protections for the
current stakeholders in the disposal process, while improving
the process for disposition of real property. These important
stakeholders include homeless service providers and
municipalities eligible for public benefit conveyances.
So, I am especially interested in whether or not the
current guidelines are working, as Congress intended, to allow
homeless service providers an appropriate opportunity to make
use of surplus or underutilized Federal properties to address
the devastating problems of homelessness, particularly among
returning veterans.
So I look forward to the testimony of today's witnesses to
help us evaluate the need for legislation to dispose of Federal
property that might be surplus or underutilized.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you, Ranking Member Carson. On our
first panel today we have the Honorable Jeff Denham, chairman
of the Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous
Materials of the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure. And I ask unanimous consent that our witness'
full statement be included in the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. Without objection, so ordered.
Chairman Denham, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF HON. JEFF DENHAM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Barletta and Mr. Carson, for
allowing me to testify today. And first let me commend Chairman
Barletta on his efforts to not only authorize, but also pass a
bipartisan bill, the Public Buildings Reform and Savings Act of
2015.
Your leadership on this issue has helped us not only in
decreasing our national debt, but also in getting rid of some
of the Government inefficiency.
I would also like to thank Chairman Shuster and Chairman
Chaffetz for working with me on this issue to ensure it
receives the proper oversight and attention. Reducing our
Nation's national debt is a bipartisan issue, and I have been
proud to work over the last several years to not only get a
bipartisan resolution, but get one that goes across multiple
committees to get--to garner enough support to actually move
this along.
Legislation will reform the Federal property disposal
process, and would create a nonpartisan, professional board to
root out waste and inefficiencies in the way that we manage our
public buildings. The principles of this bill are the driving
forces behind the effort to redevelop the Federal Triangle, and
serve as a model for how we manage property, nationwide.
I first proposed reforming the Federal property disposal
process at this subcommittee's first hearing in February 2011,
and the President proposed similar ideas in his 2012 budget. I
am pleased to see the President has continued his support of
these reforms, speaking to it not only in his 2011 State of the
Union speech, but also including it once again in his 2016
budget that he submitted to Capitol Hill.
Likewise, I am pleased to have secured the commitment of
this administration to advance legislation, to work with myself
and Chairman Chaffetz, to see real reforms actually signed into
law.
In recent years the GAO identified billions of dollars of
waste through mismanagement over buildings, and an overreliance
on costly leased space to meet long-term housing needs.
Additionally, both Houses of Congress have included the idea in
their annual budget documents. I believe the potential to save
billions of dollars is real.
To be successful, the board will need to implement five
principles: first, to consolidate the footprint of Federal real
estate; second, house more Federal employees in less overall
space; third, reduce our reliance on costly leased space;
fourth, sell or redevelop high-value assets that are
underutilized, or too valuable for housing Federal employees;
and, fifth, and most importantly, to dispose of surplus
property quickly.
I believe a board of citizens that uses these five
principles to guide its decisions can see over $15 billion in
initial savings. To be clear, we are not looking to create a
fire sale of vacant properties, or overload the marketplace.
Simply dumping vacant properties on the market is not a long-
term solution.
Additionally, some Members have talked about this as being
a BRAC-like process. We have listened to these concerns over
the years, and continue to work on this legislation. To begin
with, BRAC relocated thousands of people, families, and entire
communities. BRAC removed an economic engine from cities across
the country. This legislation will not relocate one family. It
will not destroy one single community. Instead, we will bring
new economic life and development into Federal space that has
long been neglected.
Finally, the decision on these properties today belongs to
OMB. And, through this legislation, will remain with OMB. What
we would like to do is reshape the way this country manages the
Federal real estate footprint. At the end of the day, the total
cost to house the Federal Government is directly proportional
to how much real estate we hold. To save money, we will have to
consolidate that footprint. To consolidate, we must house more
Federal employees in less space. Fortunately, there are
tremendous opportunities of savings in this area.
Perhaps one of the greatest areas for taxpayer savings will
be in the redevelopment or sale of the high-valued but
underutilized properties. For instance, the ones the chairman
had talked about, the abandoned and underutilized properties
here, in DC, the Georgetown West Heating Plant and the Old Post
Office, they were both vacant and decayed, costing taxpayers
millions of dollars a year, as they sat idle and unused.
The first hearing that we held was in the Old Post Office.
I remember being a new freshman, wearing a California suit in
the middle of the winter, and it was 32--it was below zero,
freezing temperatures in that cold building, sitting vacant. I
know there are some people in here that remember very fondly
the cold atmosphere of that vacant building that is now being
redeveloped.
Through the attention that was paid by this committee, GSA
was able to sell one and lease the other to private entities
that will bring new business and economic activity right here,
to the DC area. There are high-value properties like this all
across the entire country. We can use this as an example.
Maximizing value is what we seek to achieve.
I believe this guiding principle, along with the five
objectives I have outlined earlier, should help us to redevelop
and push this legislation along.
I thank the committee, again, and I look forward to working
with you on this issue, as we move forward.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you for your testimony. Your leadership
and commitment to this issue is critical.
I will now call our second panel of witnesses. Thank you.
[Pause.]
Mr. Barletta. We have with us today the Honorable David
Mader, Controller, Office of Management and Budget; Mr. Norman
Dong, Commissioner, Public Buildings Service, U.S. General
Services Administration; and Mr. David J. Wise, Director,
Physical Infrastructure Issues, U.S. Government Accountability
Office.
I ask unanimous consent that the witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. Without objection, so ordered. Since your
written testimony has been made a part of the record, the
subcommittee would request that you limit your oral testimony
to 5 minutes.
Mr. Mader, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF HON. DAVID MADER, CONTROLLER, OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT
AND BUDGET; NORMAN DONG, COMMISSIONER, PUBLIC BUILDINGS
SERVICE, U.S. GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION; AND DAVID J.
WISE, DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Mader. Thank you, Chairman Barletta, Ranking Member
Carson, and members of the committee and subcommittee, for
inviting me to testify and update the subcommittee on the
changes that we are implementing to improve the Government's
real property management, and overall efficiency of the real
property portfolio.
I would like to update you on the status of the initiatives
that I mentioned when I testified last July in front of the
House Subcommittee on Government Operations regarding the
administration's effort to improve the management of the
Government's real property portfolio. Over the past 11 months
we have continued to implement actions that will improve and
transform the way the Federal Government manages its real
property.
Our plan includes four key components: first, develop and
implement a strategic framework that will guide agencies'
management of their real property portfolios over the next 5
years; second, develop and implement Governmentwide performance
metrics that will identify efficiency opportunities at the
agency level, and to assess the performance of individual
agencies; third, develop a new management tool within the
current Federal Real Property Profile to enhance the utility
and quality of that data; fourth, modifications to existing
statutes to increase the pace and number of property disposals
which will decrease the amount of resources expended on
maintaining excess and underutilized properties.
The President's 2016 budget invests in our federally owned
facilities to ensure that mission execution is optimized at the
lowest possible cost, including $2.4 billion over the fiscal
year 2015 enacted level to support critical construction and
renovation projects, as well as opportunities for consolidation
in the Federal building inventory.
We have completed or made significant progress on three of
the four components. We issued the National Real Property
Strategy in March of 2015, which builds on past actions and
results to define the strategic framework that agencies will
use to manage their portfolio. The framework will freeze the
growth of the inventory, measure performance, and identify
opportunities to improve efficiency in data quality, and,
finally, to reduce the size of the inventory by prioritizing
actions to consolidate, colocate, and dispose of properties.
To implement the national strategy, we have issued a new
policy that provides a set of agency-specific performance
metrics. The Reduce the Footprint policy, issued also in March,
requires agencies to implement a 5-year plan to reduce their
real property portfolios. The Reduce the Footprint policy
prioritizes the disposal of unneeded and inefficient properties
by requiring agencies to set annual square-foot disposal
targets for all types of buildings. It also requires agencies
to issue office space design standards by March of next year,
2016, and to use the standard as a design criteria, going
forward.
The last component of our plan, potential modification to
existing statutes, could increase the pace and the number of
properties disposed of through sale, demolition, and public
benefit conveyance. These modifications could include, but are
not limited to, agency retention of some of the sale proceeds
for reinvestment in additional disposals, expanded authority
for GSA to support agencies' work to prepare properties for a
declaration of excess, and relief from some of the aspects of
the public benefit conveyance process.
All of the components of our plan, except, of course, for
the potential modifications to the existing statutes, will be
implemented by the end of this fiscal year, 2015. We believe
these actions will significantly improve the management of real
property and deliver efficiency gains over the next 5 years.
The real property program has achieved results in 2014, and we
will continue to build on this achievement.
We reduced the Freeze the Footprint baseline by 11.2
million square feet in 2014, and this result builds on the
10.2-million-square-foot reduction we achieved in 2013, so in 2
years combined we reduced 21 million square feet of office and
warehouse space.
It is important to note that, in order for the Government
to reduce our footprint, we require funding to make the
necessary reconfigurations and relocations that will result in
out-year cost avoidance. We have made progress. However,
significant opportunities remain.
One significant challenge has been the historically low
levels of funding appropriated to the GSA Federal Buildings
Fund. The GSA is leading the Federal effort to both invest in
Federal facilities and consolidate space to reduce costs and
optimize efficiency, avoiding tens of millions of dollars in
annual lease costs. Recent funding levels for the GSA and other
Federal landholding agencies have led both to facility
deterioration, as well as missed opportunities to consolidate
and reduce operating costs. As I stated in my hearing last
summer, I think we need to think about the concept of investing
to save.
We look forward to working with the subcommittee on
legislation that will enable us to make even greater progress
by improving the efficiency of the Governmentwide portfolio and
accelerating the pace of property disposals over the next few
years.
Thank you for the opportunity of testifying today, and I
look forward to answering your questions.
Mr. Barletta. OK, we have--they have just called votes. We
have a two-vote series. So we are going to recess until we can
return from these votes in about 20, 25 minutes.
The subcommittee is in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Barletta. The meeting will come to order. We will pick
up where we left off.
Mr. Dong, you may proceed.
Mr. Dong. Good afternoon, Chairman Barletta, Ranking Member
Carson, and members of this committee. Thank you for inviting
me to the hearing this afternoon. Our mission at GSA is to
deliver the best value in real estate, acquisition, and
technology to the Federal Government. And, within the Public
Building Service, our goal is to support agency real property
requirements, but in the most fiscally responsible way.
We recognize that excess spending on real estate comes at
the expense of more mission-critical activities. And, as
agencies spend less on rent, they can devote more of their
limited dollars to support mission requirements.
To do this, we are consolidating space and improving space
utilization. We are taking a more disciplined approach to
leasing. We are disposing of unneeded assets. We are leveraging
our exchange and outleasing authorities, and we are supporting
OMB in the Governmentwide effort not just to freeze, but to
reduce the Federal footprint.
On the issue of space utilization, we are working with
Federal agencies to identify opportunities to colocate,
consolidate, and reduce the footprint. Since fiscal year 2014,
Congress has provided $70 million each year to support agency
consolidation projects. Many of these projects reflect agencies
moving out of expensive leased facilities into federally owned
space.
In Minneapolis, for example, we are partnering with HUD
[U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] to move them
out of leased space into the Federal building in that city.
Through this process, HUD will reduce its footprint by over
9,000 square feet, which will save the Government more than
$700,000 each year.
And today we are executing dozens of projects that will
reduce the Federal footprint by almost 800,000 square feet, and
reduce annual leasing costs by about $50 million. And, given
significant agency interest in this program, our budget request
for fiscal year 2016 will help us further reduce our square
footage, and increase our annual cost savings.
As we emphasize the importance of federally owned space, we
will continue to see a significant amount of leasing activity.
So, our job at GSA is not just to make sure that we are
reducing the footprint, but also the cost of that footprint.
And, by embracing greater competition in our leasing
transactions, we can capitalize on favorable rates that we are
still seeing in many markets.
In order to get better leasing rates for the Government,
GSA is working with our Federal tenants to simplify their space
requirements and broaden delineated areas to increase
competition; to extend lease terms to 10 years or longer
whenever possible, because longer terms usually mean lower
rates; and to start the planning process at least 36 months
prior to lease expiration, to allow for competitive
procurements, and to avoid costly holdovers and extensions.
We see that whenever we are in holdover or extension, we
are paying about 20 percent more than we should, on average. In
recent years, we have made some good progress to reduce the
number of holdovers and extensions. And, by the end of fiscal
year 2014, we had only 97 holdovers out of more than 8,700
leases, which was the lowest figure since 2007.
On the issue of underutilized property, we are improving
our efforts to identify assets we no longer need, and to move
these properties off our books. In fiscal year 2014, GSA
disposed of 342 properties, Governmentwide, which represented a
61-percent increase from the year before. And this year we are
on track to meet our goal of disposing of 3 million square feet
of excess property, which includes the Metro West Building in
Baltimore.
We are seeing some progress here, but we recognize that
there is much more that we can and should be doing. GSA is also
leveraging our exchange and outleasing authorities to tap into
the value of those assets that no longer serve a Federal
purpose, but still represent significant value to the private
sector.
In Southwest DC, we are leveraging the value of our
regional office building and the Cotton Annex in the Federal
Triangle complex. Through this exchange project, GSA is seeking
construction and development services to modernize the rest of
our headquarters building, and to further the DHS consolidation
at the St. Elizabeths campus.
Another example is our long-term lease of the Old Post
Office building to the Trump Organization, which is
transforming it into a luxury hotel. This private investment of
$200 million will preserve this historic building, serve the
local community, and generate lease revenues for the
Government.
I would like to close by discussing how GSA is supporting
the administration's National Strategy for Real Property. This
summer, GSA will be working with OMB to review agency plans to
reduce the footprint. And, through this process, we will build
upon our work in fiscal year 2015, and will develop a robust
pipeline of potential projects for disposal, exchange, and
outlease, beginning next year.
We have made significant progress in managing Federal real
property, but we recognize there is much more work that must be
done. I look forward to working with this committee to improve
Federal Government management of real property.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Dong.
Mr. Wise, you may proceed.
Mr. Wise. Chairman Barletta, Ranking Member Carson, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss our work on how the Federal Government's real property
management practices could be improved.
The Government's real property holdings are vast. The
portfolio comprises hundreds of thousands of buildings, and a
comparable number of permanent structures. My statement today
focuses on, one, improvements and challenges in Federal real
property management; and, two, executive and legislative steps
that could help the Government address these challenges.
Since GAO placed Federal real property management on the
high-risk list in 2003, the Government has given the issue
high-level attention, including: establishing the Federal Real
Property Council and the Federal Real Property Profile, which
is the Government's real property database; implementing the
2012 Freeze the Footprint policy, aimed at keeping Federal
office and warehouse inventory at a baseline level established
using FRPP data; and issuing this past March the 2015-2020
National Strategy for the Efficient Use of Real Property. The
strategy includes freeze growth in the inventory, measuring
performance, and reducing growth through consolidation,
colocation, and disposal.
Notwithstanding these positive steps, the Government
continues to face challenges in managing its real property
portfolio, including maintaining more real property than it
needs, relying on leasing when ownership would be more cost-
effective, and making real property management decisions using
unreliable data.
Retaining unneeded real property results in significant
costs to the Federal Government. In July 2014, the
administration released the first-year results of the Freeze
the Footprint policy, indicating that it reduced the Federal
Government's office and warehouse space by about 10 million
square feet between fiscal years 2012 and 2013, which exceeded
its goals.
However, we found that the data behind these results were
unreliable, resulting in a potential overstatement of the
progress made. For example, some properties credited as having
been disposed of by agencies were actually returned to GSA, and
remain part of the Federal inventory.
The Government continues to rely heavily on leasing where
ownership would be more cost-effective in the long run. In our
February 2015 high-risk update, we reported that the Government
has demonstrated leadership commitment by trying to consolidate
high-value leases and smaller leases, as they expire. However,
we noted that GSA lacked an action plan and transparent data to
demonstrate progress in achieving this goal.
Consistent and accurate data are critical to effectively
manage real property. Despite leadership commitment to improve
FRPP, the Government continues to face challenges with its
accuracy and consistency. In 2012, we reported that FRPP data
did not consistently describe excess and underutilized Federal
real property. While the Government has taken some steps to
improve FRPP, additional improvements are needed, including
better accuracy of utilization, space reductions reported by
agencies, maintenance needs, and tracking of structures.
Three key steps could assist the way forward: implementing
the national strategy, which I mentioned earlier; implementing
key GAO recommendations; and considering legislation to assist
the disposal process and mitigate competing stakeholder
interests.
In recent years we have made a number of recommendations to
GSA that, if implemented, should improve real property
management and reduce costs. Some priority recommendations
include, in June 2012 we recommended steps GSA could take to
make the FRPP database a better decisionmaking tool. GSA
agreed, and is implementing measures aimed at improving its
reliability and usefulness. This effort is ongoing.
In July 2012, we recommended that GSA develop a 5-year
capital plan to help ensure that long-term goals are fully
considered when making decisions to fund capital projects. GSA
agreed, but conveyed that the challenging budget environment in
recent years has limited the agency's ability to develop such a
plan.
In November 2014 we recommended that GSA develop a clear
strategy to effectively manage the Government's vast warehouse
portfolio. GSA agreed, and is developing appropriate guidance.
We will continue to monitor the implementation of these and our
other real property recommendations.
Since 2011 there have been several real property reform
bills introduced in the Congress. None have been enacted. One
of the bills, a Civilian Property Realignment Act, CPRA,
provided a framework for disposing of and consolidating
civilian real property. The Excess Federal Building and
Property Disposal Act would have created a pilot project for
expedited disposal of a limited number of high-value properties
through public auction.
More recently, the Public Buildings Reform and Savings Act
would codify the Freeze the Footprint policy goals for high-
value projects, and place limitations on the agency's ability
to enter into private-sector leases, among other things.
Chairman Barletta, Ranking Member Carson, and members of
the committee, this completes my statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you have at this time. Thank you.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you for your testimony, Mr. Wise. I
will now begin the first round of questions, limited to 5
minutes for each Member. If there are any additional questions
following the first round, we will proceed with the second
round.
Mr. Dong, I want to thank you again for working with us on
the leasing side. Before we get into the owned side, I did want
to alert you that I am still hearing that the standard GSA
lease is just 5 years, which, as you know, is more costly than
long-term lease deals. What are you doing to get the GSA
regions to lock in the long-term deals?
And also, with 50 percent of your leases expiring in the
next 5 years, GSA should be using all the tools in your
toolbox. However, I am still not seeing many leases being
tasked to the brokers. And what are you doing to address this?
Mr. Dong. Chairman Barletta, I think you are raising a
really interesting point here. And since I have been
commissioner over the past 15 months, I have underscored the
importance of broader delineated areas, and longer lease terms,
and greater competition, all in the name of being able to get
better rates.
But I think what we want to be able to do is not just say
what is important, but to actually follow through with the
regions, to make sure that they are doing what is important.
And we are taking much more of a hands-on role to have those
follow-on discussions with the regions, to review the
transactions, one by one, to ask the questions, in terms of,
``All right, tell me what you are doing about delineated area.
Tell me what you are doing about lease term.''
We actually, over the past few months, have been doing
reviews of past transactions, region by region. What we will
do, going forward, is to review the future pipeline of expiring
leases, and really make sure that agencies are adhering to the
guidance that we have articulated at headquarters, to make sure
that we are landing in the right place for those larger
transactions.
Mr. Barletta. As far as working with the brokers?
Mr. Dong. We have talked in earlier settings about how we
have a significant amount of work in front of us, in terms of
the expiring lease pipeline. And, again, we don't want to be in
a situation where we continue to put more time on the clock
through extensions, because that costs us, as we have talked
about before, a 20-percent premium.
So, as we look at the workload, region by region, one of
the questions that we are bringing to that discussion is,
``Tell me how you are going to use the broker contracts as a
resource here,'' because we have no excuse not to use the
brokers. We need to be leveraging every single resource at our
disposal to manage the workload, and to get the best rates.
Mr. Barletta. Mr. Mader, last week OMB Director Donovan
committed to members of this committee to working with us and
Chairman Chaffetz to advance legislation and reform the way the
Federal Government manages property. Specifically, we seek to
consolidate the Federal footprint, sell or redevelop high-
value, underutilized space, and dispose of property more
quickly.
Now, the President has also included property disposal
legislation as a priority issue in his annual budget. We
appreciate the President's focus on this issue, and agree the
time has come to address the backlog of unneeded property. Can
you confirm that the administration will work with us to move
legislation through Congress that incorporates those ideals?
Mr. Mader. Mr. Chairman, absolutely. Not only does the
administration support better leveraging the real property
portfolio, but, you know, I think we have demonstrated through,
you know, proposing in multiple budgets now for several years,
the CPRA legislation that David Wise talked about. So I think
we are all shooting for the same objective, and I think it is
just a matter of how do we sort of dock all these ships
together.
This morning, Norm and I had an opportunity to testify over
in the Senate with Chairman Johnson and Senator Carper. Same
topic. They have an interest, they want to do something.
So, I think, you know, it is just a matter of getting all
the stars aligned, because I think everybody is shooting for
the same objective here.
Mr. Barletta. Mr. Wise, does the Federal Government own
civilian property that it does not need, or underutilizes? And
is significant taxpayer money spent on these properties every
year? Is this a significant problem? Is legislation required to
address it?
Mr. Wise. Yes, yes, yes, and yes, in brief. To expand on
that, yes, it is--clearly, we have shown--and I think the
testimony from the administration has also shown--that there is
a lot of unneeded and underutilized property out there. Exactly
how much, we don't really know. Is it costing taxpayers money
to maintain and secure it and guard it, and so forth? Yes.
Legislation? There are certain things we have talked about
in the past in some of our reports. There's a lot of things the
administration can do, but there are some things that the
Federal agencies are really unable to do. We see this as
basically kind of a cooperative effort. There is both a Federal
side, as well as an agency side and a legislative side.
And where I think the legislative side can come into play
is through some elements that we are--that we already knew
about from CPRA, where it can deal with some of the problems
that inhibit the disposal process, primarily trying to either
neutralize a little bit, or at least mitigate some of the
competing stakeholder interests. And that is where a CPRA-like,
or at least a legislative remedy, could be very useful, in
partnering with the Federal agencies, to help move the disposal
process.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ranking
Member Carson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Chairman.
Commissioner Dong and Mr. Mader, can you provide specific
examples of when the Federal Government was unable to dispose
of a valuable piece of property because of conflicting
stakeholder interests that you believe to be emblematic of this
problem, nationwide?
Mr. Mader. Congressman, let me start, and then I think Norm
probably has a couple examples.
I recently had an opportunity to visit with the Department
of Veterans Affairs. OMB does an annual review of agency
operations. Last week we sat with Deputy Secretary Gibson and
his top leadership. And one of the topics of each and every one
of these reviews--and we are about halfway through the cabinet-
level departments now--focuses on real property, on the amount
of space they hold, number of buildings.
In the case of the VA, obviously, they are a very large
landholding and building-occupying agency, and rightfully so,
because of the critical mission that they provide. But what was
interesting in that conversation was the level of frustration
that they talked about, where they have facilities that they
are looking to replace, and yet, you know, they receive
opposition from the community to actually replace it. And there
were a couple that they mentioned in particular, where they
said, you know, ``We have the funding to build a new facility,
but the community doesn't''--you know, ``They really like this
old facility.'' Or, ``We can consolidate a facility, and turn
that building over to GSA for redevelopment, and the community
says, `You know, we would really just like to keep the VA
hospital.' ''
So I think one of the challenges--and Norm has lots of
other examples--is how do you sort of leverage the interests of
all the parties in a way that we can actually achieve. What we
share with you is reducing the footprint.
Mr. Dong. Congressman Carson, my colleague from OMB was
talking about some of the challenges in managing the various
stakeholder interests. I wanted to answer the question focused
on what we see as some other obstacles, as well. And I think a
key obstacle for us in this process is that whole notion of
retention of proceeds. And what we see, as agencies look to
identify properties to move off their books, is that they incur
costs. There is a cost of doing that. There is an upfront cost
of doing that. And if they have no ability to retain any
proceeds to at least recover their cost, it makes it very
difficult.
We actually see some examples in the Federal Government
where you do have agencies that have some limited retention of
proceeds authority. The Coast Guard is one example, the Forest
Service is another example. And, with those two agencies, you
are seeing far more volume, far more disposition activity among
those agencies because they are able to recoup their costs.
Mr. Mader. I think, if I might add one more item, in the
current fiscal year, the Congress authorized GSA to spend $70
million out of the Federal Buildings Fund to do building
consolidations. And I think this goes to the chairman's comment
about, you know, in GAO's critique about moving out of
expensive leased facilities.
So GSA had last year, and then again this year, $70
million. And they have done--and Norm can talk about the
progress they have made over the last 2 years. But in the
President's budget for 2016 that is pending, we have asked for
$200 million. There is a lot more we can do, if we could invest
in it. And what we are hearing is, in fact, not only are we not
going to get the $200 million, we are not even going to get the
$70 million. So you got to wonder, you know, can we actually
expect GSA to make any progress when we are not providing the
resources to them?
Mr. Carson. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Wise, given the problems you have identified with the
Federal Real Property Profile, and that a significant portion
of its data is, effectively, unreliable, do you think it is
possible to put together a commission that would have the
ability to scour the Federal real estate inventory in a
systematic way?
Mr. Wise. Congressman Carson, the issue with the Federal
Real Property Profile is, as you say, the data--we have done a
lot of engagements, and almost in every one we have found
issues with various aspects of the Federal Real Property
Profile.
But beyond just the pure data being an issue, there is
also--as we turned over the rocks of the Federal Real Property
Profile, we found that there were some real issues with how the
data is collected, and the congruency of the various agencies'
definitions of what constitutes utilization or nonutilization
or building condition. And so we have a very wide-ranging kind
of set of circumstances involved with many different agencies,
and even sometimes bureaus within those agencies, putting data
into this system, but not all clearly defined in the same way.
So, naturally, when things go in with some lack of
consistency, they are certainly going to come out
inconsistently, as well. And so we find all sorts of anomalies
with the data.
But I think we see a very strong management commitment,
both from GSA's Governmentwide policy office, as well as from
OMB under the leadership of Dave and his staff, of trying to
come up with ways to harmonize the collection data practices
and definitions, so that the data itself can be collected in a
more parallel basis, which, hopefully, will then improve the
overall database.
So, it is really quite a deep problem, beyond just the
numbers themselves. It is the foundation of it that really
needs to be worked on. We do know that process is ongoing at
GSA, and we are hopeful that when we evaluate it on the next
update of the high-risk update for 2017, we will see some
significant improvements as we go to test the data and its
reliability.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, gentlemen. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. We will now start our second round
of questioning. This is to all witnesses.
As I said in my opening statement, I think there are four
basic reasons that we can't get rid of real estate that we
don't need. One, agencies are land-banking valuable properties.
Two, it costs agencies more to sell a property than it will
generate in sale proceeds. Three, you have to relocate people
from underutilized properties first. And, four, the disposal
process takes too long, and results in few sales.
To address these problems, it would seem that we need, one,
an independent body to recommend properties for sale; two, the
proceeds from the high-value properties to pay for the upfront
costs of selling the less-valuable properties; three, GSA's
real estate authorities to relocate people off underutilized
but valuable property; and four, to streamline the disposal
process.
Do you agree these are the fundamental problems and
solutions that Congress has to address?
Mr. Mader. Mr. Chairman, I think what you just articulated
is very consistent with the themes that exist within our
proposed CPRA legislation. So, you know, I think we are--again,
I know I sound like a broken record--I mean I think we are all
in alignment on what the endgame is, and how to get there. I
think it is a matter of just tweaking the pieces and moving
forward.
Mr. Barletta. OK. Mr. Dong?
Mr. Dong. I would concur with what Mr. Mader said.
Mr. Barletta. Mr. Wise?
Mr. Wise. I will continue the broken record. I pretty much
agree with what Dave and Norm said. In fact, what you were
describing sounded a lot like CPRA legislation. Those are all
elements that are important to helping the process move
forward, hopefully, to improve the Federal property profile.
Mr. Barletta. OK. Sorry for not recognizing Ms. Norton in
the first round of questions. Ms. Norton, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I tiptoed in, so I can
understand that.
I very much appreciate this hearing, Mr. Chairman, however,
and I would like to pose a question, first off, to Mr. Wise.
Mr. Wise, this question, really, is about how. You know, it
is easy enough to point out all the things that we wish GSA
would do. It becomes more hard to do it. And sometimes GSA has
authority and won't do it. Perhaps sometimes the Congress needs
to make clear or to offer authority.
I noted on page 4 of your own testimony--here I am quoting
from it--you said, ``The Federal Government continues to rely
heavily on leasing of properties where it would be more cost-
effective in the long run for the Federal Government to own.''
That is a kind of mantra, virtually, of this committee. But,
you know, it is easy enough to say that; it has been difficult
to do it.
If you were--we were to point to agencies where this
becomes hard to avoid, we might point to the consolidation of
the Department of Homeland Security, where the Government
continues to spend billions of dollars. And when it is all
done, it will be perhaps untold billions, because of the delay
that Congress has made moving here.
But I noted that DHS is still in 55 locations in this very
high-lease national capital region. When consolidation fully
occurs, they will be down to something like six to nine leases.
You know, one can calculate the kind of savings in lease costs
that amounts to. One would imagine that sooner, rather than
later, is when we would want to proceed. If this doesn't add to
the deficit, I don't know what does, at least in terms of money
that we could extract.
So, I would like, perhaps beginning with Mr. Wise, does GSA
have the authority to fully use incoming rent funds to
construct new facilities that could help with consolidation?
Mr. Wise. Congresswoman Norton, the issue with the Federal
Buildings Fund, of course, is that there is an accumulation of
money going into it, but GSA is not able to expend that money
on capital projects without the authorization of Congress.
Ms. Norton. All right, let me stop you there. If Congress
were to authorize spending of money we already have in the
building fund, then GSA could move more rapidly to free us from
these costly leases.
Mr. Wise. If Congress authorized GSA to spend the money as
Congress directed, then GSA could proceed forward with spending
that money on whatever capital project was authorized.
Ms. Norton. Do both of you agree, Mr. Dong, Mr.----
Mr. Mader. Absolutely.
Mr. Dong. Yes. It comes back to having full access to the
rents that we collect. The Federal Buildings Fund was set up so
that the rent that we collect from our tenant agencies gets
reinvested back into the Federal portfolio. We are not seeing
full access. Those dollars are being diverted for other
purposes.
Ms. Norton. What kind of purposes?
Mr. Mader. The other purposes outside of Federal----
Ms. Norton. Well, I can understand for rehabilitation, for
maintaining properties. But I wonder if one could even cite a
purpose that could save the Government more money than
authorization by this committee to use at least some of those
funds to hasten--otherwise, we are depending upon
appropriations, and that is very difficult to do,
appropriations from Congress of the United States, and we have
this money lying right here that could be used.
And, Mr. Chairman, I am going to ask that we at least take
a close look at that, so that we don't continue simply to
criticize GSA for doing something it can't help but doing for
lack of authorization from our own committee.
Mr. Blue, I want to thank--or was it Mr. Dong who was with
me at the roundtable I had on holdover leases?
Mr. Dong. I believe it was our regional commissioner,
Darren Blue, who was with you at that event.
Ms. Norton. It was Darren Blue, yes. When he--I was pleased
to hear that the holdover leases--holdover leases are costly,
perhaps the most costly of leases--had decreased. But it looks
like the way we have done it is to increase the number of
short-term leases, at least in this region. And, of course, I
point to this region, where perhaps the lion's share of your
leases are.
What would it take to get off of these short-term leases?
Is it because of the footprint requirements? Why are you doing
short-term leases, which, in and of themselves, guarantee to
cost the Federal Government more in funds?
Mr. Dong. I think you are raising a really good point. And
I think what we see is, whenever there is holdover or
extension, or even succeeding leases, whenever we take a stay-
in-place strategy, and we send a strong message to the market
that we want to stay in place, then we shouldn't be surprised
when we are getting less than competitive rates.
So we are trying to make sure that we apply much more
discipline and rigor to the planning process, so that we get
agency requirements early on in the process. We need to start
the planning process at least 36 months before lease
expiration, and we need to be much more disciplined, in terms
of running that competitive process, so the market knows that
we are serious about getting the best rates for the taxpayer.
Ms. Norton. So what is the average for a short-term lease?
Mr. Dong. Well, we see lease extensions that are, like, 2
years or 3 years. And sometimes they make sense. So when we do
a lease extension because we are moving that tenant to a
federally owned building, then that is a clear strategy that
makes sense, because we have got a longer term solution to have
them in an owned facility.
Ms. Norton. Oh, would that were possible more often. Go
ahead.
Mr. Dong. When we see lease extensions where we have not
done the planning, and we are simply putting more time on the
clock, and we don't have a clear plan for what happens next,
that is the wrong approach.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Chairman, I know I am over time.
I wish you would submit to the chairman how you are
implementing this longer term out, so that, in fact, you engage
in fewer short-term leases, so the committee will understand
when this is happening, how often it is happening, and how many
short-term leases have been affected.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. We will now resume our second
round of questioning. I just have one more question.
Mr. Mader, the administration advocates for an independent
board to achieve ``long-desired opportunities for reform and
deficit reduction within the inventory with far greater scope,
speed, and efficiency.'' Can you talk about why an independent
board is important?
Mr. Mader. I think, Mr. Chairman, an independent board
would allow us to bring in outside expertise, folks that have,
you know, worked in the private sector, who have dealt with
large, real property portfolios. And I think the combination of
the outside expertise, along with GSA and other--let's say
other landholding agencies, would allow us to sort of step back
and think differently about how we look at properties, how we
think about bundling portfolios of properties.
This past year, working with GSA, you know, it is
interesting. GSA only has control over 19 percent of the
inventory, which, I think, is a surprise when people hear that
low number. They just think GSA runs everything. The fact of
the matter is, they don't. You know, you have NASA [National
Aeronautics and Space Administration], you have DOD [Department
of Defense], you have the Department of Agriculture.
So, what we did, between us and GSA, is actually got these
landholding agencies together and said, ``Look, we all have
disposals. But what we are doing is we are doing them in our
stovepipes, And we are doing them as one-offs. What if we
looked at a geographic area and said, you know, `Who has got
excess property in these five counties?' '' Is it more
attractive to sell a portfolio than a single property? Maybe.
So I think a board brings that creativity and different way of
thinking.
And I also think it takes away some of the parochialism
that just is inherent in the Government. You know, like,
``Well, we have never done it that way before.'' So I think it
is a combination of that outside experience and the inside
expertise.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. I have no further questions, and
recognize Ranking Member Carson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Chairman. Commissioner Dong and Mr.
Mader, how often do Federal agencies, unprompted by GSA or even
OMB, offer up excess real estate for disposal? And is the
solution as simple as allowing agencies to retain the proceeds
of the sale of that property? And does GSA have the discretion
to really allow agencies to retain the proceeds of a sale using
their current authority?
Mr. Mader. So I am going to start, and then I think Norm
will pick up.
I have seen, over the last couple of years now, a--more of
an interest in agencies to basically unload their excess
property. Because, with flat or declining budgets, what they
are seeing is, you know, dollars going to underutilized excess
properties, maintaining and safeguarding vacant properties. And
that is a dollar that is not going to their mission, and to,
you know, citizen services. So I see more incentive on the part
of agencies now to say, ``I need to find a way to either
consolidate my facilities, or release excess facilities,'' and
more and more of those agencies coming to GSA, saying, ``Help
me.''
And, you know, GSA has done, I think, a great job over the
last 2 years. But again, it is within the limit of how many
dollars they have to do it. So, either the agency brings them
the dollars, you know, through an appropriation, or, as Norm
mentioned, a couple of agencies that actually have the
authority to retain some of those savings, to use them, then,
to queue up the next property for disposal.
Mr. Dong. I think Dave is right, in terms of we are seeing
more activity across the agencies. And the Reduce the Footprint
directive from OMB, I think, is helpful to really focus our
collective attention on the problem.
That having been said, I think we all recognize that there
is far more potential that we should be tapping into. And I
bring it back to that whole notion of retention of proceeds.
And where agencies have some ability to retain proceeds, to
recoup the costs of getting these properties off their books,
you are seeing far more activity.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Wise, you stated in the past that consolidating leases
onto owned spaces might be the quickest way for us to save
money in real property. What can the Government do to reduce
its reliance on leasing?
Mr. Wise. Yes. I think that, again, this tracks back to the
data issue that we talked about a little bit earlier. Because
one of the issues we have seen in a number of our reports is
that consolidation of leases is made more difficult by the fact
that individual agencies don't always know what each other has
out there.
I think back to an example of one of my teams out in the
field had been in a medium-sized city in Texas, where there
were two small Federal offices. They both could have fit
together in one or the other, because one had a very small
footprint. But they didn't know that the guy down the street
had some vacant space.
So, that leads back to the idea that, if there was greater
transparency into the Federal Real Property Profile, and
agencies had more access to it, and it was more accurate, this
would help facilitate individual agencies being able to look
for opportunities to consolidate and move into Federal space,
which would then reduce the reliance on leasing.
So, lease consolidation could be a very effective tool in
terms of both saving money and reducing the Federal footprint.
Mr. Carson. Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ms.
Norton for 5 minutes.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a further
question on freezing the footprint. As the chairman noted, this
committee is working in concert with the administration to
encourage as much freezing of the footprint as possible. But I
noted that the GAO, Mr. Wise, has determined that some agencies
are overstating. Indeed, some of those that had the largest
reductions are overstating their freeze of the footprint. Is
that--am I reading that correctly?
Mr. Wise. Yes.
Ms. Norton. Can you explain that? Is this a technical
matter? Is it something beyond that? What are they trying to
do?
Mr. Wise. Well, it was a combination of different things,
Ms. Norton. There were some technical aspects to it, there were
some miscalculations of the measurements. There were--sometimes
it was happenstance, where offices had been moving to begin
with, but it happened to fall in that period when they were
being asked to reduce a certain amount, or freeze a certain
amount.
And there were also cases where it was just a situation
where an agency might give back some of its real estate to GSA
and claim it as a reduction, whereas actually, it was a
reduction only to that particular agency, but in the aggregate
sense, it was still part of the Federal footprint.
Ms. Norton. It gave back some of its footprint.
Mr. Wise. But it turned it back--it didn't actually get
reduced from the Federal inventory, it got reduced from an
individual agency, but it went to GSA to take charge of. And,
as a result, it was still part of the Federal inventory, but
the agency counted it as a reduction.
Ms. Norton. Yes, but it is a reduction for the agency. If
GSA doesn't dispose of it, that is another question.
Mr. Wise. Well, yes. It is a reduction to that agency, but
it is not a reduction in the aggregate sense. And that is why
we felt that the--because the statistics that the
administration was presenting was an overall, Governmentwide
statistic. And, as a result, we didn't feel as though--that,
when we did our analysis, that--we said, ``Well, that is not--
that is a reduction maybe for Agency X, but it is not an
overall reduction''----
Ms. Norton. You know, that is fair, Mr. Wise. I am going to
say it is fair in judging the inventory of the Federal
Government. But I must say it does nothing to encourage an
agency which reduces its footprint, and then finds that it
looks as though they have overstated. And I would ask GSA to
break out, so that we know when the agency has done what we
asked the agency to do, but GSA, for whatever reason, hasn't
gotten to it, so it is not counted as if it is simply ignoring
the footprint.
To what extent does moving costs or other costs interfere
with reduction of the footprint?
Mr. Wise. You are asking me?
Ms. Norton. I am asking all three of you on that. Start
with you, Mr. Wise.
Mr. Wise. OK. Well, I will start off. Yes, it has an
impact. And I think this gets back to some of the testimony
that Dave and Norman had talked about a little bit earlier, and
that is the fact that there are issues when an agency still has
to--it sees a space where maybe there could be a potential for
lease consolidation.
Let's say, for example, there is a sorting facility from a
post office where they are no longer sorting mail, but they
still need the front end of the post office to provide
services. However, that back end of it still would need a
certain amount of investment, or capital investment, to make it
suitable for, say, the other Federal office down the street to
move in there. And so, who is going to bear that cost? That is
an issue----
Ms. Norton. Well, that is my question if GSA authorizes to
front that cost and then build it into the cost of the lease.
Mr. Dong. I think that is exactly right. And what we are
trying to do, first and foremost, is to identify the
opportunity to move from leases into owned space. Once we
identify that opportunity, it is to figure out how you are
going to fund the project.
Mr. Mader talked about the consolidation fund, which we
think has been huge in terms of our ability to help support
more of these projects. We also have a program at GSA that
focuses on the upfront cost of furniture and IT [information
technology]. And what we do is we finance those costs and allow
the agencies to repay us over time.
Ms. Norton. So are you doing all the--all of the upfront
costs that would be necessary for that agency to move into a
smaller space?
Mr. Dong. There are still some costs that the agency would
be responsible for. But, again, what we are trying to do----
Ms. Norton. What are those----
Mr. Dong. It would be certain improvements, certain above-
standard requirements that would be on the tenant to pay.
Ms. Norton. You can't do anything for them--well, that is
going to keep them right where they are, Mr. Dong. That is
going to keep them right where they are. You know, they are not
getting enough appropriations, given the sequester and other
reductions, to do much more than they are doing. So if they
have got to put any money into moving, I don't know how you can
expect an agency to reduce its footprint. I certainly
wouldn't--if I were an agency, I wouldn't put that upfront. I
would put the priority on keeping my staff, you know, or
keeping my agency running.
So I don't see that you are enabling agencies, once they
have to come up with some money that you know good and well
that Congress isn't giving them, I don't see how you are
enabling people to reduce their footprint fast enough.
Mr. Dong. Yes, we want to make sure that we are using all
the tools at our disposal, and all the flexibilities that we
have to reducing any obstacles.
Ms. Norton. Why the tenant? Why is--why are the upfront
costs for making the tenant adjustments in the facility not a
part of what could be included in the lease?
Mr. Dong. Again, we are working to make sure that we have
all the flexibilities. And we are using those flexibilities.
What we often see is that agencies don't want to use the credit
card to pay for the entire move. They don't want to overextend
themselves, so they would rather find the upfront costs to deal
with it, so that they are not paying overtime.
So what we do is, transaction by transaction, agency by
agency, try to figure out how we are going to solve the funding
issue for that specific project.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think--I mean I
would like you to--I would like to know what the number of
agencies are who are able to move, given the fact that they
have got to take care of the tenant, the cost of adjustments to
the facility in which they are moving. I would like you to send
that to the chairman, please.
Mr. Dong. Happy to provide the additional details on that.
Ms. Norton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. I have no further questions. Are
there any further questions?
Mr. Carson. No, sir.
Mr. Barletta. I would like to thank you for your testimony.
Your comments today have been helpful in our discussion. Thank
you.
I will now call the final panel and witness.
[Pause.]
Mr. Barletta. Maria Foscarinis, executive director of the
National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty. I ask
unanimous consent that the witness' full statement be included
in the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. Without objection, so ordered.
Since your written testimony has been made a part of the
record, this subcommittee would request that you limit your
oral testimony to 5 minutes. And you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF MARIA FOSCARINIS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL LAW
CENTER ON HOMELESSNESS AND POVERTY

Ms. Foscarinis. Thank you, Chairman Barletta, Ranking
Member Carson, members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
invitation to testify today. My name is Maria Foscarinis. I am
the founder and executive director of the National Law Center
on Homelessness and Poverty.
The Law Center is the only national organization dedicated
to using the power of the law to advocate the legal rights of
homeless and economically vulnerable Americans. Since 1989, Law
Center attorneys have worked through State and Federal courts
to expand access to affordable housing, meet the immediate and
long-term needs of those who are homeless or at risk, and
strengthen the social safety net.
Through our work we have been fortunate to achieve
significant progress in meeting these goals. In addition to
securing and expanding legal rights for homeless Americans, we
have worked with partners throughout the country to provide
services to millions of homeless families and children. There
is still much work to be done. Homelessness remains a crisis
affecting too many men, women, and children across the country.
Many of our Nation's veterans are among those who are affected.
One key Federal program designed to assist homeless
Americans is title V of the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance
Act, signed by President Ronald Reagan in 1987. Title V makes
HUD responsible for leading a cross-agency effort to identify
unneeded Federal properties suitable for use by homeless
assistance organizations. Once those properties are available,
homeless service providers have a right of first refusal to
acquire the excess property.
Title V has enabled service providers and local government
agencies to acquire and use surplus property to provide meals,
shelter, housing, job training, medical care, and mental health
treatment, among other things, for homeless Americans
throughout the country. Each year, more than 2 million
Americans receive assistance through title V.
Title V is a proven vehicle for assisting America's
homeless with no cost to taxpayers. In fact, in light of the
focus of today's hearing, I want to emphasize that title V
saves taxpayer dollars by reducing operations and maintenance
costs associated with unused and unneeded Federal properties.
But, despite this ongoing success, the Law Center has
identified a number of challenges. Most notably, as this
subcommittee well knows, landholding agencies are all too
willing to retain unneeded or underused properties. The Law
Center has worked for over two decades to push Federal agencies
to identify all properties eligible for disposal under title V.
So I can say with certainty that the Law Center shares this
subcommittee's goal of ensuring that surplus properties are put
to better, more productive use, while reducing costs to
taxpayers.
As we work towards this common goal, title V must continue
to be a part of the Federal property disposal process. Title V
is not the cause of delays. In fact, only those properties
deemed by HUD as suitable for use to provide homelessness
assistance are available under title V. For this subset of
properties, the title V application process takes only a few
months to complete. We have worked with Congress, HUD, and
other Federal agencies to improve and streamline title V and
improve the efficiency of the process. I would like to briefly
highlight three areas that could improve the title V program
and save taxpayer dollars.
First, property should be designated for disposal once it
has been vacant or unused for 1 year. If an agency determines
that a vacant property is still needed, it should submit a
written explanation of continuing need, which would be
available for review by the general public.
Second, Congress should consider a more streamlined title V
application process. Property for which there will not be a
homeless services application should be available for sale more
quickly. At the same time, title V applications should be
considered more fairly and efficiently.
Third, Congress should consider reducing unnecessary
bureaucratic redundancy by providing one agency, HUD, with
authority to grant or deny title V applications.
At the Law Center we believe that the right to a home and
food lie at the heart of human dignity, and we envision a world
where no one has to go without the basics for human survival.
Title V is a critical element of this vision, and I urge the
subcommittee to ensure that any proposed modifications to
Federal property disposal preserve and enhance this essential
program.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. I look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you for your testimony. I will now
begin the first round of questions, limited to 5 minutes for
each Member. If there are additional questions following the
first round, we will have additional rounds of questions, as
needed.
As you have mentioned in your written testimony, we share
many of the same concerns. I believe we have the same problem
and the same goals. Agencies are land-banking properties. To
address this, there needs to be some independent review and
clear direction, other than relying on agencies themselves.
Would you agree?
Ms. Foscarinis. [No response.]
Mr. Barletta. Would you agree with that?
Ms. Foscarinis. Well, certainly there needs to be review,
yes. I agree.
Mr. Barletta. I am pleased with the discussion your
organization has already had with this committee, and we look
forward to continue to work with you on a solution that we can
all agree on. Will you continue to work with us on this
important issue?
Ms. Foscarinis. Oh, absolutely. We would love to work with
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Barletta. Yes, thank you.
Ms. Foscarinis. And the subcommittee.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. I recognize Ranking Member Carson
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, Chairman. Madam Foscarinis, in your
testimony you discuss the possibility of improving the disposal
process by making HUD responsible for evaluating and approving
applications for properties to be provided for homeless
providers. Can you discuss this idea and how it could expedite
the process of disposal?
Ms. Foscarinis. Absolutely, Congressman Carson. So, right
now, the review process lies with HHS [U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services]. HUD is responsible for the front
end of the process, and then HHS takes over. We believe that
the process could be streamlined, if authority were vested in a
single agency. We think HUD is the most logical agency. HUD has
the most expertise on issues of homelessness. And so we propose
reducing bureaucratic redundancy by vesting the authority in
HUD.
Mr. Carson. And lastly, how would you describe the level of
cooperation that homeless service providers have received from
Federal agencies with respect to how they report excess
properties? And how could that be improved?
Ms. Foscarinis. Well, I think a big problem for service
providers is that they are not familiar with the process. There
is a lack of information about what properties are available.
So we believe that the agencies should--And GSA should--comply
with--well, GSA should comply with the court order, and not
land-bank the properties, and report the properties that are--
that it annually deems excess to us, and to the homeless
service providers for use as properties to assist homeless
people.
But we also think that much more needs to be done with
outreach. As the GAO recommended in its report, much more needs
to be done to get the word out that these properties are
available. Homeless service providers are not often reading the
Federal Register. Much more user-friendly and accessible
methods of outreach need to be implemented.
Mr. Carson. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. The Chair recognizes--oh, Ms.
Norton is gone. OK.
I would like to--are there are any further questions?
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. I would like to thank you for your testimony.
Your comments have been helpful to today's discussion.
And if there are no further questions, I would ask
unanimous consent that the record of today's hearing remain
open until such time as our witnesses have provided answers to
any questions that may be submitted to them in writing, and
unanimous consent that the record remain open for 15 days for
any additional comments and information submitted by Members or
witnesses to be included in the record of today's hearing.
[No response.]
Mr. Barletta. Without objection, so ordered.
I would like to again thank our witnesses, again, for their
testimony today.
If no other Members have anything to add, this subcommittee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
