- PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST FOR COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST
FOR COAST GUARD AND MARITIME
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

(114-6)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 25, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-531 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                             Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
TOM RICE, South Carolina             RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
JOHN KATKO, New York                 JARED HUFFMAN, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
------

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    JOHN GARAMENDI, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      CORRINE BROWN, Florida
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         JANICE HAHN, California
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York                  Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

WITNESSES

Admiral Paul F. Zukunft, Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard:

Testimony....................................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................    40
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter of California.........................    48
Hon. Don Young of Alaska.................................    49
Hon. Peter A. DeFazio of Oregon..........................    52
Hon. John Garamendi of California........................    59
Hon. Lois Frankel of Florida, including the U.S. Coast
Guard's comments to the Federal Railroad
Administration's All Aboard Florida Draft Environmental
Impact Statement.......................................    68
Master Chief Steven W. Cantrell, Master Chief Petty Officer of
the Coast Guard, U.S. Coast Guard, testimony...................     5
Hon. Paul N. Jaenichen, Administrator, Maritime Administration:

Testimony....................................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................    81
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter of California.........................    88
Hon. Lee M. Zeldin of New York...........................    91
Hon. John Garamendi of California........................    94
Hon. Mario Cordero, Chairman, Federal Maritime Commission:

Testimony....................................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................   105
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. John
Garamendi, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.................................................   118

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Admiral Paul F. Zukunft, Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard, response
to request for information from Hon. Garret Graves, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Louisiana.........    29

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2016 BUDGET REQUEST FOR COAST GUARD AND
MARITIME TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
Room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Duncan Hunter
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Hunter. The subcommittee will come to order. The
subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on the
President's fiscal year 2016 budget request from the leaders of
the Coast Guard, the Maritime Administration, and the Federal
Maritime Commission.
This is our first hearing of the new Congress, so I want to
take a moment and welcome back Ranking Member Garamendi, who
will be here shortly, and thank him for working with me so well
in the last Congress. I also want to welcome the new members of
the subcommittee. I look forward to working with each of you
over the next few years. We have two new members over here, on
my right, and none on the other side.
The President sent Congress a budget that would increase
spending by nearly $75 billion over the fiscal year 2016
spending cap. As a result, most Federal agencies are slated to
receive generous increases in spending over current levels,
including a nearly 20-percent increase for the Maritime
Administration and a 7-percent increase for the Federal
Maritime Commission. Yet, somehow, even with an additional $75
billion, the President still proposes to cut funding for the
Coast Guard, this time by 4 percent below the current level.
The request would slash the Coast Guard's acquisition
budget by 26 percent. The proposed level is at least $1 billion
less than what is required to sustain the acquisition program
of record. It will severely undermine efforts to recapitalize
the Service's aging and failing legacy assets, increase
acquisition costs for taxpayers, and seriously degrade mission
effectiveness.
For the fourth year in a row, the administration is playing
a reckless game. They propose a budget that cuts funding for
the Coast Guard so they can pay for increases at other
agencies, betting that Congress will somehow restore the
millions of dollars needed to sustain Coast Guard acquisitions
and frontline operations. Quite frankly, I'm getting tired of
playing this game. Congress is running out of quarters. If the
President is going to continue to propose these cuts year after
year, he needs to tell us how he intends to rescope the
missions of the Coast Guard to reflect his reduced budgets.
This is the first time Admiral Zukunft and Master Chief
Cantrell appear before us. I want to commend both of you for
your leadership and tremendous service to our Nation. I fully
understand the situation they've been put in with this budget
and I appreciate their candor in describing what these cuts
will mean for the ability of the Service to successfully
complete its missions.
I also understand the situation you face on Saturday if
Congress does not act on a fiscal year 2015 budget for the
Department of Homeland Security. I know there will be a lot of
questions about the impact a shutdown or a CR may have on the
Coast Guard, and I know you will answer them candidly. However,
I want to remind everyone that the House passed a bill. It is
now up to the Senate to act. Unfortunately, the Senate minority
refuses to even allow a discussion or a debate on the floor. I
hope they understand the urgency of this issue, and act as soon
as possible.
The budget request for the Maritime Administration
represents a nearly 20-percent increase over the current level.
Much of the increase comes from a one-time payoff offered to
the maritime industry in exchange for a permanent reduction in
the number of U.S. mariner jobs carrying cargo under the hugely
successful Food for Peace program.
Since 1954, the Food for Peace program has provided
agricultural commodities grown by U.S. farmers and transported
by U.S. mariners on U.S.-flagged vessels to those threatened by
starvation throughout the world. Unfortunately, for the third
year in a row, the President proposes to restructure the Food
for Peace program. This misguided proposal will eliminate a
vital program for our farmers, put U.S. mariners out of work,
and undermine our national security by reducing the domestic
sealift capacity on which our military depends.
Republicans and Democrats have repeatedly come together to
vote down this flawed proposal. I hope my colleagues will join
me once again in rejecting the President's proposal and work
with me on efforts to strengthen our merchant marine. I look
forward to hearing from the Administrator on how he intends to
move forward with his efforts to revitalize the U.S.-flag
fleet.
Finally, the budget request for the Federal Maritime
Commission proposes a 7-percent increase in funding over
current levels and a nearly 10-percent budget increase in the
number of staff. While this budget increase amounts to less
than $2 million, I think it sends the wrong signal. I encourage
the Chairman to continue to find ways to operate the Commission
as efficiently as possible.
Our Nation is facing a very tough budget climate and the
President's unrealistic request only makes things harder. I
look forward to working with my colleagues to enact a
responsible budget.
With that, I yield to Ranking Member Garamendi, who is
right on time.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am anxious to
hear from our witnesses, so I am going to try to be brief.
First, congratulations to you on continuing the
chairmanship. We have developed a very cooperative and cordial
working relationship, and I look forward to continuing that.
And thank you for the support on the issues that I care about--
and, obviously, you do, too.
The maritime policy matters. It is our most--it is our
national economic interest that we should act upon. As the
world's largest trading nation, the United States exports and
imports annually, in value, about one-fourth the global
merchandise trade, approximately 95 percent of America's
foreign trade: 1.3 billion tons moves by ships. Based on
current projections, by the year 2020, U.S. foreign trade in
goods may grow to four times today's value, and almost double
its current tonnage.
Additionally, our inland waterway traffic will increase by
one-third, providing new economic opportunities in the U.S.
farmlands. The economic potential is there for all of us to
see, but so are the challenges, such as solving the port
congestion issues, finding new cargo to grow the U.S.-flag
fleet, and U.S. foreign trade, and developing new incentives to
expand and diversify the U.S. shipbuilding industry.
That is why we should not be shooting ourselves in the foot
at a time when we should be ramping up our investments in our
maritime agencies and in the U.S. maritime economy. But,
unfortunately, we seem to be doing a lot of shooting towards
our own feet.
If the House fails to pass before February 27th either a
clean fiscal year 2016 appropriation bill for the Department of
Homeland Security or extending the continuing resolution to
provide funding for DHS agencies, including the United States
Coast Guard, we will be unnecessarily creating short-term havoc
with potential long-term repercussions. This makes no sense,
especially in light of the heightened terrorism potential.
The Coast Guard is our first, our only line of defense
protecting the U.S. maritime boundaries from all the threats
abroad. It is irresponsible to subject the Coast Guard to a
partial shutdown and ask active-duty coastguardsmen and
coastguardswomen to work without pay simply to express a hard-
headed disagreement with the administration over immigration
policy.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, the Coast Guard prides itself on
being semper paratus, or always ready. That is a fitting model
for a very proud institution. Perhaps we ought to use that one
ourselves. I hope, ultimately, that common sense might prevail,
we can get past the current crisis of funding, make sure the
Coast Guard has adequate funding, and our maritime industry is
supported and given the opportunity to grow. Too much is at
stake. We have our necessity to get our work done.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you, yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the ranking member.
On our panel of witnesses today is Admiral Paul Zukunft--I
am sorry, we have the ranking member of the full committee.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you. Thank you. I won't prolong this. I
want to thank everyone. I won't go through that again.
I would just like to say I associate myself with the
chairman's remarks about the President's budget as it relates
to the Coast Guard. And I am going to say to the admiral--
although I know this is a difficult situation--but we once had
a colleague named Mike Parker. And Mike was a Democrat turned
Republican. And in the Bush administration they made him
Assistant Secretary over the Corps of Engineers. And he came
before us for one of these budget hearings, and I looked at the
proposed budget. I reminded him that they had a $45 billion,
you know, critical asset backlog. And I said, ``Is this budget
adequate to meet the needs of your agency, the Corps of
Engineers of the United States of America?''
And he said, ``No, absolutely not.'' Now, that is the
positive side, because I always try and get people who have
that jurisdiction to tell us like it is. The downside was a
week later he resigned because of family issues.
Now--so I am not going to ask you to be quite that candid,
Admiral. But I am going to observe when Congress orders you to
produce a list of priorities that are unmet, and you come up
with four things, I don't buy it. And I think you are being a
little too much of a good soldier here--not to call a Coastie a
soldier, but, you know, in terms of--it is not the way the
Pentagon works, I will tell you that. They make their needs
that are unmet in the budget known in a million different ways.
I was just at Coast Guard Station Newport--beautiful. They
do their own work. You don't find that on other military bases.
They bring in contractors. You are the most frugal of the
services, and you are critical. And you are absolutely critical
on a day-to-day basis for the American people, and something
they see--anybody who has access to the water or the coast--and
saving lives.
And, you know, we have to figure out a way to get you
adequate resources to meet all your national security
obligations, which have grown dramatically post-9/11, but also
to meet your day-to-day obligations, in terms of lifesavings.
And some of the cuts that are proposed this last year, like
cutting my Coast Guard Air Station in Newport, which does half
the rescues on the Oregon coast in water that never gets warm,
where you are dead in half an hour, is not a place to be
cutting. And we have got to find a way around this. And part of
it has got to be you, as much as possible, within your chain of
command from the White House, being candid with us about your
needs.
And, with that, I would yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. And thank the gentleman
for being here, too.
On our panel of witnesses today is Admiral Paul Zukunft,
Commandant of the Coast Guard; Master Chief Petty Officer of
the Coast Guard, Steven Cantrell; the Honorable Chip Jaenichen,
Administrator of the Maritime Administration; and the Honorable
Mario Cordero, Chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission.
Admiral, before I recognize you, I want to take a moment
and thank you for your statement on the Jones Act. Your
statement and your comments continue to prove that the Jones
Act is critical to our economy, and is an important part of our
national security.
I also see your wife Fran behind you, and I want to welcome
her. And you are welcome to take his place at the table, if you
like, too, at any point. We would enjoy that more.
So, thank you for coming, Admiral. You are now recognized.

TESTIMONY OF ADMIRAL PAUL F. ZUKUNFT, COMMANDANT, U.S. COAST
GUARD; MASTER CHIEF STEVEN W. CANTRELL, MASTER CHIEF PETTY
OFFICER OF THE COAST GUARD, U.S. COAST GUARD; HON. PAUL N.
JAENICHEN, ADMINISTRATOR, MARITIME ADMINISTRATION; AND HON.
MARIO CORDERO, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION

Admiral Zukunft. Thank you, Chairman. And thank you,
members of this committee. We have developed a number of
strategies to address the concerns that were addressed by
Ranking Member DeFazio, and we will talk about those in length
later. But I am truly humbled to be here, to speak on behalf of
the 88,000 men and women of our United States Coast Guard.
Let me begin by emphasizing that there has never been a
greater demand for our Nation's Coast Guard. In our own
hemisphere, in the Western Hemisphere, we are witnessing
extreme violence in Central America, stemming from insidious
transnational organized criminal networks.
We are also seeing significant maritime commerce ships
fueled by the America energy renaissance. And we have rapidly
seen increasing demands on both industry and Government in the
world's newest domain of cyber.
Mr. Hunter. Admiral, would you mind pulling the mic closer
to you? I have artillery ears, hard to hear.
Admiral Zukunft. OK. How is that, better? OK.
And we have also seen a new ocean open in the Arctic. Most
importantly, all of these geostrategic trends have converged on
the Coast Guard in an unprecedented manner, dramatically
increasing demands on our daily operations, and major
contingency preparedness. This is at a time when much of the
Coast Guard's buildings, piers, infrastructure, and many of our
platforms are well past their service life.
Last year I sent four 50-year-old Medium Endurance Cutters
to costly emergency drydock availabilities, losing 20 percent
of my planned patrol days, due to unscheduled maintenance.
Those pressures put great strain upon the Coast Guard.
Now, to help alleviate this strain, I have developed
strategies to address these converging trends. And we are
aligning our budget priorities to meet these. Let me just spend
a few minutes talking about these four converging trends.
The first trend is illegal trade in drugs, people, and
weapons, which is now a $750 billion global enterprise. And,
since 9/11, 450,000 Americans have died in this country due to
drug violence and drug overdoses. Combating these networks
requires a forward-based presence using Coast Guard authorities
and our ability to attack illicit trafficking where it is most
vulnerable: at sea.
We have actionable intelligence, due to our commitment to
the national intelligence community, on approximately 90
percent of known maritime drug flow in the maritime domain. Yet
we are only able to target, detect, and disrupt 20 percent of
that 90 percent, due to our limited arsenal of aircraft and
ships. This is simply a matter of capacity.
This is one of the reasons why the Offshore Patrol Cutter
is my number-one acquisition priority, with an emphasis upon
affordability.
Second emerging trend is our regulatory role. The United
States is now the world's largest producer of natural gas and
crude oil, and the maritime transportation system is a vital
pathway for these products. It is imperative that our marine
safety workforce continue to grow the expertise needed to keep
pace with industry, and to facilitate commerce, not impede it.
And the third trend, we also have a statutory role to
ensure the maritime transportation system is secure and
resilient against cyber threats. In coordination with the
Department of Homeland Security, I will soon sign out a cyber
strategy for the United States Coast Guard.
And, fourth, looking to polar operations, changing ice
patterns have created new frontiers for human activity, in
exploration to tourism, and resource development. Notably,
Shell Oil just announced its intent to drill this summer.
Maintaining a sure access to the polar regions is vital to
meeting the United States Arctic strategy. However, this is a
global access challenge, and requires a national solution.
Funding new icebreakers must be in addition to, and not at the
expense of, our existing acquisition programs of record.
Finally, investing in 21st-century Coast Guard platforms
and people is a smart choice. No one will return more
operational value on every dollar than the 88,000 men and women
of the United States Coast Guard. Our workforce received five
Federal acquisition awards in 2014, and we were the first
military service to obtain a clean financial audit opinion, and
we have now done it 2 years in a row. We proved to be
responsible stewards of our financial resources, and capital
plan operating, and maintaining platforms well beyond their
service life.
Going forward, the key to our future operational success is
stable and predictable funding. To be very clear, a lapse in
funding will jeopardize the construction of our eighth National
Security Cutter. It will cause the furlough of more than 6,000
Coast Guard civilians, and it will curtail Coast Guard
operations worldwide.
Mr. Chairman and members of this committee, as you have in
the past--and I know it will continue--I seek your support to
avert such a funding collapse. I look forward to working with
this committee as we make prudent investments in the 21st-
century Coast Guard.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Admiral, for your testimony.
Master Chief Cantrell, you are recognized.
Master Chief Cantrell. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and
distinguished members of the committee. It is my honor and
privilege to appear before you today to represent the dedicated
men and women of your United States Coast Guard who stand the
watch every day, protecting and serving our Nation. They are
charged with maintaining operational excellence across a broad
and diverse spectrum of 11 statutory missions, and across all 7
continents, from Antarctica to the Middle East, on the high
seas and in our Nation's ports and waterways.
As I continue serving my first year as the Master Chief
Petty Officer of the Coast Guard, I continue to be impressed by
the dedication, professionalism, and innovation of Coast Guard
men and women, and the support they receive from their
families.
Performing our missions and conducting necessary training
in a maritime environment is inherently dangerous. And our
servicemembers operate in some of the harshest, most
unforgiving environments imaginable. But our folks do this day
in and day out, and they do it with a sense of devotion that is
nothing short of spectacular. I offer two nearly simultaneous
examples of the extraordinary devotion to duty and service to
country.
Early on the morning of February 15th, an H-60 Jayhawk
helicopter crew from Air Station Cape Cod fought near-hurricane
force winds and limited visibility to rescue a father and son
150 miles off the coast of Nantucket. That same day, the crew
of Coast Guard cutter Polar Star was called upon to rescue 26
crewmembers on an Australian fishing vessel that had been
stranded for nearly 2 weeks in thick ice only a few hundred
miles north of Antarctica. These cases are perfect examples of
how an appropriately trained, well-focused, and properly
equipped Coast Guard can excel in carrying out its missions.
As a leader, I have an absolute responsibility to equip,
train, and care for our workforce and their families, with the
understanding of the immense challenges my Service faces. We
are doing all that we can do to be good stewards of our aging
resources and limited funding, while we tend to the needs of
our servicemembers and their families, who make so many other
sacrifices.
We ask so much of our well-educated, innovative, and
professional workforce, some of which are serving on assets
older than their parents, supported by infrastructure older
than their grandparents. We ask them to maintain these
platforms at the expense of their own time, as well as time
with their families. It is impossible to calculate that lost
time in dollars and cents.
However, our newest asset, such as the National Security
Cutters and Fast Response Cutters, are performing exceptionally
well, and don't require these same sacrifices. I thank you for
your continued support of our recapitalization efforts, despite
these fiscal challenging times. Your support does make a
difference, as these platforms are more capable, and contribute
to the successful and efficient execution of our missions and
our service to this Nation.
We continue to face challenges with housing, medical, and
child care services. But, once again, we are grateful for the
support from this committee, as we address these challenges,
ensuring these resources remain a top priority in our ongoing
efforts to support our military members and their families.
Mr. Chairman, members of the committee, on behalf of the
men and women of your United States Coast Guard and their
families, I thank you for your continued support, and thank you
for the opportunity to discuss some of the highlights and
challenges Coast Guard women and men face.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Master Chief. Are each of those stripes
4 years?
Master Chief Cantrell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. You got 28 years?
Master Chief Cantrell. Thirty-one. I had another one, so--
--
Mr. Hunter. You got to wait 1 more year before you get the
stripe?
Master Chief Cantrell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. All right. Thank you very much.
Master Chief Cantrell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Administrator Jaenichen, you are recognized.
Mr. Jaenichen. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi,
and members of the subcommittee, I appreciate this opportunity
to discuss President Obama's budget request for the Maritime
Administration for fiscal year 2016. The budget request
reflects my priorities for maintaining our country's national
security and preparedness, investment in mariner training,
investment in our maritime transportation system
infrastructure, enhancing U.S.-flag competitiveness, and
fostering environmental sustainability.
The President's budget request continues to fund readiness
programs that support Department of Defense sealift
requirements. Funding provided from the U.S. Navy will allow
the Maritime Administration to continue to provide ready surge
sealift support in 2016 through the Ready Reserve Force. This
is a fleet of 46 vessels whose primary purpose is to provide
for rapid mass movement of defense equipment and supplies to
support our armed forces, and to respond to national and
humanitarian emergencies.
One of these vessels, the motor vessel Cape Ray, earned
special recognition for its unprecedented support of the United
Nations and the Organization for Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons mission to neutralize the Syrian Government's declared
stockpile of chemical weapons. More recently, three Ready
Reserve Force vessels were activated to support the DOD medical
mission to Liberia for the Ebola virus response for Operation
United Assistance.
For fiscal year 2016, $186 million is requested to fully
fund, at the authorized level, the Maritime Security Program.
This program provides a fleet of 60 commercial privately owned,
military useful, U.S.-flagged and U.S.-crewed ships whose
primary purpose is to provide assured access to sealift to
support global projection of our U.S. armed forces, including
access to their worldwide intermodal logistics capacity. The
MSP is the core of the U.S.-flag fleet, and provides critical
employment for 2,400 U.S. merchant mariners, creating a
reliable pool of mariners ready to support the activation of
our Government's Reserve sealift fleets.
The fiscal year 2016 funding enables the Department of
Transportation to continue to maintain this critical national
asset, and the men and women who crew them. However, declining
cargoes are creating a significant challenge for the MSP, most
notably the declining Department of Defense cargo to the
drawdown in Afghanistan and Iraq, coupled with more than an 80-
percent reduction in personnel and military bases overseas
since 1990 are impacting the U.S. fleet operating in
international trade.
It is for this reason we are working with industry and
Government stakeholders to develop a National Maritime Strategy
to support the U.S. maritime industry, and ensure the
availability of U.S.-flag vessels to support national security.
I know the committee is anxious for a strategy to be completed,
and I am committed to providing one as soon as possible.
I want to highlight that this budget request is an increase
in our mariner training programs. This increase in funding will
ensure that we can continue to produce highly skilled U.S.
merchant marine officers to support America's economic as well
as our national security requirements.
The President's fiscal year 2016 budget request includes
$34.6 million to support our six State maritime academies.
Included in that request is $5 million for the planning and
design of a national security multimission vessel to support
the replacement of the 53-year-old training vessel Empire
State, currently used by the State University of New York
Maritime College.
The budget also includes $22 million to fund maintenance
and repair costs for federally owned training ships currently
on loan from the Maritime Administration to the other five
State maritime academies. These training vessels provide
opportunities for midshipmen and cadets to get important hands-
on experience and technical training, a critical educational
component, in order to qualify to take their U.S. Coast Guard
merchant mariner officer examination.
In addition to providing a training platform, these ships
have been called up in the past to respond to humanitarian
emergencies and disaster response efforts. For these training
vessels are rapidly approaching the end of their useful life,
and we must develop a recapitalization proposal and analysis of
alternatives, with a multiyear budget scheme to address the
replacement of vessels.
The President's budget also includes $96 million for the
U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, which will enable the Academy to
effectively achieve its core responsibility of providing the
highest caliber academic study and the state-of-the-art
learning facilities in the Nation's future merchant marine
officers and maritime transportation professionals.
Finally, the fiscal year budget request reflects a
continued commitment to reducing and mitigating transportation-
related impacts on the environment, including $5 million for
the MarAd ship disposal program, which currently is at a
historic low of 19 obsolete vessels, having responsibly
disposed of over 200 vessels since the year 2000. With the
requested funding level in 2016, we plan to remove an
additional eight vessels in 2016.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the subcommittee's continuing
support for maritime programs, and I look forward to working
with you on advancing the maritime transportation of the United
States, and establishing a maritime strategy.
And I am happy to respond to any questions that you or the
subcommittee may have.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Administrator. I still find that
number, 80-percent reduction in forces around the world,
military forces since 1990, extremely interesting. Thank you,
Administrator.
Chairman Cordero, you are recognized.
Mr. Cordero. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Garamendi, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to
present the President's fiscal year 2016 budget for the Federal
Maritime Commission. With me today are my colleague
Commissioners, Rebecca Dye, Michael Khouri, William Doyle, as
well as the Commission's senior executives.
With the committee's permission, I would like my full
written statement to be included in the record, and submitted.
The President's budget for the Commission provides
$27,387,000 for fiscal year 2016. This will fund 135 full-time
equivalent employees, as well as mandatory rent, interagency
services, and critical commercial services. Our fiscal year
2016 budget request includes $19.8 million for salaries and
benefits of the 135 FTEs expected to be on board at the end of
fiscal year 2016 to support the Commission's mandate and
protect the American shippers.
Administrative expenses are funded at $7.4 million in
fiscal year 2016 to support our number of business expenses,
representing a net increase of just $84,000 over fiscal year
2015.
The Commission continues to work diligently to support the
Nation's goals to increase exports, the vast majority of which
move through our ports. Ports are the gateways that handle $900
billion worth of containerized goods annually.
The Commission monitors the continued growth of chassis
agreements, and the increase in ocean carriers divesting from
chassis fleets, which impact cargo movements in ports. Several
months ago, I hosted a forum on U.S. port congestions in Los
Angeles to foster a dialogue between industry stakeholders,
regulators, and the general public on the causes and impacts of
congestion. Signs of chronic congestion in our Nation's ports
have been surfacing over the last few years. Congestion is a
serious threat to global trade. So much so that one private-
sector economist recently opined as follows: ``The biggest
threat of global trade isn't protectionism, war, or terrorism,
disease or natural disasters. But, instead, mounting congestion
at global ports and the crumbling infrastructure surrounding
them.''
It is clear that much of the congestion plaguing U.S. ports
is not tied to the absence of an ILWU-PMA agreement, for which
there is now resolution. This conclusion is based on the input
received by the Commission at its four regional port congestion
forums held last fall. Forums were held in Los Angeles,
Baltimore, Charleston, and New Orleans, in order that the
industry participants in those gateways and port regions
address causes and possible solutions to congestion.
There are many factors causing congestion, including
unavailability of chassis at U.S. ports. Ocean carriers serving
Los Angeles, Long Beach, New York, New Jersey, Baltimore, and
other ports have been withdrawing from owning and providing
chassis in order to reduce costs. Another important source of
congestion stands from the impact of the introduction of 15,000
to 18,000 TEU vessels. Though the megavessels helped carriers
significantly reduce their operating costs when they are
unloaded at the U.S. ports, challenges have been presented.
Logistics have been problematic, as a result.
Presently, the Commission is working on a study that
addresses congestion at U.S. ports, and continues to work with
other Federal agencies to find solutions to supply chain
bottlenecks. Closely related to congestion is the matter of
marine terminal operator and ocean common carrier demurrage
charges. The Commission is receiving numerous complaints by
shippers, American shippers, who are repeatedly told that they
may not retrieve containers due to on-dock congestion or gate
delays. Furthermore, the container will not be released until
demurrage is paid.
The increased funding for fiscal year 2016 will allow the
Commission to enhance its efforts in addressing both supply
chain and port congestion issues. The recovery in the U.S.
liner trades continued in 2014, with U.S. container exports and
imports worldwide reaching 31 million TEUs in fiscal year 2014,
compared to 30.5 million TEUs in 2013. The Commission continues
to closely monitor the operation of the alliance agreements on
the world's largest container operators that are filed with the
Commission. The parties to four agreements account for 96.8
percent of the containerized trade in the Asia-U.S. west coast
trades.
To reduce regulatory burdens, the Commission revised
provisions from its advanced notice of proposed rulemakings to
our OTI rules. Based on the feedback from the industry,
Chairman Hunter, and other Members of the Congress, the
Commission issued a proposed rule that would lengthen the time
of the period for the OTIs to renew their license from 2 to 3
years, and free--and no fee. So, essentially, free of charge.
Commission staff is working on recommendations to streamline
other parts of our regulations, including those with service
contracts and NVOCC service arrangements.
With the funding support that Congress provided for fiscal
year 2014 and fiscal year 2015, the Commission has made great
progress towards creating a modern, user-friendly, and, most
importantly, efficient system that can make the agency more
productive. With the increased funding for fiscal year 2016,
the FMC will be able to continue to--its multiyear enhancement
of its IT systems to carry out its congressional mandate.
Mr. Chairman and members of the subcommittee, it is an
honor to appear before the subcommittee, and I thank you for
your support for the Commission throughout the years, and I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you for your testimony. Since we don't
usually have a lot of people here--sometimes it is a party of
two--we are going to go ahead and start with some of the new
folks on the committee.
So, thank you all for your testimony, and I am going to
recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Curbelo.
Mr. Curbelo. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
certainly share your concerns with regards to the
administration's fiscal year 2016 budget.
Admiral Zukunft, welcome, and thank you very much for your
testimony. I was in Coast Guard Station Key West on Wednesday
of last week, and I was reminded of the importance and the
unique challenges that the Coast Guard faces in the State of
Florida.
I specifically wanted to ask you with regards to Reserve
training, the President requested a $9.4 million decrease for
the Reserve training account in fiscal year 2016. The budget
also assumes enactment of a proposal made in the fiscal year
2015 request that would move 600 reservists from selected
Reserve to inactive Ready Reserve, essentially making them
unable to respond if the country needed them without
significant lag time to train.
As you know, in Florida we had--and all along the gulf
coast--the unfortunate incident of the Deepwater Horizon some 5
years ago. Considering the risk of terrorist attacks, of spills
of national significance, do you think that these reduced
numbers will allow the Coast Guard to effectively respond to
these types of scenarios?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressmen, those numbers cause me great
concern. Our Active Reserve component is now the lowest it has
been since 1957.
Now, we can look back in the last 2 years. We have not had
a significant natural disaster. But they have been out there.
Super-typhoon Haiyan hit the Philippines a year ago with winds
in excess of 190 knots. There was another typhoon out in the
Pacific this year, Vongfong, with winds of 200 knots. And are
we prepared to deal with a natural disaster of that magnitude
here, in the United States? Because when we do, we field strip
our other field units.
The Coast Guard does not have a force in garrison, other
than our Active Reserve. And so, I am deeply concerned with the
number of Active Reserves right now, as we look at the
disasters that may confront us in the 21st century. Your point
is well taken. I cannot drop my Active Reserve level below
where we are at right now. I would like to grow that back.
Mr. Curbelo. Thank you for your answer. I have an
additional question.
In my discussion with Captain Young and Commander Reed on
Wednesday down in Key West, they expressed some concerns with
regards to, obviously, a potential shutdown of the department,
but also of these short-term funding mechanisms for the
department. Can you briefly expound on the challenges that
these short-term funding measures pose to your department?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. I will expound a little bit on two of
those.
The first was when we had sequestration in 2013. And when I
had to make those budget adjustments, the only thing I can
adjust is the amount of fuel that I burn. And what burns the
most fuel is airplanes and ships. So it has a direct impact on
our operations.
We entered 2014 with a funding lapse. The Budget Control
Act was still 3 months out, and we didn't know if we would be
sequestered that year, as well. So we have to scale back
operations. And whenever you scale back operations, you play
into the hands of our adversaries, and they take full advantage
of the lack of Coast Guard persistent presence.
Mr. Curbelo. Thank you, Admiral. And I will yield back. But
before, I want to recognize the rest of the panel. Thank you
all for being here, especially Chairman Cordero, who it is a
pleasure to see.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. The ranking member, Mr.
Garamendi, is recognized.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, I think you have started a
very good practice. Those who--you and I are always here, and
we have time for our questions. I would like to pass my time to
Member Hahn.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member. I think
I am always here, too, but I will take the opportunity to ask
my questions.
And I have several questions that if I--we need to do a
second round, I want to do that, because I have some questions
for the Coast Guard. But I wanted to start with Chairman
Cordero, because you were really bringing it up about port
congestion. And I will tell you. These last contract
negotiations between the PMA and the ILWU were really long and
arduous, and really had an impact, unfortunately, on so much in
this country.
And before I ask you my question, I just want to say it--to
me, and to, I think, the rest of the country, what happened was
unfortunate, and had nothing to do with the actual negotiations
going on in San Francisco. I actually would like to see the
Federal Maritime Commission look into some of the unilateral
actions by the Pacific Maritime Association, in terms of, you
know, not allowing the workers to work in the evenings and on
the weekends. I think that was really untenable and
unfortunate.
And I would think the Coast Guard would also have--you
know, would have had a fit. I can see, from my house, those--at
one point there were 35 ships outside of Long Beach/Los Angeles
breakwater. The Coast Guard base is right there. You know, that
had to cause a lot of extra angst for the Coast Guard. So that
would be something I would like to see, a full investigation on
how, in 5 years from now, when we go back through these
contract negotiations, we don't have that kind of, really,
lockdown of our ports on the west coast.
But Honorable Cordero, I am very concerned about the
congestion at the ports. As you said, the fact that this
contract was agreed to and will be ratified, most likely, does
not necessarily change the congestion on the docks. And we got
a lot of big problems. Panama Canal expansion project is coming
online next year. We are not going to stop that. But what can
we do for our ports in this country to really address this
congestion?
And I know you talked about it generally in your remarks,
but could you be more specific on what is the Commission going
to do to address the congestion on the docks, the last mile
going in and out of our ports? It is a serious problem that
could put us at a huge globally competitive disadvantage.
I said a lot; I hope there was a question in there.
Mr. Cordero. Well, thank you, Congresswoman. I appreciate
the question.
Number one, as I quoted a private-sector economist, and
that quote came from the Journal of Commerce, and the economist
is Walter Kemmsies with Moffatt and Nichol. Very respected
economist. And you are absolutely correct; the congestion here
at our ports is an issue, not only just here in--for the
Nation, but it is a global issue. And, for that reason, in the
summer of 2014, I identified the need to hold these congestion
forums, and the Federal Maritime Commission proceeded with the
assistance of my colleagues on the Commission to hold four
forums.
Now, one of our--we have nine basic responsibilities, the
FMC. One of them is to monitor the activities of marine
terminal operators, port authorities, and the foreign couriers.
So this issue would be an interesting question, given what has
occurred on the west coast. But let me say this.
Number one, there are systematic causes to congestion. And
I think it is fair to say that, as I have indicated--and I have
been stating that, once the negotiation was over, that is not
going to cure congestion. Absolutely not. And this is something
that I shared, and I can represent. Everybody in industry
shares that feeling, whether you are a carrier, whether you are
a port authority, and whether you are a terminal operator.
So, in essence, let me just highlight three particular ones
that are really crucial at this time.
Number one, I mentioned the question of the shortages of
chassis. It has been very crucial. Now, on the optimistic side,
I believe they are moving forward to a model which eventually--
that is going to be tweaked, and that is going to be cured at
some point. But, for now, it is a problem.
Number two, last year I testified, and this year I made
reference again with regard to the involvement of these mega-
alliances, these alliances by the big carriers. And add to that
the mega-vessels. When I was a commissioner at the Port of Long
Beach at first we had, at best, a 5,000 TEU. That progressed to
an 8,000 TEU. And now we have vessels three times as large as a
football field. So, essentially, there are problems, and we are
hopeful--we, the FMC--to kind of identify what these issues
are, and suggest possible solutions, and identify possible
bottlenecks to address.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. I appreciate that. And, again, I hope,
as you have identified some of these other issues--for
instance, demurrage--I think, you know, I really feel like
something fishy was going on at our ports with the PMA not
allowing the workers to load and unload the cargo. Meanwhile,
charging folks for the storage of the containers on the docks,
which weren't able to be loaded and unloaded. So I think there
are some real--a lot of questions that we have about some
actions that were taken during these contract negotiations, and
I hope----
Mr. Cordero. And I will say----
Ms. Hahn [continuing]. The Commission looks into it.
Mr. Cordero. And I just want to stress that this issue that
I mentioned, including demurrage, is not an issue isolated to
the west coast. This is a major issue at many of our ports.
I will represent to you that the American shippers are very
angry at this point with regard to that question. And,
hopefully, we will be able to identify some of these issues as
part of our congestion study that we are--our staff--is working
on.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. I yield back, and I hope we have a
second round of questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentlelady. Mr. Graves is recognized.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just want
to make note that in the 2 minutes I had the gavel I didn't
even screw up, and I already got demoted.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Admiral, thank you very much for
being here. It is great to see you again, and I enjoyed your
State of the Coast Guard speech yesterday. Chief, thank you for
being here, as well.
Louisiana is a huge maritime State, as you know, the third
longest coastline in the Nation, 5 of the top 15 tonnage ports
in the United States. We have a huge dependence upon Coast
Guard doing its job well in Louisiana, and I want to thank you
and all the men and women that work under each of you for your
service.
In looking at the budget request, you see a 26-percent
reduction in the ACI account, as compared to last year. You and
I in the past have had long conversations about the fact, for
example, the 110s are operating decades beyond their intended
service life. When you look at the fact that you are operating
so far beyond the service life on your 110s, the 210s and 270,
the Medium Endurance Cutters once again operating beyond their
service life, is that reduction aligned with where the Coast
Guard needs to be, in regard to reinvesting or recapitalizing
in its equipment to ensure that the men and women of the Coast
Guard have the resources and the equipment they need to do
their jobs?
Admiral Zukunft. Thank you, Congressman. We have
identified, you know, the right platforms for the 21st century.
Many of the platforms we operate today were designed to do
coastal search and rescue--our 210-foot cutters, to go after
mariners that wanted to be found. Today, we are going after
narco traffickers, and the last thing they want to do is to be
detected, apprehended, and brought to justice.
The Fast Response Cutters that we are currently building in
Louisiana, that is a game changer for us. And we will build 58
of those. We will recompete the contract. But when you talk to
the crewmembers on these cutters, especially those that have
served on the 110 before that, it is truly a game changer.
We had an increase in migrant flow over the Christmas
holiday. And had it not been for these Fast Response Cutters
standing the watch over that Christmas holiday, we would have
seen a potential mass exodus from Cuba, if the Coast Guard
wasn't out there, standing the watch. But we would not be able
to sustain that watch with these new platforms that we are
bringing to bear.
We proved the same with the National Security Cutter. And
that is why the Offshore Patrol Cutter will be so critical as
that middleware between a coastal patrol craft, an off-water
frigate, if you will, a National Security Cutter, and then that
middleware, the Offshore Patrol Cutter, to protect our maritime
equities, including those in the State of Louisiana.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. So is that a yes or a no, in
regard to the budget being where it needs to be in order for
you to recapitalize, considering that these vessels are
operating well beyond their intended service life?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. The best part about the fiscal year
2016 budget is it gives us the wherewithal to proceed with full
rate production of the Fast Response Cutters: 6 per year, and
then to build out all 58 of those. A challenge we have is the
full funding for final design of our Offshore Patrol Cutter. I
am quite confident that we will demonstrate that this will be
an affordable platform, and that the funding will be
forthcoming for us to proceed with what will be the most
significant major acquisition in Coast Guard history.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Well, with your happiness with the
performance of the FRC, perhaps you can turn to Louisiana yards
again on the OPC when you are ready to go there.
Let me change gears very quickly in the last minute. You
and I also had long discussions about the fact that the Coast
Guard--and I think we both used the term--has become somewhat
of a Swiss Army knife. If you look at the evolution of the
Service over the last few hundred years, you have taken on all
sorts of missions that never were initially considered within
the Coast Guard realm.
Looking at--and, as Congressman Curbelo noted, the
reduction in your Reserve training budget this year, nearly 9
percent, as I recall--that is what allows you to address some
of the surge capacities that you need in some cases.
Considering the multimission new face of the Coast Guard, all
the things you are trying to do out there, do you have the
resources you need, in order to continue carrying out the
security mission that the--the growing security mission that
the Coast Guard is faced with today?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, right now I am resourced for
a perfect world. If we don't have a terrorist attack, if we
don't have a major natural disaster. Any one of those
uncertainties, I am resourced for that. But that is--it is
inconsistent with a Service that prides itself on being semper
paratus.
As the Commandant of the Coast Guard, what I will not do is
offer up reductions to our force structure. We have done that
over the last several years, due to making painful tradeoff
decisions to meet current-year budget needs. But I cannot cut
any deeper into our force structure, as Ranking Member DeFazio
and others have brought up, and Congressman Curbelo, with our
Reserve component. But that is also true in our active-duty
component, as well. So I need to hold fast on my force
structure, because that really is the backbone of our Coast
Guard.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Did you want me to yield back?
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. I would like to recognize
and again say how just honored we are to have such esteemed
colleagues here, who could easily be the full committee
chairman, but isn't right now. Mr. DeFazio is recognized.
Mr. DeFazio. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks for that last testimony, Admiral. I appreciate
that. But within force reduction I would want to include, you
know, your basic function of, you know, safety of life at sea
and, in my case, that gets a bit parochial with the Newport Air
Station. Central coast we have North Bend, Astoria. They are
involved in half of the rescues off the Oregon coast. As you
know, very cold water, short survival time. Congress
forestalled some proposed cuts there. I know you are trying to
move money around.
But I never--we haven't seen a real rationale for those
cuts. What one would observe is, A, would be a longer response
time from North Bend; B, that puts more wear and tear on the
equipment, which seems to be a good deal of an offset, in
addition to the potential for losing lives.
So, I mean, if you are going to persist in that, obviously,
I am going to do what I can to find a way to not let that
happen. But, beyond that, in the interim, I would like to see
the analysis of how this really would have saved money. Because
I--if you are not reducing force--a lot of it was personnel
cost--and if you are not reducing force, then they are just
going somewhere else. So that is for that.
Now, if we can move on beyond my parochial issues, which I
obviously feel very strongly about, but--icebreaking. I have
been on the Polar Star at the South Pole with the former
Commandant. We got the Polar Sea. I am going to see the poor
thing in dry dock. As I understand it, pretty much dismantling
it to try and keep the other ship going. And you are at a point
where there is nothing in your budget for a new icebreaker--
potentially $1 billion.
You know, some are advocating that, on an interim measure,
perhaps we should look at refitting the Polar Sea to try and
get--because I understand the hull is fairly good. And I was
on--not out on, but on--a 52 at Newport, which is 60 years old,
which are unique boats. There are only four left. They can go
out in a breaking 26-foot sea. The other cutters can't. I don't
know what we are going to do for a follow-on for the 52s, or if
we can keep them going for 100 years.
So, the question would be, are you looking at and close to
making a recommendation on what we are going to do in the
interim, perhaps by refitting the Polar Sea?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, Ranking Member. We have got money in
the 2015 budget to pull the Polar Sea out of the water so we
can do a full materiel inspection of it. Unfortunately, under
continuing resolution, my hands are tied in the ability to
award that contract. So therein lies the challenges of
operating under a continuing resolution.
Then, until we can do a full assessment, then we can make a
full business case analysis of whether it is prudent to invest
in buying up to perhaps 10 years of service life on a nearly
40-year-old ship, or do we repurpose that money for perhaps a
total recapitalization of the fleet, as well, which--at some
point we are going to have to make that decision. But we are
running out of time, and----
Mr. DeFazio. You just gave us a good action item there.
Admiral Zukunft. OK.
Mr. DeFazio. I wasn't aware that you couldn't do the
contract under the continuing resolution, and that should be
something we could fix.
Would there be money--would you need an appropriation to
follow that, or just need authorization?
Admiral Zukunft. Just need authorization, an anomaly to the
existing continuing resolution. The same would apply as we want
to award the National Security Cutter number 8, and we need to
make that decision by mid-March. So that time is rapidly
running out on us.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, I would think the chairman might be
interested in us doing a little rifle-shot suspension bill that
might deal with some of these issues. Good.
And then, on the question about the 52s, I mean, I know you
have got an awful lot of stuff out there that needs replacing.
I mean what are we going to do in the future? These are unique
boats, you use them around the country. We are down to the last
four. Maybe you can squeeze another round of refitting out of
them. Beautiful inside, I wish the inside of my boat looked
like that in the engine room. But, still, it is 60 years old.
You have a follow-on proposal there? Are you thinking about
that?
Because, again, I go back to, you know, your list of unmet
priorities. And I guess maybe we need to direct you a little
differently, in terms of what we want to see a list of. Maybe
we should be asking about your unprogrammed, or unmet projected
capital needs, which would go--which would be a much more
comprehensive list, which might get the attention of Congress a
little better than these four little items.
Admiral Zukunft. And just on the 52--the hulls are as you
have seen. I have been on those boats, as well. And there is
great pride in ownership, and they are relatively easy to
maintain, from an engineering standpoint. So right now there is
no need to repurpose those. They have a very unique, high
ability to tow other vessels and operate in those conditions
that you have in the State of Oregon.
So, right now, there is not a service need to recapitalize
those four very unique boats for a very unique mission in a
very unique environment.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. So we will look forward to their 100th
birthday, perhaps, with a fourth set of engines.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. OK, it is my turn. I guess
the first question I have, Admiral, is this. I think since I
have had this position chairing this subcommittee, 4 years in a
row now the President has sent us a budget request that guts
your acquisition. The administration seems determined not to
spend more than $1 billion. That is what they keep doing, $1
billion on recapitalization of Coast Guard's aging and failing
legacy assets.
The GAO and previous Commandants have testified that it
takes a little bit more than $2 billion a year to keep you on
your program of record and your current acquisition strategy on
time and on budget. So the administration does not support your
acquisition program. I mean that is pretty plain.
And I talked to Secretary Johnson last week, and it seems
he is kind of obviously focusing on what is happening right now
with the entire Department, but he didn't seem too concerned.
And I think the game is the administration does this, and it is
up to Congress, then, to come in and say, ``Oh, we all love the
Coast Guard, we are going to plus them up to what they need to
be.'' I think it is a dumb game. So we are not going to play
it.
So, my question is, what are you--when are you going to
give us the American people and the administration a new--
mission needs statements that cut out those missions which you
can no longer do? And what are the missions that you can no
longer do? If we pass a budget for you that reflects exactly
the President's budget request, what missions are you going to
not do?
Admiral Zukunft. And, as you are probably aware, well
aware, Chairman, the word ``no'' has not always been in our
vernacular. I will produce a mission needs statement, and my
staff will certainly brief yours this summer. But as we look at
this mission needs statement, what has changed in just the last
couple of years?
As DOD rebalances, you know, what vacuums have been
created, and what unique niches does the Coast Guard need to
fill? And that is why I am very focused on the Western
Hemisphere. I have tripled the number of ships in the Western
Hemisphere today. It is not because I have triple the number of
ships in my inventory. I had to take them from somewhere else
and put other mission areas at risk as I look at what is the
greatest risk to our national security right now. And it is in
the form of transnational organized crime. And so, we need to
include that in the mission needs statement.
The energy renaissance. We didn't see that when we wrote
the last mission needs statement in 2004. An opening Arctic,
which requires command and control platforms to be up there, at
least on a rotational basis, and certainly icebreakers, to have
the ability to have persistent presence up there, as well.
So, I owe you that mission needs statement. When I meet
with every Department of Defense geographic component commander
across the world, every one of them, as they look at the
threats in their area of responsibility, many of those require
Coast Guard-unique authorities. And so, the demand on a global
scale continues to go up, whether it is in the East China Sea,
off the coast of Nigeria, in the Pacific Island nations in
those remote economic exclusive zones, where fish is their only
source of economic prosperity. Time and time again we are
seeing more and more demands for more Coast Guard. And so, that
is what we need to capture----
Mr. Hunter. Let me--I can go to the combatant commanders
and get a requirement list for the Coast Guard, too. That is
not what I am asking for. What I would like is a mission needs
statement that reflects your budget. And you could put that, if
you want to, side by side with the combatant commander, the
geographic combatant commander requirements. That is fine. But
I would like a mission needs statement that is actually what
you can do, not what you would like to do, or have been asked
to do.
Admiral Zukunft. OK, understood.
Mr. Hunter. Can you get us that?
Admiral Zukunft. I will.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Thank you, Admiral. I appreciate it,
because we want to know what can you do with the budget that
the President has laid out.
Question for Administrator Jaenichen. Talked about the
Jones Act a little bit. Talked about it in the Senate. Our
colleague, Senator McCain, has talked about axing the Jones
Act, getting rid of it. We think that would be a horrible,
horrible thing for America's industrial base and our ability to
fight wars, protect ourselves, protect the sea lanes, and build
ships. So I want you to talk about it.
What impact is even talking about it, about changing the
build requirements or getting rid of the Jones Act, what does
that mean for American ship manufacturers?
Mr. Jaenichen. Chairman, a couple things. In 2013 the
Maritime Administration put out an economic impact study of the
shipyards and repairing industry. Essentially, what it said is
there are 100,000 shipyard workers that are currently employed
building ships. There are also--if you take the indirect jobs,
there are another 300,000 jobs in a $36 billion industry.
The challenge that we have is, today--the Commandant
mentioned the energy renaissance. Today the order book at our
shipyards around the country, we have 33 large vessels,
oceangoing vessels. A significant number of them, 25, are
actually supporting the energy industry. There are 12 of them
that are 330,000-barrel tank vessels. There are also seven that
are 110,000-barrel or greater, in terms of articulated tug and
barges to be able to move those cargoes. Those are currently on
the order book today. We additionally have eight container or
RoCon kind of vessels that are also on the order book.
The challenge is even the discussion of potentially
changing the build requirement is enough to essentially
influence some of the finance folks. And if they get concerned
about the ability for the folks that are buying these ships to
be able to get financing, or they take the risk and they make
the risk too large so that they have to charge a higher risk
rate to be able to get that, some of those projects that are
currently on the order book today may not occur.
And it has nothing to do with even changing the Jones Act.
It is just the sheer threat of changing the Jones Act, because
what ends up happening is, if you bring in tonnage that can be
built overseas at shipyards that are subsidized by forward
governments, you get a situation where you imbalance the
economic model that these operators currently who have made the
investment in Jones Act tonnage, built it in the U.S. to be
able to be coastwise trade, they are now at a disadvantage in
comparison. So now you have got projects that are currently
financed for 25 or 30 years. They now can't compete in the same
environment. So, potentially, those projects go under, or they
can't pay their loans. So this is a cascading problem that
could potentially be created.
There are a number of folks that have said that the Jones
Act is the problem and the reason why we have gas high at the
pumps. Can I--I could take it through sort of a little
mathematical analysis and say that is not exactly the case. If
you take a look at the U.S. Energy Information Administration,
they have said that, from a barrel of crude oil, you get 12
gallons of diesel, 19 gallons of gas, and that is out of a 42-
gallon barrel. So about 31 gallons. So that is about 75 percent
is useful.
The difference in the rates to be able to move on a
foreign-flag vessel versus a U.S.-flag vessel, say from the
Gulf of Mexico to Canada, is about $2 per barrel. To move it to
the refineries on the east coast, it is about $5 a barrel. The
difference is about $3. So you take that 31, divide it into 3,
and you get about $0.09. That is the cost to be able to move it
per barrel. And that doesn't even count the 25 percent of that
barrel that can be used for other things to be able to defer
that cost.
I compare that $0.09 to the Federal tax on gas, $0.18. In
the State of New York, the local and State taxes is $0.44. So
$0.62. And a comparison is $0.09. I also take $0.09 and I
compare it to the price of a gallon of gas. It is less than 4
percent. Whoever is saying that this is the cost of our woes
for high gas prices is misinforming the American people.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you for that. And I want to tie that in,
Admiral. What is the Coast Guard's position, if you had
foreign-flag vessels moving chemicals, flammable gas, oil,
anything like that that can do anything up in the interior
river system of the United States? What does that do to the
Coast Guard?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. We have a very rigorous port State
control program for foreign-flagged vessels in--on any given
day in our U.S. ports we probably have at least a dozen vessels
that are being detained because they do not comply with
international standards for pollution and safety of life at
sea.
Those standards are the exact same standards that we apply
to the U.S. fleet. There is no difference between the two. But
we do see that flag States of convenience, some of them are
cutting corners. And in this regard, moving highly volatile
materials, this is not a place where we can afford to cut
corners. And, as the Commissioner mentioned, in our very
congested ports.
Mr. Hunter. So let me ask you more to the point, then.
Would the Coast Guard rather see American mariners on American-
flagged vessels that have been inspected by the U.S. Coast
Guard and have been trained up to U.S. Coast Guard standards
and U.S. mariner standards driving volatile ships up and down
America's inland waterways? Or would you rather see folks from
Pakistan, from Yemen, from Somalia driving those ships on the
interior waterways? What is the Coast Guard's take on that?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. Certainly from our credentialing
program, we run background checks on all of those mariners.
They carry--many of them carry transportation worker
identification credentials. So we have that trust and
confidence in our American operators.
So, to answer your questions, from a security aspect, that
would be my preference.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Admiral. Thank you, Administrator.
I would like to yield to Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. I yield to Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Let me--Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for
your comments that you just made.
And I hope that--it just reminds me, with regard to the
Jones Act, I agree with you, Administrator. I mean we can't
even--we--you know, it seems as if there is some real short-
sightedness going on here, and that is a major problem. And I
am hoping that the chairman will join all of us on this--
particularly on this subcommittee, to try to make sure that the
Congress understands the significance of the Jones Act, because
I think a lot of our colleagues just do not understand how
significant it is, and how America is falling behind. I used to
say slowly, but surely. Now it is fast.
And that leads me to these questions. You know, as you
know, our highest priority, Administrator, you know, was to try
to make sure that we--well, when I go back and I think about my
chairmanship of the subcommittee over the Coast Guard, you
know, we spent a lot of time just trying to make sure that our
ports were safe. And we put in a lot of measures to try to
accomplish that. Where are we on that, the port--with regard to
Coast Guard and ports?
Admiral Zukunft. Chairman, I will be happy to take that
question.
Mr. Cummings. Yes.
Admiral Zukunft. We have really matured our relationship
with our Area Maritime Security Committees. And even taking it
one step further, when I look at the State of California, and
Florida, and others where we have transnational criminal
organizations operating in those very same waters where we are
trying to discriminate licit commerce from illicit commerce,
working with Federal, State, local, and private-sector, the
synergies that we have, many of those come under our captain-
of-the-port authorities. But we have literally come light years
since the implementation of the Maritime Transportation
Security Act of 2002.
Mr. Cummings. Good. Administrator, how many vessels are
currently flying the U.S. flag in oceangoing foreign trade?
Mr. Jaenichen. Sir, as of the 1st of January of 2012, we
had 106 vessels. Today that number is 81. And I anticipate that
it is going to go lower than that before the end of the year.
The challenge for the U.S.-flag internationally trading fleet
is the lack of available Government-impelled cargo, which is
one of the things that they rely on and have access to.
DOD cargoes are principally one of the principal cargoes
that they carry on an annual basis. The--General Paul Selva,
the commander of U.S. Transportation Command, recently is on
record as saying that this budget for transportation
requirements, essentially, is 50 percent what it was just 2
years ago. So that is a significant challenge for the U.S.-flag
fleet, and we are seeing their exodus because of the lack of
Government-impelled cargo and other cargo opportunities.
Mr. Cummings. How many such vessels were there, say, 5
years ago?
Mr. Jaenichen. Five years ago, typically from--for about
the last 20 years, all except for the year 2007, we had a
number above 100 in that entire period. So we have been
hovering around 100, somewhere between 103 and just below that
in--only in 2007. But, essentially, from 2012 over the last 3-
year period, we have lost 25 percent of the U.S.-flag fleet.
And that corresponds to about 2,200 U.S. mariner jobs that have
been lost, as a result.
Mr. Cummings. And I know you have been working diligently
to strengthen the flag fleet. And I want to applaud you and
Secretary Foxx for the efforts, and--because he has shown a lot
of personal commitment to the success of the U.S. merchant
marine, more so than just about any other Secretary that I have
had a relationship with.
Can you discuss what steps have been taken, and what
additional ones are planned to support our U.S.-flag fleet in
the foreign trade?
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you for your question, sir. We have
done a couple of things. We started last year with two National
Maritime Strategy symposiums. We did the first one--the first
one we did in January was solely dedicated on the U.S.-flag
fleet trading internationally. And so we met for several days,
had about 600 stakeholders that participated in that particular
symposium. We captured all those comments. We have now collated
them, we have identified what we refer to as tenets that would
be required to be supporting in a strategy, and we have also
identified some options that might be available to be able to
improve the number of ships operating under U.S. flag,
internationally.
We have shared that with our Marine Transportation System
National Advisory Council. They have assisted us in
prioritizing those. I have sat down with my Federal partners,
the Federal Maritime Commission, members of the Commandant's
staff, and others who are involved in this particular
requirement to be able to get this National Maritime Strategy
out.
I have also employed an outside organization who is
actually going and talking to stakeholders to make sure that we
recognize what a National Maritime Strategy should and should
not do. And we are in the process of getting that drafted, and
then getting it coordinated with the agency. I hope to have
that out very soon.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. Ms. Brownley is
recognized.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. I
am a new member of the T&I Committee, and very, very honored to
be able to sit on this subcommittee. And I have a very specific
question, probably for you, Admiral. And it is--my
understanding that the Coast Guard air station currently
located at Los Angeles International Airport will be relocating
to Point Mugu Naval Air Station, part of Naval Base Ventura
County, which is in my district. I am very excited about this
news, very pleased about the move, and look forward to
welcoming new personnel to Ventura County.
My first question is, if Congress does fail to fund DHS
programs this week, would the shutdown affect the planning of
this move, and would it impact it at all?
Admiral Zukunft. Congresswoman, no, it would not. We are
being squeezed out of the Los Angeles Airport, as you well
know, due to growth in that sector. And so we need to continue
to operate in that domain. What it does inhibit our ability to
do, though, is to make upgrades that would be needed at Ventura
County to permanently base aircraft there. But we can certainly
operate from there in the near term. But what it does not
provide us is the long-term solution, hangar upgrades and the
like, to make that a permanent operating base.
Ms. Brownley. And what is the timeframe, exactly, for this
move?
Admiral Zukunft. We will be relocating to Point Mugu in
2016.
Ms. Brownley. And in terms of buildings there, have you
identified the buildings that need to be ungraded?
Admiral Zukunft. There is a hangar that would need to be
upgraded, and we are also looking across DHS to see if there
might be an opportunity to have other components of the
Department perhaps collocated there, as well. So we are looking
at this from an all-of-DHS approach, not just from a Coast
Guard approach.
Ms. Brownley. And the money proposed within the fiscal
budget, is that money enough to cover all of the costs and the
upgrades on the site? You wouldn't need any additional money--
--
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, we would need an additional
appropriation to be able to build out a hangar to fully
accommodate that. We can provide you what that dollar value
would be, but right now we don't have an appropriation to do
so.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, sir. And I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentlelady. I think we are well
represented by the west coast here.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. Yes. Except for a couple people. That is all
right. I would like to yield to the ranking member, Mr.
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I thank my
colleagues for their questions. Many of the questions that I
was going to ask have been asked.
But I want to follow up, Mr. Jaenichen, on the discussion
that you were having with regard to the merchant marine, the
critical role that it plays.
And also, Admiral, in your opening statement, you mentioned
the issue of LNG. We will be shipping LNG offshore this year,
actually. Cheniere will begin its process. I think you are all
aware of my particular interest in this. It may take 100 LNG
ships to handle just the Cheniere shipments. The issue of
safety is of utmost importance. We know that, under current
law, imported LNG must be handled by American sailors, merchant
marine. We passed a bill last year in the Coast Guard
authorization that authorizes the Secretary to have
discretionary authority on export.
Mr. Jaenichen, what is the status of that discretionary
authority? How will it be used with regard to the export from
the Cheniere facility in Texas?
Mr. Jaenichen. Ranking Member Garamendi, thank you for that
question. We have done a number of initiatives. First, we have
reached out to the LNG industry to try to better understand
what it is they are shipping, how much they are shipping, and
where they are shipping from. To be able to do that, we have
partnered with the Department of Energy and a task force that
is associated with the Committee on Marine Transportation,
looking at--specifically at alternative energies.
We also, as part of our international engagement with the
bilaterals that we do on a maritime basis, and also what we do
internationally, I have personally talked with members of the
Japanese delegation, the South Korean delegation, and the
Chinese delegation, with regard to some of these particular
issues. I will say that they are not taking root very
effectively, but we are continuing to engage on that, to see if
there are opportunities in some kind of agreements that we
might do.
We are also taking a look, talking with our shipyards, in
terms of their capacity. I think you know that the last LNG
vessel that we built, we built 16 of them back in the 1970s and
the 1980s, that the last one was built in 1980. The yards that
did that here in the U.S. are no longer building commercial
vessels, so we have some challenges to be able to reconstitute
that particular capacity. So, we are doing a number of things
to make sure that we can understand and be able to exercise the
direction that you provided, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Specifically, having looked at all of that,
is it the policy of the administration to encourage the
construction, the building of LNG tankers, in the United
States? Is that your policy, or is it not?
Mr. Jaenichen. That is what we are working to put together,
as a policy, to do that. It is not firmly set yet. I am working
on that to be able to get to the Secretary.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, let me be very clear where I am coming
from. There are three critical national security elements
involved in the LNG issue. First of all, the natural gas itself
is a strategic asset of the United States. It has led to the
repowering of many of our electrical power plants. And it has
allowed us to have a significantly lower energy cost than many
of our competitors. It is a strategic asset here, in the United
States.
Secondly, the shipbuilding industry is absolutely critical
to the Coast Guard, to the U.S. Navy, and to the--what remains
of the American merchant marine.
Thirdly, the merchant marines themselves are critical. We
have seen the discussion part of it today, that the merchant
marines are absolutely critical for the--that is not only the
mariners, but also the ships critical to the national defense.
Ninety percent of military supplies are by ship. I do represent
Travis Air Force Base and the Air Mobility Command. We love C-
5As and 17s. However, that is a small percentage of the
materiel that needs to be moved around the world.
So, we have three critical national security elements
involved in the LNG trade. We should require that all LNG
exported from the United States be on American ships, so that
these three elements of national security are enhanced.
A lot of mariners would be put to work. You mentioned the
number of mariners that have lost their jobs: 2,000 in the last
3 years. They could be on these ships. The shipbuilding
industry can build these ships. They are going to take time to
gear up, perhaps 3 to 5 years. So there would be a phase-in
period of time for the LNG ships to come online.
And, finally, it is a security issue. The chairman may have
stacked the deck a little bit by mentioning Yemenis and
Somalians and others that might be on these ships. And, in
fact, perhaps they are on the ships, we don't know. But we do
know that every American mariner is licensed. And we know who
they are. We have their thumb prints, we have their
identification. And all of these volatile cargoes, at least in
American ports, in and out, ought to have American mariners.
That ought to be our policy. And that ought to be your
policy, Mr. Jaenichen. And you should ask for nothing less. And
the Coast Guard should be equally certain, since the safety of
our ports is your business, Admiral. So, having done that, I
want to hear specifically where you are, Mr. Jaenichen, in this
process. I know you are not going to get it today.
Next, I am going to take just a few more minutes, if it is
OK with you, Mr. Chairman. The National Maritime Strategy was
supposed to be delivered to this committee last week. Where is
it, Mr. Jaenichen?
Mr. Jaenichen. Sir, it is going to be late, as you and I
previously discussed.
One of the challenges I want to make sure the National
Maritime Strategy--that we deliver is the right one. I think we
are only going to get one chance at this, to be able to get it
right. We have done a significant amount of effort to make sure
that we have captured stakeholder input, to make sure we have
captured the--what is going to be required. And one of the
things that was included in that Coast Guard authorization was
that I have to also coordinate it within the interagency. That
process takes a little bit longer than----
Mr. Garamendi. Let me guess. Stuck in OMB. Is that correct?
Mr. Jaenichen. The interagency process takes some time,
sir.
Mr. Garamendi. So it is stuck in OMB.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. Well, we will see if we can pry it out of
OMB. I assume that you have worked with the Coast Guard on this
strategy. Is that correct, Mr.----
Mr. Jaenichen. We have personally talked with them, sir. I
have also met with Chairman Cordero and his Commissioners, and
we have done a lot of what I would call the interagency
engagement. I still have some drafting, the physical
requirements to do. So we have gotten their feedback, and I am
now in the process of drafting. So it is not----
Mr. Garamendi. I suspect that the Chair and I would be
interested in having a conversation with you about the general
issues that are in the current strategy. We may have some views
ourselves. So I would appreciate that conversation.
Next, P.L. 480. I understand that USAID, OMB, Departments
of Agriculture, Transportation have been involved in
negotiating some sort of a new P.L. 480 program. Is that
correct?
Mr. Jaenichen. Mr. Garamendi, you are correct.
Mr. Garamendi. My understanding is also none of that
information has been shared with the people that actually write
the laws--us. So when do we hear what the new strategy is?
Mr. Jaenichen. Sir, what is in the President's budget for
fiscal year 2016 is a 25-percent local and regional purchase
requirement. Our budget supports that. What is being discussed
is something more expansive than that. That legislative
language I know is being drafted, and it is not at a point I
think it is ready to be delivered to you.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, we have two critical issues here that
are kept secret from the Congress. Not a good thing to do. It
is kind of useful to brief us along the way. You can get some
input from us, may give better direction, more likelihood of
something actually happening. The fact that it hasn't been done
is disturbing.
If I might, Mr. Chairman, there is one further question,
and this is to the admiral, and it has to do with your new
airplanes that you are getting from the Air Force. Neat little
things, the C-27J models.
Do you have any money to upgrade those, and to make them
compatible with the Coast Guard requirements?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, we do. And we have an
appropriation to do so. In fact, that work is ongoing, as I
speak.
Mr. Garamendi. Let me guess. The continuing resolution
makes it impossible for you to actually do the work?
Admiral Zukunft. Some of this work is actually ongoing. And
so we are still on a timeline where we will have four C-27Js in
Sacramento in 2016.
Mr. Garamendi. I do like the word ``Sacramento.'' My
understanding is that they are to replace the C-130J model, or
H model.
Admiral Zukunft. This is actually a midrange aircraft, and
so we have a C-144, which--originally, the program of record
was for 36. We have 18 of those C-144 aircraft. And, as you
know, we have 14 C-27Js, which is a much more capable aircraft.
So we are reassessing is that total of 18 and 14, will that
meet our service needs into the 21st century.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. As the C-27s come on board, they are not
all coming at once; they are going to be spread out over 3, 4
years. Is that correct?
Admiral Zukunft. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. OK.
Admiral Zukunft. At the same time----
Mr. Garamendi. Is there a hiatus and, therefore, an
insufficient number of aircraft, depending on the timing of the
arrivals of the 27s?
Admiral Zukunft. That is a good question. So we are phasing
the arrival of the C-27Js with the dispatching of the Hercules
version of the C-130, which is going to the Forestry Service.
In fact, that first aircraft of eight is in the process of its
transition, as well.
So, the timing of that, so we don't create a gap for the
Coast Guard, is that C-27Js come on board, the C-130H will go
over to the Forestry Service. And that will happen over a
period of the next 3 years.
Mr. Garamendi. So there is or is not a gap?
Admiral Zukunft. Right now there will be a small gap, but
it is a negligible one.
Mr. Garamendi. Where will that gap be?
Admiral Zukunft. This is near-shore, since it is a midrange
aircraft. And right now our greatest gap is when we are using
long-range surveillance in the drug transit zones, which are
normally staged out of a foreign country.
Mr. Garamendi. I would like to get into this, a little more
detail about the gap. The Forest Service will not be able to
use those airplanes immediately, because they have to be
reconfigured for this--for firefighting. And it may not be in
the interest of drug interdiction and long-range surveillance
that a gap exist at all. I think I can go on and on with a
whole series of questions here about that issue, but I would
like to get some more detail on that.
A final point is that I--last week I was with the President
of Panama, and had a discussion with him about their desire to
work more closely with the Coast Guard. And actually, he was
willing to establish some sort of a station and facility in
Panama that would be available to the Coast Guard to be used. I
know you have some facilities there now, but there would be a
possibility of a more integrated facility.
And, finally, back to Port Hueneme. The Navy will be flying
its Poseidon version of the Global Hawk out of Port Hueneme,
and they will be doing exercises in that area, training
exercises. That piece of equipment observes the ocean well. I
would like to have a discussion with you about using the
Poseidon information in the training, as they observe the
southern California coastal area. Might find it to be useful.
Thank you very much. Yield.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the ranking member. I would like to
recognize Mr. Graves again for the second round.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral,
we had the chance in a previous life to spend a good bit of
time working on the oil spill. And, again, I want to thank you
for your efforts there.
As you know, the--you can do simple math, and you can come
to the conclusion that you have more oil remaining in the Gulf
of Mexico today than perhaps was spilled in the entire Valdez
oil spill. And the State of Louisiana and the Coast Guard
differed on the best approach to continue seeking the--and
removing the oil that was there. Where is the best place for
the State of Louisiana to turn if they have concerns related to
the residual oil in the Gulf of Mexico resulting from Deepwater
Horizon?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. The first place to begin is with the
regional response team. But probably, to even navigate through
that process, would--to meet with the sector commander in New
Orleans, who now owns the Federal on-scene coordinator process.
But to activate the regional response team, as we look at
measures of whether it is more friendly to the environment to
let the oil decay or to go in and do removal operations--now,
this does not negate the fact that if there is report of oil or
oiling, that oil will be removed under the Oil Pollution Act of
1990.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Well, I think for about 3 years we
had asked the Coast Guard to compel the responsible parties to
step in and require them to do additional oil removal, as you
and I have discussed. Just by moving into the knee-deep water,
as we discussed recently, as I recall, I think the 9-month
period yielded a 15-time, 12-time increase in the removal of
oil, indicating that that was a good scenario, in terms of
finding additional oil and removing it.
For years, we pushed the Coast Guard to require additional
removal activities, and those were rejected. If the Coast Guard
is unwilling to compel the responsible party, what--where does
the State go then?
Admiral Zukunft. Well, we compelled the responsible party.
And in 2012, 2013--each year we removed about 6 million pounds
of oil. And we continue that process into 2014. Whether it was
weather-related or not, but--we only removed about 29,000
pounds. That does not suggest that there is not still oil out
there. But it just has not presented itself. But when it does,
the Coast Guard will respond to any increased oiling.
What we then do is we have to send it off to a lab and
determine whose oil is it, to begin with. So this will be a
Coast Guard-led evolution. And if this is BP's oil, then they
will be held accountable for those removal actions.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Do you see the State and the
parish, county, local governments as having a role in the
response?
Admiral Zukunft. Absolutely, Congressman. And that was a
big learning curve during, really, the most complex oil spill
in U.S. history, was who is in charge. The State of Louisiana,
as are most coastal States, typically operate under a Stafford
Act. And it is the Governor of that given State that directs
the day-to-day operations.
Under the Clean Water Act, this is led by the Federal
Government. And so it is a different governance structure. And
so, what we felt was imperative is that every Governor, every
parish president, every mayor on the coast of--the entire gulf
coast have a Coast Guard liaison officer that they can talk to,
to make sure that their equities were represented. We didn't do
that at the very beginning, and so there were concerns of a
breach of trust with the Coast Guard.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. But you do recognize that the Oil
Pollution Act also has a savings clause that allows for State
authorities, State laws, to continue to apply in cases when
they don't--they generally conflict with Federal law.
Admiral Zukunft. There is, correct.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Let me change gears real quick.
The Coast Guard leads a U.S. delegation in the IMO related to
ship recycling. And it is my understanding there is currently a
convention under discussion that would, in effect, encourage
the use of foreign facilities for ship recycling, as opposed to
those stateside.
Could I just ask you, in the Coast Guard's role in that
delegation to the IMO, could you also consider the use of
stateside ship recycling facilities for foreign ship recycling?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, I will have to get back to you. I
can't comment on that on the record right now, but I will be
happy to back-brief you on that.
[The information follows:]

The Coast Guard acknowledges its role as leading the U.S.
delegations to the International Maritime Organization (IMO).
However, the Coast Guard is not involved in the permitting of
vessels being recycled in the U.S. and is not in a position to
respond to the specific request presented by Representative
Graves. It is recommended that ship recycling-related questions
be posed to the Coast Guard's governmental partners at the U.S.
Maritime Administration (MarAd). MarAd generally manages U.S.
ship recycling issues/concerns for purposes of IMO activities.

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Administrator Jaenichen, you guys issued a contract in October
of last year to scrap a vessel. And, as I recall, the way that
works is you have companies that come in and bid, and that
company that bids the highest actually pays you to scrap the
ship, because they generate revenue from the recycling
activities.
It is my recollection that MarAd actually selected a
company that was willing to pay $400,000 less, as opposed to
more. And, again, just reminding folks that the higher the
price, the better for taxpayers, because the revenues come to
the State--excuse me, come to the United States.
In this case, MarAd allowed additional time for the company
to pay the fee that they were supposed to be paying, which, as
I understand, is not allowed by the rules. And now it is my
understanding that the company has actually shut down
operations, and has four MarAd vessels. So, struggling with a
few things.
Number one, does MarAd actually do a financial evaluation
to determine the solvency of the company, the ability of the
company to pay? Now we are in a situation where the taxpayers
have not received the funds, the vessels are not being
scrapped.
And secondly, just trying to understand best value for the
taxpayer there, to choose a company that is willing to pay
$400,000 less. Thank you.
Mr. Jaenichen. Congressman, thank you for that particular
question. I would have to go and take a look at the specific
solicitation. Here is what I can tell you.
Over the 90 contracts that we have either done through
vessel sales or through service contracts, where we actually
have to pay for them to actually dispose of the vessel, 72 of
the 90 that we have done have, in fact, gone to the highest
bidder. Under our best-value contract, we do--we take a look at
a couple things. We take a look at the sales price or the
service fee cost. We take a look at the production period. We
take a look at the past performance of that particular company.
And then we award it, based on best value.
The GAO has looked at this program, and has validated our
procedures for best value. And they have also ensured that we
are in compliance with the Federal acquisition requirements.
With regard to the current issue with the scrapyard that is
currently disposing of a couple of our vessels, one of the
things that has happened over the last probably month and a
half or so, the bottom has dropped out of the scrap metal
market, and so that is a challenge. We were made aware of this
here recently. We are trying to ascertain what the status is,
and how that might affect the actual performance period of the
production contract. I would have to get back to you on the
specifics, because I really don't have that information.
I will tell you that we have had a situation in the most
recent solicitation where we had ships that--bids were made.
Because of the change in the scrap metal market, that the
actual first and second bidder actually withdrew their sales
contracts. We actually awarded it to the next lowest bidder,
which was $400,000 less than the highest bid. But they were
still willing to pay for that vessel sale. So those are the
examples of what happens under the solicitation, and how it
works.
And so, to be able to go back to specific, you know,
contracts, in terms of money lost, we do attempt to get the
highest value, to make sure that the taxpayer is the
beneficiary of that. And, again, 80 percent of the time we are
able to do that.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Administrator. I would
appreciate if you could follow back up on that. As I
understand, the high bidder in this case actually did protest,
and still lost out in this case.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. Ms. Hahn is rerecognized.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is for the admiral,
Admiral Z.
I know you know that this Congress--or not this Congress,
but a previous Congress, after 9/11 passed the law that would
require 100 percent of scanning for the containers that are
coming in and out of our ports. And it is clear, from this
administration, that that goal is not even being attempted to
be achieved. And, in fact, we have heard from, I think, both
Secretaries of Homeland Security that it is just not something
that is going to happen. And, instead, the administration has
asked for a layered approach to security in and out of our
ports.
I think our ports are still one of the most vulnerable
entryways into our country. And I think sort of the excuse that
it may slow down commerce, and that would be of a bigger
detriment to our economy than an attack at one of our ports
would be, I disagree with that 100 percent. And, again,
interesting that, through these last months of the contract
negotiations, we have been told now that it might take 3 months
to clear out the backlog of the ships on the west coast ports,
which I think is a bigger issue.
I have introduced a bill that would--the SCAN Act--that
would authorize two ports in the country to do a pilot program
of 100 percent scanning of the containers. I think the
technology exists so that it wouldn't slow down commerce. Is
that something that you think we ought to at least evaluate, or
look into, as a possible long-term policy for this country?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, Congresswoman, that would really fall
under the oversight of our Customs and Border Protection. So it
would probably be unfair for me to comment on what Commissioner
Kerlikowske would--this would come under his purview, whether
that would be a prudent measure or not.
I will say we have a seamless interaction with our Customs
and Border Protection. Coast Guard and CBP work at the National
Targeting Center together, where Coast Guard screens every
foreign crewmember destined for the United States. It could be
on a passenger vessel, it could be a commercial vessel. CBP
does the same thing for every container. Where was it packed?
Is it a trust shipper or not? Which would then make that
particular container subject to further screening, or perhaps
even more intrusive and time-consuming, actually opening and
inspecting that container. But, at the end of the day, this
bill would really need to be addressed to Customs and Border
Protection.
Ms. Hahn. Well, I just was asking you because, of course,
Coast Guard oversees our ships coming in and out. And, again,
on the west coast you are dealing with other issues, with panga
boats, and that is even another layer of security coming in and
out of our ports. So I appreciate that.
So we--the Secretary of Homeland Security came out today
with a statement that said if Congress was unable to reach
agreement on the DHS funding this week, contract negotiations
will be delayed to construct the Coast Guard's eighth National
Security Cutter, which would lead to higher cost. And I was
wondering if you could just elaborate to us, so that, while we
are trying to make this decision, what kind of cost would be
higher as a result of the DHS funding lapsing?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. Through our acquisition program, we
go with a fixed-price contract. And so we have negotiated the
price of that contract. And so the contract that will be let is
$638 million. But we need to award that by mid-March, so it
will be obligated by the end of the month. If we miss this
timeline, then we have to renegotiate the price all over again.
In our years of experience, every time you negotiate, you
negotiate to a higher level, not to a lower level.
So, it increases the cost and, more importantly, it also
delays the construction of this final cutter of this program of
record at a point in time where we need to build trade space in
our acquisition budget to bring on the Offshore Patrol Cutter.
Ms. Hahn. And I also--I understand that a lapse in the
funding will impact your 225-foot buoy tender ships. And these
ships, of course, are crucial to protecting vessels on our
coastline, recovering spilled oil. What does a lapse in
maintenance of these ships--what does that mean?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. So we have a very finite acquisition
budget. And so we squeeze everything that we can into it. And
so, with our 225-foot buoy tenders, this is a service life
extension program to extend the service life of these ships out
for a number of years ahead.
And so, what that does create, then, is a backlog. And then
we would have to look at the next year acquisition budget, but
we would need some relief in that to deal with the backlog that
the CR may create this year.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentlewoman. I want to yield to the
ranking member, Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. I want to thank the witnesses for their
testimony today, the work that you do. We ask some questions.
Some of them seem to be tough, but all of them are very
important, and I want to thank all of you. I am going to have
to slip away to attend another hearing over in the Committee on
Armed Services. So thank you very, very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. Master Chief, not
forgotten about you.
So let me ask. With all the stuff that is going on, all the
budget cuts, and I guess you could say the kind of spurning by
your own leadership within the administration and OMB and the
Department of Homeland Security, they don't think much of the
Coast Guard, as reflected by their budget. What is the biggest
obstacle that you face in making sure that your Coast Guard men
and women are able to function and live happy lives and go
about their duties?
Master Chief Cantrell. Well, thank you, sir. What--this is
affecting folks right now today. And what we want our folks to
be focused on is getting the mission done. And the last thing I
want by a young petty officer on a buoy tender that has got a
10,000-pound sinker swinging around on the deck as they work a
buoy, is to worry about if he is going to get a paycheck or
not, or worry about his training is going to be affected, or
his transfer is going to be affected later on. We want them
laser-focused on mission.
Same thing for our folks that are out driving boats, that
are out pounding through 20-foot surf to rescue a sinking
fishing vessel. I want them focused on their job, not worried
about whether they are going to get a funding bill, or
whether--again, it goes back to the--are they going to get a
paycheck or not. That is not what they should be focused on.
Mr. Hunter. Let me----
Master Chief Cantrell. I mean I think we have the----
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask----
Master Chief Cantrell [continuing]. Best, brightest, and--
--
Mr. Hunter. If there is a shutdown, do the--does the Coast
Guard not get funded?
Master Chief Cantrell. A shutdown? If we are not funded,
our folks, in essence, would not--I mean they are going to show
up for work, because that is what they do. But a lapse this
week in appropriations affects, of course, next week. But this
is what is on their minds.
Mr. Hunter. When is payday for the Coast Guard? It is every
2 weeks?
Master Chief Cantrell. Every 2 weeks. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. So the first iteration of not being paid would
kick in 2 weeks next month?
Master Chief Cantrell. They would be paid on the first of
March, as the pay period ends at the end of this week. So they
get paid at the end of this week. It is the next paycheck that
folks will be concerned about.
And, again--but they are worried about this now. And these
are folks that live paycheck to paycheck, anyway, most of the
time. And you could go to a commissary any of those paydays and
see what I am talking about. But this is stuff that is
affecting them.
We have got a high retention rate and folks that really
want to do great work, and lace up their boots and come to work
and get after the jobs that they signed up to do. And I don't
want them focused on the things that are certainly outside
their paygrade to worry about, but it certainly has taken its
toll.
Mr. Hunter. Besides the budget woes right now, what is the
biggest thing that worries you about your people?
Master Chief Cantrell. Well, it does kind of go with budget
uncertainty a lot, because, look, we are operating--I mean----
Mr. Hunter. Let me phrase it differently. Is it housing? Is
it commissaries on bases? Is it--what is it?
Master Chief Cantrell. We are concerned--housing, medical,
child care services are something that we stay focused on. We
have good relationships with our DOD partners that allow us
access to those facilities. But a lot of our units are remotely
located, so we have to rerack our housing to make sure--some of
our older housing is divested from, but that means that we have
got to look for other options for our folks in some of these
small areas that aren't base-centric like, you know, a lot of
the DOD facilities are.
But child care is a big thing that worries a lot of our
folks that make career decisions sometimes on whether child
care services are available, or even affordable. But we work on
that, and we stay focused on it to make sure we are providing
resources within our own Service, but also looking outside the
Coast Guard to our DOD partners. And we maintain really good
relationships there.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Master Chief.
Master Chief Cantrell. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Chairman Cordero, you requested an extra $1
million, a bit over, to increase your workforce by 10 percent.
That is not a lot, right? Ten percent is a small number of a
small number. And your testimony indicates that these increases
are needed to review a growing number of large and complex
liner agreements to conduct--and to conduct basic day-to-day
activities.
Yet, over the last year, the FMC has held several public
forums on ways to make ports and cruise lines more
environmentally friendly, giving awards to companies with
environmentally sustainable shipping practices, encourages the
maritime sector to use FMC, the FMC to--dispute resolution
services, to use them for resolution services instead of
independent arbitrators. And, in some ways, you tried to put
yourselves in between business and business, creating, I think,
unnecessary regulatory burdens on small businesses.
This sounds like mission creep. And just one example. You
are giving an Earth Day award, in your position as Chairman of
the Federal Maritime Commission, coming up. So, specifically,
my question is two-part.
One, mission creep adding more employees, and it seems like
doing a little bit of busy work, just to stay busy.
And, two, when it comes to things like giving environmental
awards to companies, what statutory authority does the Federal
Maritime Commission have to regulate environmental compliance
of ships and ports? Do you enforce the act to produce--to
prevent pollution from ships? The Clean Water Act? The Clean
Air Act? The clean hull title of the 2010 Coast Guard, or any
other Federal environmental statutes?
Mr. Cordero. Thank you for your question, Chairman. First
of all, with regard to the environmental component, I can
assure the chairman and the committee that this is a very minor
part of the FMC, in terms of our staff and the role that we
play in, essentially, what we recognize as best practices. And
I think, on that, the key question is with development.
So, as a Commission, as a maritime Commission with the
objective and the mission of fostering fair, efficient,
reliable ocean transportation system, I think sustainable
development is a concept that the--not only has the industry
embraced, but it is a concept that--it is a global concept that
is now being embraced. So I can assure the committee that it is
a minor part.
So, essentially, with regard to the agreement component,
that is a major role, absolutely. And I think, if I may add,
just in the last quarter of 2014 there were 83 agreements filed
at the Commission. That is the most agreements filed in--going
back 10 years. Total agreements filed with the Commission are
540.
Now, if I may add two other things, two offices are
involved with that. It is the Office of Agreements. We only
have three people handling that. Once they review and process
those agreements, then we have the Office of Economic and
Competition Analysis. We have been operating with four
economists--recently are adding a fifth. Given the size of the
agreements and our main mandate, as you have indicated, we have
been operating basically in survival mode.
As to the dispute resolution component, I will say that I
have met with many industry stakeholders. I think they have
embraced that. It is a cost savings effort, in terms of
volunteering informal processes to dispute resolution issues.
One issue that we talked about earlier was the demurrage. The
demurrage is an issue for the American shippers. They have
filed complaints, and some of that I could--it fair to say that
the--you know, our dispute resolution component, by way of our
department, has been able to work as a mediator to try to
comply--or, excuse me, to try to have the parties come forward
with a compromise on that.
So, the raise that we seek, the increases, of course, with
our nine responsibilities that we have, that I have mentioned,
or--a couple of them are major. And I just represent to the
fact that we have been operating on survival mode. I mean right
now we have 500--excuse me. We have 115 employees.
Mr. Hunter. All right, let me ask you this. Considering a
lot of the stuff that you just mentioned is regulatory in
nature, and could be done by a regulatory agency versus a
Presidentially appointed Commission, where the President
appoints the Commissioners, and the Senate approves them, do
you see a need--do you think that a lot of what you do could be
done by a regulatory agency, such as MarAd?
Mr. Cordero. Well, I think, going back to 1961, in 1961 the
FMC, as it is composed today, the objective is to have a
Commission and agency to specifically oversee the activities of
foreign carriers. Given the globalized world that we have
today, it is ever more important to have a well-funded FMC. And
I think, going back specifically to 1961, the decision was made
at that point, as I understand it, there would be a domestic
component that my colleague, Chip Jaenichen, or the
administrator handles at MarAd, and it would be the
international component, particularly the regulatory aspect of
that the FMC handles.
So, if I may respectfully say, it is ever more important to
have an FMC to regulate the foreign carriers who bring most of
the cargo, if not in the 90th percentile, to our shores.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
Mr. Cordero. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Cummings, you are recognized.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Admiral,
let me ask you this. As you know, one of my highest priorities
when I was Chair was ensuring that the student body at the
Coast Guard Academy reflected the diversity of the Nation that
the Coast Guard serves. And great strides were made, no doubt
about it. It has been simply astounding, what we were able to
achieve.
But certainly we ought to hold and protect our progress.
And I am wondering what is going on there, and are those
efforts continuing to make sure that we have a diverse Academy?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, I am pleased to say that
today probably the United States Coast Guard Academy is the
most--or certainly one of the most--diverse service academies
of all of military service academies. This year about 39
percent of our entrants were underrepresented minorities.
So, we have turned the corner. The next step is we need to
retain. We are doing well, but we need to continue to mentor
and grow this diverse workforce at every level in our
organization, and we still have more work to do in that regard.
I have taken a personal interest in this, as well. I am
active in NNOA, I have gone out through our CSPI program to
actually recruit college candidates in their second year of
college to be part of our Coast Guard team. They get a stipend
of about $36,000 a year to finish out their last 2 years of
college, go off to officer candidate school, take the oath, and
wear this Coast Guard uniform as a commissioned officer. I take
this--this is one of the key pinnacles of my Commandant's
direction. And you can count on me to follow through on this.
Mr. Cummings. You know, it was interesting. When we were
working on this issue years ago, people kept saying, with
regard to the Academy, that if you make your force more
diverse, the SAT scores would be lower, and that people would
not be successful. And, you know, I kept telling them, you
know, you have to go and find people. And I have sat now, I
guess for 10 years, on the Naval Academy Board of Visitors. And
I know we had an opportunity to have some--a lot of
conversations between the Coast Guard and the Naval Academy,
because the Naval Academy has done a pretty good job on this
issue, too.
So, I just want to make sure that, you know, we are
continuing to do that. And, based on what you just said, I am
glad that we are going to the colleges and--because in today's
world, with so many students having such a difficult time with
money, and getting through school, I mean, if they can get that
education, get paid, and then have a job, that is the other
piece. After you get out, I mean, that is major. And so that is
good to hear.
Master Chief, you know, you said something about--you were
talking about child care. And we--in my district we did a
series of forums with women. And we did one with women in
business, we did another one with women in education. But we
also did one with women in the military. And I was--and I am
telling you it was one of the most enlightening events that I
have ever done in my 18 years of being in Congress, because we
sat there and women literally cried. It got very emotional
about being able to get decent child care, and how so often
they had to end their careers.
I mean this was just--this was mainly Army and Air Force,
but it was just very interesting. And I never--I guess I--I
mean I had three kids, and we had to go through the child care
thing. I did not know it was such a major issue. So it is a
problem, isn't it?
Master Chief Cantrell. Yes, sir. And we see it more and
more with folks making these career decisions. Even when they
are looking at whatever their next assignment is going to be of
is there affordable and acceptable child care in there. And we
work really hard with the GSA child care subsidy reimbursement
program, as well as our DOD folks where we can, to get our
members access to those facilities. And we are continuing to
work that, and we are getting better each year, I think.
But it is a daunting task for them sometimes to think about
whether it is worth it to stay in the Service. And we have got
an investment in those folks that--we don't want to let them
walk out the door. So we are focused on trying to find other
ways to take care of them.
Mr. Cummings. Well, anything I can do to be supportive,
please let me know.
Master Chief Cantrell. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. Thank the gentleman. You could always institute
the rules that the Marine Corps had about 60 years ago, which--
you can't get married until--in 7 years, or go on two floats or
go to war once, or something like that. It is a--having
families on base is a burden. And the military did recognize
that 50, 60 years ago. I mean that is where a lot of the
resources go.
Admiral, I just got a few more questions here. Towing
vessel safety rule. It has been 10 years. It has been 10 years.
A decade. Anything?
Admiral Zukunft. First response, complex. We have had,
literally, thousands of comments. And we have adjudicated every
one of those. This and balanced water regulations are two of my
highest regulatory packages in my inbox. Actually, not on my
desk. Trust me. When they arrive, they will be off the same
day.
I am confident that we will have a rulemaking package ready
to leave my Coast Guard headquarters within the next several
months. What we have to adjudicate is what are the unintended
consequences, especially to the small operators? Is this going
to squeeze them out of business? And so we go through a very
extensive economic analysis that goes through that, as well.
At the same time, we take on the burden of having to
inspect 6,000 more vessels that currently aren't in our
inspection fleet of responsibility. But that rulemaking package
is--as you have highlighted, definitely needs to get moving.
And I will move it out.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. At least it will happen under your
tenure.
Admiral Zukunft. This will happen this year. Again, I have
been given--I am not always optimistic with rulemaking
packages, but I expect to have it out this spring.
Mr. Hunter. OK, thank you. Along with that, we changed the
rules for the inspection of the distant water tuna fleet to 5
years last year. When is the Coast Guard going to release
guidance to its inspectors and industry implementing the new
change?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, that is an amendment to a policy
letter. That will come to me, and I expect to see that within--
probably within the next month, and we will be able to push
that out, and then move that forward. And I know that is a high
priority for you.
Mr. Hunter. It goes to you from where?
Admiral Zukunft. It goes from me and then to the Department
of Homeland Security.
Mr. Hunter. From you to the Department?
Admiral Zukunft. Right.
Mr. Hunter. The DHS. OK. With that, the one final thing
that I have, I know that you have looked at the Presidential
budget request. And I know that you have at least scrubbed it,
and said, ``How do we make our acquisition strategy line up
with this, if this is our actual budget?'' And I am just--if
you could, just say a few words on--just from your very first
scrub on this, what would you do right now, if the budget that
is reflected right now is the actual budget, going forward into
2016? What are you going to do with the OPCs? What are you
going to do with final down-select from your three to one next
year?
I saw, instead of asking for money now, you are hoping that
next year the Department, DHS, just gives you a bunch of money
to be able to do it once you down-select to one, which is never
going to happen. I mean that is a--it is just not ever going to
happen. So what would you say on your first scrub right now?
What do you drop? What do you keep? What do you push out? Do
you not have your eighth NSC? I mean what do you do?
Admiral Zukunft. Right. Actually, what I asked first is
that my written statement be entered into the record.
Mr. Hunter. Without objection.
Admiral Zukunft. Because we went through some of that
scrub, as well.
Where we are really feeling the pain the greatest is in our
shore infrastructure. I have got about a $1.4 billion backlog
in shore infrastructure. And I am making an annualized
downpayment of $40 million. It is like paying the bare minimum
on a credit card. But I am still paying interest on that.
So, we are barely keeping pace with that backlog, but I am
having to make those deferments in order to keep our
operational platform acquisition program of record viable. So
those are the very tough tradeoff decisions----
Mr. Hunter. You are saying you are trading off your shore
facilities. So that is what you would do in the end, in order
to keep the acquisition program of record on track, you would
not spend money--you are going to just keep spending the bare
minimum?
Admiral Zukunft. Well, obviously, there is a prioritization
process that goes with that. Ironically, we get some relief
when you have a hurricane, and then we get relief funding to
then restore infrastructure that was also on that backlog. So
at least we can use disaster relief funding. But that is not--
you know, that is using hope as an acquisition strategy, so I
can't do that.
And so, I struggle with an acquisition budget that is, you
know, hovering somewhere near $1 billion, as I look at what the
Coast Guard is going to need in the 21st century. And so that
is what we need. We look at a mission needs statement built to
budget, what I really need is a reliable and predictable
budget, because we have really been on a roller coaster here
for the last several years.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So, looking at your acquisition--ship
acquisition, which ships get cut, based on this budget?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. We can't cut any of our programs of
record. What we----
Mr. Hunter. But you would have to. I mean you are getting--
--
Admiral Zukunft. We would not.
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. Reduction.
Admiral Zukunft. Right now, you know, we have an
appropriation for our eighth National Security Cutter. That
finishes that program of record. As we go into 2016 we have got
to bring the Offshore Patrol Cutter, you know, on to full
budget. And I will continue to endeavor, and with the great
support that we have had from the Department of Homeland
Security to get where we need to be, because that is my
Secretary's--one of his highest priorities is to recapitalize
the Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. I don't understand, then. How does the budget
reflect the Secretary's highest priority by cutting it?
Admiral Zukunft. Again, you have seen the same provision.
We have got about a $70 million gap to go to final design work
to award the Offshore Patrol Cutter to its--and so the
Department, as they look at is this affordable, has given me
assurances that we will look within the Department to raise the
Coast Guard to a point where we can move forward with the
Offshore Patrol Cutter.
Mr. Hunter. So you think that, instead of having Congress
budget out the Offshore Patrol Cutter, and taking the money
from within DHS when you do a downselect, you think that that
is a viable--that money coming from DHS is a viable alternative
to congressional budgeting?
Admiral Zukunft. Obviously----
Mr. Hunter. For right now?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. From a budgeting process, much more
preferable to see the full appropriation that we had requested
in that budget. But we need to move forward with the Offshore
Patrol Cutter. And I can't emphasize that enough. By the time
that first ship is delivered in 2021, it will replace ships
that are 55 years old. And we can't let that drag out any more.
Or we just abdicate to the adversary and say, ``We are not
going to use the authorities, and the United States, the most
powerful Nation in the world, is not going to assert its
sovereignty using the broad authorities of the United States
Coast Guard.'' I will not let that happen on my watch.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. Do you think the Coast Guard is
tasked with doing too much right now?
Admiral Zukunft. Our authorities resonate very well, and I
wouldn't take any one of our authorities away. And this was
actually looked at about 100 years ago. Our first Commandant of
the Coast Guard. They thought, ``Well, hey, if we split the
Coast Guard up and have other components do it''--well, first
they have to take on a maritime capability, they have to
understand the authorities. But they become one-trick ponies,
that is the only thing they do.
But when you look at what a buoy tender does, it tends
buoys, it cleans up oil spills, it does law enforcement, search
and rescue. So when you look at our platforms, they are really
multipurpose. And the Nation really gets the best bang from the
buck from these multipurpose platforms because of the
authorities that are vested in the United States Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Admiral. Gentlemen, thank you very
much. Appreciate it. Adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:05 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
