- OVERSIGHT OF THE ONGOING RAIL, PIPELINE, AND HAZMAT RULEMAKINGS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF THE ONGOING RAIL, PIPELINE, AND HAZMAT RULEMAKINGS

=======================================================================

(114-12)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
RAILROADS, PIPELINES, AND
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-181 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                         Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
TOM RICE, South Carolina             RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
JOHN KATKO, New York                 JARED HUFFMAN, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

(ii)

Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials

JEFF DENHAM, California, Chairman

JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee       MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          JERROLD NADLER, New York
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              RICK LARSEN, Washington
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
TOM RICE, South Carolina             RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
JOHN KATKO, New York                 JANICE HAHN, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada                Officio)
MIMI WALTERS, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    vi

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Hon. Jackie Speier, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, testimony.......................................     5

Panel 2

Sarah Feinberg, Acting Administrator, Federal Railroad
Administration:

Testimony....................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    45
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Michael E. Capuano, of Massachusetts................    65
Hon. Jared Huffman, of California........................    74
Timothy P. Butters, Acting Administrator, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration:

Testimony....................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    77
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Sam Graves, of Missouri.............................    97
Hon. Michael E. Capuano, of Massachusetts................    99
Additional questions for the record......................   124
Hon. Christopher A. Hart, Chairman, National Transportation
Safety Board:

Testimony....................................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................   126
Responses to questions for the record from Hon. Michael E.
Capuano, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Massachusetts, with a list attached of the National
Transportation Safety Board's open recommendations to the
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.....   142

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Timothy P. Butters, Acting Administrator, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration, response to request for
information from Hon. John L. Mica, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Florida.............................   156

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

OVERSIGHT OF THE ONGOING RAIL, PIPELINE, AND HAZMAT RULEMAKINGS

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 14, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous
Materials,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:08 a.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Denham
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Denham. The Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and
Hazardous Materials will come to order. First, I would like to
ask unanimous consent that Representatives Cheri Bustos and
John Garamendi be permitted to join the subcommittee for
today's hearing and ask questions.
[No response.]
Mr. Denham. Without objection, so ordered.
Our hearing today will focus on numerous matters related to
current railroad, pipeline, and hazardous material rulemakings
within the subcommittee's jurisdiction. Last year, we had two
hearings that covered these ongoing rulemakings: one on
hazardous materials safety and tank cars and the other on
pipeline safety.
I have heard too many times from industry and safety
advocates that the Department of Transportation needs to move
more quickly to implement the safety provisions Congress has
passed. It is unusual to hear that industry wants to be
regulated, and is pushing for rules to actually be completed.
But the reality is companies can't invest in new equipment, in
new employees, and in new ventures without regulatory
certainty. In those two hearings, we expressed our frustration
with the administration. Not enough progress has been made
getting these numerous rules out.
Sadly, today we are back asking the same questions. Where
are these rules? Why are they still delayed? What is the
administration doing about it?
We believe in a risk-based, data-driven approach to safety.
The administration states that they do as well. So, it should
be easy to come up with rules that are data driven, apply cost-
benefit principles, and get them out so both the public and
industry can act accordingly.
This brings me to another point with the administration.
Last year we had both FRA and PHMSA Administrators come before
us to answer for the administration. Now we have two Acting
Administrators. Mr. Butters and Ms. Feinberg have been good to
work with. We appreciate their service, and our frustration has
nothing to do with either of them personally. But these are
very important times, and we need certainty in these agencies'
leadership. Yet, the administration has not formally nominated
anyone for these top safety positions.
I would like to take a moment to thank Ms. Feinberg for
coming to California last week at my request. I brought local
leaders together to ask questions of FRA, and they had similar
questions of what we have today. But, specifically, the people
of the Central Valley are as concerned about rail safety as the
rest of the country. We have been waiting and waiting for the
new final crude-by-rail rule to be released, so that the Nation
can move forward in creating safer rail systems.
Notably, Congress has acted on multiple occasions to speed
this process along, and even imposed a statutory limit for
releasing a finalized crude-by-rail rule. That deadline was
promptly missed by the administration, which has led us to
having this hearing today.
Again I want to thank you for coming to California last
week. I hope it was--provided you a good perspective of what we
are looking at from the Central Valley, and why the rule is
important. I know my constituents appreciated it, our first
responders and local elected officials appreciated it.
But to summarize, I hope to hear the status of the crude-
by-rail rule. Specifically, is it still at OMB? Has OMB sent
the rule back to the agency for further analysis? And when will
it actually be published?
I look forward to hearing about the comments from DOT about
the draft rule, how DOT is planning to address the final rule.
And, additionally, I would like to hear each panelist's
opinions on actually implementing the rule.
We have heard from many different sides on this issue on
the capacity of American tank car manufacturers and how quickly
a new mandate can be implemented. So I would ask that you
please provide this committee with what you think that capacity
is, and how soon the tank car designs will be able to be
completely phased in in our Nation's freight network.
In closing, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
regarding these issues.
I would now like to recognize Ranking Member Capuano from
Massachusetts for 5 minutes for any opening statement he may
have.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, it was
interesting. I think you just stole my opening statement. I
agree with everything you just said, except the phrase,
``Central Valley.'' Just change that to ``New England.'' He is
100 percent right. I have nothing to add to it.
I am looking forward to this hearing, and I am looking
forward to truly engaging. Because, to be perfectly honest,
some of the concerns I have--and I am still learning a lot of
this stuff--it is just unacceptable. It is just unacceptable.
And I am a supporter of the administration. I know we have new
people in place, but I think today is going to be not as much
fun as some of you might like, because, honestly, you are going
to have a hard time telling me why some of these things have
taken this long.
But, with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for allowing me to give my speech.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Now I call on the full committee
chairman, Mr. Shuster, for any opening statement he may have.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, and good morning, everybody.
Appreciate Chairman Denham and Ranking Member Capuano for
having this hearing today. I think you are going to hear a lot
of sentiment that is shared by Mr. Capuano and Mr. Denham
throughout this hearing today.
I want to begin by saying safety is the highest priority of
this committee, and it is the number-one job and the number-one
task of the Department of Transportation for you to carry out
that safety mandate. Our railroads and pipelines are critically
important for safe movement of goods and people around this
country.
The good news is that overall safety trends in both modes
are trending in the right direction, and that is positive.
However, there have been accidents over the past 12 months
dealing with rail and pipeline that--so it is important for us
to take a close look at this. As a member of this committee, it
is important, but also as someone who--in my district we have a
significant number of oil trains that pass through each day.
Adjusting regulations to changing market conditions is a
complicated task. And having regulators draft up rules for
comment by those impacted is the right way to go about making
regulatory changes. However, it is very important the
administration carefully base those rules on data, and that--
take a risk-based approach. I think that is the smart way for
us to move.
I am concerned that DOT has not been able to move many of
the mandated rules from the 2011 Pipeline Safety Act. I would
like to know why they haven't moved forward. And I would also
like to hear about the status of the hazmat mandates in MAP-21.
I have concerns about the administration's slow pace addressing
the increased movement of crude-by-rail. And, as Mr. Denham and
Mr. Capuano have pointed out, it is far too slow. It needs to
happen. The industry, as Mr. Denham points out, is crying out
to get a new standard on these tank cars. The NTSB has called
for new tank cars. I have even sent a letter to OMB and to DOT
and have yet to get a response on where we are in the process.
We need to get moving forward.
I appreciate everybody being here today. I would just
probably warn you it is going to be a vigorous question and
answer period here today, finding the answers we need to hear.
It has--again, it has gone on far too long, and we need to have
answers.
I appreciate Representative Speier being here today. I know
she has great concerns over pipeline safety, and we look
forward to hearing from her today, also.
So, thank you very much, and yield back.
Mr. Denham. I now call on the ranking member of the full
committee, Mr. DeFazio, for any opening statement he may have.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, later this
year we are looking at pipeline reauthorization. And I have got
to say, as a member of the committee, I am going to wonder why
we should do that, because we still haven't implemented the
majority of the 2011 Act.
I mean, you know, if you look at what is not done:
automatic shutoff valves not done, leak detection not done. You
know, there is a number of really critical mandates from this
Congress that aren't done. One is rumored to be sitting on the
Secretary's desk, one is rumored to have moved to OMB a year
ago. We really don't know. I mean, in part, it points to, I
think, the need for changes in the regulatory system itself,
and creating more transparency, and I would love to address
that at another time. I won't get into that too much now, but
those cause tremendous concerns.
The DOT-111 tank cars, Mr. Chairman, you sent them a
letter, you didn't hear back. I called them yesterday, and it
was opaque, as usual, but we can expect something very robust
in the not-too-distant future, probably. So there is your
answer.
And they are aware of the recent concerns that were
expressed by NTSB in investigating the last two accidents, West
Virginia and Virginia, and some of the new conclusions
regarding the 1232 cars, the lack of thermal insulation, et
cetera. They are aware of those things. That made me feel
really good. So, there is that.
You know, we are really talking about life and death here
on a lot of these issues. And there is another area which I
intend to have some questions regarding the transport of
lithium batteries. We have a number of domestic air carriers
who have just drawn a line in the sand and said, ``We are not
carrying those things on passenger planes any more.'' And it is
rumored this came out of a briefing of ICAO down in South
America with the manufacturers, and the fact that the fire
suppression systems on those planes cannot deal with lithium
battery fires and occurrences that have happened. And yet we
are locked in a place--a former Congress said that they can't
exceed the ICAO standards. The ICAO standards are laughable.
Whatever the Chinese want to put into a crummy cardboard box
and stick into an airplane and not label, that is fine with
ICAO. So I will be raising some issues about that, too.
We really are talking about life and death here. We need a
more transparent, more efficient process. We created PHMSA back
when Norm Mineta was Secretary, with the idea that we needed to
have a laser-like focus and more efficiency and more distance
from the regulated entities, and the solution was supposed to
be PHMSA. I really wonder if it has worked. I wonder if we
would be better off if we had some people who just looked at
pipelines. That is a unique mode. If we had safety people in
FRA who were dealing with tank cars and understand railroads
better, and if we had the aviation people dealing with stuff
that the industry itself says it doesn't want to carry on
airplanes. We are not seeing the kind of performance we need
here out of this theoretically integrated, efficient agency
that should be at arm's length from all of those that they
regulate.
So, those are a few of the questions I have today, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio. We have two panels
today. Our first panel is with Representative Jackie Speier
from California. After receiving testimony from our first
panel, we will proceed immediately to our second panel.
I ask unanimous consent that our witnesses' full statements
be included in the record.
[No response.]
Mr. Denham. Without objection, so ordered.
Since your written testimony has been made part of the
record, the subcommittee would request that you limit your oral
testimony to 5 minutes.
Ms. Speier, you may proceed. Welcome to the Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure.

TESTIMONY OF HON. JACKIE SPEIER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Speier. Mr. Chairman, thank you. And to Ranking Member
Capuano, to Chairman Shuster, and Ranking Member DeFazio, I
really appreciate the fact that you are holding this hearing
today, because I have struggled with pipeline safety now for 5
years. And we have made very little progress. The system,
frankly, is fundamentally broken.
It is personal to me. I have spent hundreds of hours in
hearings, in boardrooms, at town halls, and very little has
changed. It has scarred not just my district, but the entire
region.
This is a distant view of the Pacific Gas and Electric
natural gas pipeline explosion in San Bruno, California. When
it happened in September of 2010, everyone thought that a plane
had dropped out of the sky, the explosion was so great, and
seen so far away.
Closer up scenes were horrific. Eight precious lives were
lost. Many others were hospitalized for months with life-
threatening burns. I visited many of them at the burn center in
San Francisco. Three people were considered missing for more
than 2 weeks, because there was so little DNA from the intense
fire to positively identify them. Thirty-eight homes were
completely destroyed, and dozens more were seriously damaged.
It looked like a war zone.
Those numbers do not adequately describe the terror that
was inflicted on an entire community. And all this was caused
by a pipeline that hadn't been inspected since 1956, thanks to
the irresponsible gaping hole in our regulations known as the
Grandfather Clause. And Congress put the Grandfather Clause in
place. And then, in 2011, we said to PHMSA, ``We want you to
take this out, and you have 18 months in which to do it.'' We
are 3 years later, and still they haven't done it. I have sent
letters to them, and they come back with, frankly,
gobbledygook.
This is a piece of pipe that failed in San Bruno because
the Grandfather Clause was--allowed it to go uninspected for
decades. The Pipeline Safety, Regulatory Certainty, and Job
Creation Act of 2011 eliminated this terrible policy, which
previously had allowed companies to bypass comprehensive
inspections of older pipes. But here we are, in 2015, and PHMSA
has not yet released a rule implementing those reforms.
Frankly, how difficult is it to strike a line in a law that
says the Grandfather Clause is no longer in effect? The
deadline to release the rule, as I said, was 18 months, and it
has been twice as long. It is clear to me that PHMSA is a
toothless tiger without the clout to make the serious reforms
recommended by respected institutions such as the National
Transportation Safety Board. PHMSA keeps saying that it is
working on an improved integrity management system. But after
industry complained that it was too expensive, PHMSA allowed
its nascent rulemaking to be quietly consigned to the
bureaucratic dustbin.
While safety does cost money, so does death and
destruction. On this slide is what the utility responsible for
San Bruno--Pacific Gas and Electric--has paid, or may pay, that
we know about so far. The stunning figure is $3.9 billion. This
is paid by shareholders, not by ratepayers.
California's problem with PHMSA and its own State pipeline
regulatory agency are a microcosm for the rest of the Nation.
Despite PHMSA's paying for about 80 percent of pipeline safety
program costs, a crony culture developed between the industry
and State regulators in California, and PHMSA claims they can
do nothing about it. Despite mounds of evidence showing that
industry executives were wining and dining top State regulators
and flouting ex parte communication rules, PHMSA claims to be
powerless to bring CPUC to its heels. Considering that PHMSA
holds the power of the purse, I find this hard to believe.
Now, in exposes that have occurred in California, PG&E
email exchanges with the California Public Utilities Commission
exposed complicity of CPUC in judge-shopping, in advice, in
public relations, engagement in the initiative process, and a
quid pro quo relationship.
This bankrupt safety culture regularly defeated enforcement
of Federal and State standards. Just today, an external auditor
found that the CPUC gas safety enforcement efforts have
actually gotten worse and slower since the explosion in San
Bruno. This is unacceptable, and PHMSA must step in.
But this is par for the course for PHMSA. In the aftermath
of the San Bruno disaster, I met with then-Administrator
Quarterman many times. Each time, as I pushed for regulations
that would actually improve pipeline safety across the Nation,
she would say, ``We don't have the authority.'' I am sure that
was true in some cases, but in the case of the Grandfather
Clause, PHMSA has crystal-clear authority and still refuses to
act. In this case, PHMSA is not only a toothless tiger, but one
that has overdosed on quaaludes and has passed out on the job.
In addition to the technical issue of proper integrity
management, PHMSA's oversight of safety programs is lax. They
have been amply described in formal reports by both the NTSB
and the Department of Transportation inspector general. PHMSA's
problems, which Congress must help them address, are clear.
PHMSA's guidance, protocols, and training for State inspectors
are inadequate. PHMSA's pipeline location data has internal
discrepancies. PHMSA's database makes it more difficult for
operators to learn from incidents. Overall, neither industry
nor State nor Federal Government produces good pipeline safety
data. It is garbage in and garbage out.
Though I have talked about San Bruno, I want to emphasize
that the lack of adequate pipeline safety measures is a
nationwide problem, not a bay area or California problem. In
2011, a leak from an 83-year-old cast-iron main in Allentown,
Pennsylvania, in the chairman's district, caused a blast that
killed five people. In 2012, a gas pipeline explosion outside
of Charleston, West Virginia, destroyed several properties. In
2014, a leak in a 127-year-old pipeline in Harlem, New York,
killed 8 and injured 50 more. In each incident we see the same
reoccurring problems: aging infrastructure and inadequate
inspection. How many more of these tragedies do we need before
we get serious about pipeline safety?
In closing, I urge the chairman, ranking member, and
committee members to keep the tragedy of San Bruno in mind as
you conduct oversight and start to consider reauthorization of
PHMSA's Federal pipeline safety program. We know how to prevent
pipeline explosions.
Look at this picture here. It is, indeed, a war zone. We
need automatic remote control shutoff valves. Now, PG&E has put
in 200 of them now. The law that we passed in 2011 said that
you only had to put them in if they were technologically
available and economically feasible. When is it going to be----
Mr. Denham. Ms. Speier, I would ask you to wrap it up.
Ms. Speier [continuing]. Economically feasible?
I know I need to close, so thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity to speak.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Ms. Speier. Thank you for your
testimony today.
I would now like to welcome our second panel of witnesses:
Sarah Feinberg, Acting Administrator from the Federal Railroad
Administration; Tim Butters, Acting Administrator, Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration; and the Honorable
Christopher Hart, Chairman of the NTSB, the National
Transportation Safety Board.
Welcome to this morning's hearing. I would reiterate once
again that I appreciate your openness, your communication, as
well as I know a number of members of this committee have
expressed their appreciation for your accessibility and
responsiveness to questions that we have had.
Ms. Feinberg, you may proceed.

TESTIMONY OF SARAH FEINBERG, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL
RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION; TIMOTHY P. BUTTERS, ACTING
ADMINISTRATOR, PIPELINE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY
ADMINISTRATION; AND HON. CHRISTOPHER A. HART, CHAIRMAN,
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD

Ms. Feinberg. Thank you. Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Capuano, Ranking Member DeFazio, members of the subcommittee,
thank you so much for the opportunity to appear here before you
today.
As Acting Administrator, I have already had the privilege
of meeting with many of you, and even visiting some of your
districts. Mr. Denham, I want to thank you for hosting me last
week in your district. I was grateful to spend time with your
constituents. And, Mr. Garamendi, I enjoyed spending time in
your district, as well.
Let me start off today by saying that I welcome all of your
continued interest and efforts to work closely with the FRA,
and I can assure you that working closely with this committee
is a top priority of mine.
In my 3 months serving as Acting Administrator, the FRA has
responded to five major rail incidents, some involving deaths
and injuries, and many smaller incidents. Each incident has
underscored for me FRA's top priority, which is improving
safety.
Safety has always been the priority of the agency, and it
always will be. At the FRA we have a mandate to provide
oversight, enforcement, and regulations that will set the bar
for rail safety. It is a challenging task, and one that demands
collaboration and cooperation. As stipulated by the U.S.
regulatory process, we do not have the freedom to simply
conceive of a new safety regulation and allow it to become the
law of the land. The regulatory actions we issue must be born
out of a robust dialogue with all stakeholders, the public, and
industry, and a rigorous economic analysis that considers both
the benefits to safety and the cost to industry.
In other words, as the chief rail safety regulator, we are
tasked not just with raising the bar on safety, but also with
ensuring that, as we raise that bar, we are taking all
perspectives and opinions into account.
Since Congress passed the Rail Safety Improvement Act in
2008, the FRA has completed action on 33 tasks, including
rules, studies, reports, and other actions, with 10 tasks still
to be completed. That work has improved safety outcomes. It has
also enabled us to focus on some of our greatest challenges,
and challenges where the stakes are the highest: the safe
transport of energy products like crude oil, track hazards, and
grade crossings.
That said, thanks in great part to this committee's
leadership and partnership with the FRA, the rail industry is
safer than it was a generation ago. But we have a long way to
go. For years, the FRA has had success with our prescriptive
rulemaking and enforcement program. But getting to the next
level of safety requires us to be innovative. This includes
pushing forward with risk reduction programs like the
Confidential Close Call Reporting System, plus system safety
programs for passenger operations. The programs uncover root
causes behind accidents, and help identify accident precursors,
enabling railroads to put prevention measures in place.
We also continue to work on a final rule for securing
unattended train equipment, and proposed rulemakings related to
train crew size and passenger equipment safety standards. And,
of course, we remain laser-focused on our work to ensure the
safe transport of energy products. In partnership with our
colleagues at PHMSA, we are completing work on a final
comprehensive rulemaking that addresses prevention, mitigation,
emergency preparedness, and response to crude train incidents.
We are also taking an aggressive posture against the rising
tide of highway rail grade crossing incidents. In addition to
calling for increased grade crossing improvement funding in the
GROW AMERICA Act, we have partnered with law enforcement. And
law enforcement in New York, California, Idaho, Illinois, and
elsewhere are responding. We are grateful for their help, and
we will continue this effort as we broaden our focus on a
public awareness campaign.
Additionally, as RSIA required, we continue to work with
railroads to implement Positive Train Control. We look forward
to continuing to work with this Congress and the industry and
its suppliers in addressing the obstacles preventing its swift
implementation.
And, finally, we look forward to working with this Congress
on the reauthorization of a surface transportation bill that
includes rail. The House has already made great strides in this
area by passing legislation focused on passenger rail. We
greatly appreciate this committee's work on that priority. We
look forward to working with this Congress on a package that
will also enable the FRA to balance our regulatory framework
with innovative, proactive ideas that will advance safety and
provide capital investments that serve as a foundation for the
next generation of safety improvements.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to taking
your questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Ms. Feinberg.
Mr. Butters, you may proceed.
Mr. Butters. Good morning. Chairman Denham, Ranking Member
Capuano, and Ranking Member DeFazio, thank you. And the other
members of the subcommittee, thank you for having me appear
before you this morning.
As you know, PHMSA's mission is the safe transportation of
hazardous materials. Over 1 million shipments move every day in
the United States by air, rail, truck, and marine vessel. We
are also charged with the safe operation of about 2.6 million
miles of hazardous gas and liquid pipelines.
The transportation of these products is critical to our
Nation's economy and our quality of life, and we take our
responsibilities very seriously.
Because these transportation systems are privately owned,
it places primary responsibility and accountability for the
safe operation of those systems on the owners and operators.
They must ensure their equipment and facilities are maintained
and operated safely, above and beyond what is required by
regulation. Our job at PHMSA, along with our State partners, is
to ensure these systems are in compliance with Federal safety
requirements through vigorous inspection and enforcement.
Unfortunately, recent incidents involving hazardous
materials have underscored the absolute importance of PHMSA's
mission. I have seen firsthand the aftereffects of rail
incidents in Lynchburg, VA, Mount Carbon, WV, and the impact of
pipeline failures in San Bruno, CA, Sissonville, WV, Marshall,
MI, and, most recently, in Glendive, MT, and the impact that
these have had on those communities.
It is our duty to ensure the public has the confidence that
their safety and the environment are well protected. Although
there have been several recent high-profile incidents, history
has shown that these incidents are infrequent. The overall
safety record for the transportation of hazardous materials in
the U.S. is very good, and continues to improve. Pipeline and
hazmat incidents involving fatalities, major injury, or
significant environmental damage have been on the steady
decline since 1988. While the safety record has been good, it
is not good enough, and more needs to be done.
Significant incidents are rare, but can have significant
and devastating consequences. In the fiscal year 2015 budget
approved last December, PHMSA was authorized with 120 new
positions for both our hazmat and pipeline safety programs. We
are fully engaged to fill these positions, and we are at nearly
30 percent thus far, noting that we are also competing with the
private sector that is also needing to fill jobs. I am
confident that we will have most of these positions filled by
the end of this calendar year.
The dramatic growth in domestic energy production across
the country has also generated a great deal of attention to the
safe transportation of flammable liquids by rail, primarily
shale crude oil, and rightfully so. We are very cognizant of
these concerns, and the entire Department, beginning with
Secretary Foxx, understands the importance and urgency to
address these issues. Our comprehensive strategy, focusing on
prevention, mitigation, and emergency preparedness in our final
rule to improve the safe transportation, has been our highest
priority. It is currently under review by OMB, and we expect it
to be released very soon.
But we aren't waiting on new regulations to address safety
concerns that can be addressed now. We have and will continue
to use every available option to take immediate action, and
stand prepared to take additional steps. DOT has successfully
engaged the rail industry, the hazmat industry, and pipeline
industry through various calls to action, asking them to take
additional safety actions in the face of these incidents.
In 2013 we launched an effort that we now call Safe
Transportation of Energy Products--unannounced inspections--to
ensure shippers are properly testing and classifying crude oil
and other flammable liquids. I am encouraged by the shippers'
increased efforts to properly test and classify hazmat since we
started this program 2 years ago.
PHMSA remains focused on meeting the congressional mandates
that were included in the Pipeline Safety Act of 2011 and MAP-
21. The NTSB has also issued 49 pipeline safety recommendations
since 2011, including 22 recommendations issued this past
January. PHMSA has completed half of the Pipeline Safety Act's
mandates, four of the six required regulatory actions under
MAP-21, and we have satisfied many NTSB recommendations.
I have had the opportunity to meet with many of you
individually, and also visit some of your districts, and I
appreciate the support of this subcommittee and what it has
provided to PHMSA. We look forward to working with this
Congress to advance PHMSA's safety mission. I am pleased to
answer any questions that you may have.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Butters.
Mr. Hart, you may proceed.
Mr. Hart. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Denham, Ranking
Member Capuano, and members of the subcommittee.
In the last few years, we have experienced an exponential
increase in the carriage of flammable liquids by rail. With
this growth, the NTSB's rail and hazardous materials
investigators have responded to an increasing number of
accidents.
Currently, we are investigating a crude oil accident near
Casselton, North Dakota, that occurred in December 2013, in
which 20 cars derailed and nearly one-half million gallons of
oil spilled, burning for more than 24 hours.
We are also investigating accidents involving industry
specification CPC-1232 tank cars that were designed to improve
crashworthiness. These include a derailment in Lynchburg,
Virginia, in April 2014, in which one car derailed, was
punctured, and fell into the James River. The resulting crude
oil-fed fire burned for several hours.
We are participating in the investigation of the Mount
Carbon, West Virginia, accident in February 2015, and have
collected information about the Galena, Illinois, accident in
March 2015, and two accidents in Ontario, Canada, in February
and March 2015. These accidents involve breaches to 1232 tank
cars that resulted in fires that compromised more than 20
additional tank cars, leading to violent fireball eruptions.
As demonstrated in these accidents, no less than six major
derailments in only 16 months, we believe that the DOT-111 and
the CPC-1232 tank cars are not adequate for transporting
flammable liquids. Just last week, we issued four urgent
recommendations to PHMSA to address these concerns. These
recommendations ask PHMSA to, first, require thermal protection
for cars transporting flammable liquid products such as ethanol
and crude oil. Second, require appropriately sized pressure
relief devices. Third, require an aggressive retrofit or
replacement schedule of DOT-111 and CPC-1232 tank cars with
interim mileposts. And, fourth, establish a publicly available
reporting mechanism, such as the DOT Web site, to monitor the
retrofitting or replacement of these tank cars.
We hope that the ongoing rulemaking process will consider
these recommendations. In all these accidents, the first
defense is to ensure the integrity of the operation, including
the track and the train cars. We have issued a number of
recommendations regarding track inspections.
We have also been concerned about the lack of information
that is available to our first responders who must respond to a
hazardous material release. Since 2007 we have asked the FRA
and PHMSA to require rail operators who transport hazardous
materials to provide more information to the communities
through which they travel. Much of this information can be
electronically transmitted to responders in the field. But in
most accidents we have investigated, firefighters tell us that
they had no idea that such products were traveling through
their towns.
Recognizing that you convened this hearing to address
issues beyond the carriage of crude-by-rail, I would also like
to highlight a few other transportation issues that remain
important to us, as more fully discussed in my written
statement.
Implementation of Positive Train Control by the end of this
year, as required by statute. We know that humans make
mistakes, and Positive Train Control can step in when humans do
make mistakes. It can prevent accidents and save lives.
Improving medical fitness for duty. In the rail industry,
operators who are responsible for transporting hundreds of
passengers or more than 100 carloads of hazardous materials on
a single train, only have to pass a hearing and vision test.
Screening for sleep disorders and other medical conditions
should also be required.
Ensuring the safe carriage of hazardous materials by
airplanes. This must include safe stowage of lithium batteries.
Improving pipeline integrity management oversight by PHMSA.
This must ensure that correct information is evaluated so that
it can be an effective risk-based system.
I appreciate your inviting the NTSB to testify today, and I
look forward to responding to your questions.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Hart. I will now recognize each
Member for 5 minutes. Let me start on a couple of process
questions.
Ms. Feinberg and Mr. Butters, while, again, I would express
this committee has--many Members have felt that you have both
been great communicators, and you have been available for
meetings and been very accessible, I think that our concern--
which has been voiced by many Members--is with the
administration, the administration that has taken far too long
on rules, an administration that has taken far too long on
making sure that we have appointments that are moving forward.
This is a--you guys--out of the five Department of
Transportation positions that are--have Acting Administrators,
these two are critical to the safety of our country, in making
sure that we are having goods and people movement--we need to
make sure that we are not only vetting those new positions
through the legislative branch, but we need to make sure that
we are also discussing those rules and the implementation of
them, as well as the long wait times to actually bring them
back before Congress.
So, let me start with a couple of process questions to each
of you. Do you each want to be nominated as a full-time
Administrator? Are you currently being vetted for nomination as
full-time Administrators? And can you tell me when your 210-day
temporary term as Acting Administrator is up?
Ms. Feinberg. I am happy to go first. Thank you for the
question. I would be--started in this role on January 11th. I
don't know the actual day that the 210 days expires, but it
would be 210 days after January 11th.
I do want to continue to stay in this role. I will leave it
to the White House to make any personnel decisions and
announcements.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Butters?
Mr. Butters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My appointment as--I
have been serving as a Deputy Administrator since November of
2010. My appointment as Acting Administrator began October 5th
of last year. I don't know the exact date of the 210-day
period, but it is--it will be coming up fairly soon.
And I--along with Administrator Feinberg, I defer to the
White House, in terms of determining how they want to proceed,
in terms of filling this position permanently.
Mr. Denham. Have you started the vetting process?
Mr. Butters. I have not.
Mr. Denham. Ms. Feinberg?
Ms. Feinberg. I have not.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Feinberg, in Politico it was
quoted--you were quoted as saying, ``We are running out of
things that I can--we are running out of things that I think we
can ask the railroads to do.'' Would you like to clarify that
statement?
Ms. Feinberg. Sure. Thank you for the question. Actually, I
believe Politico quoted me accurately. It was some individuals
in the energy industry who then followed up and quoted me
somewhat inaccurately--or selectively, I would say.
What I said was, ``We are running out of things we can ask
the railroads to do. They have gone above and beyond what we
have asked them to do. That said, we will continually ask them
to do more to improve safety.'' This was in reference to the
various actions that we have taken while we have been working
on the crude-by-rail rulemaking. We have taken, I believe, 24
interim safety measures. We have issued emergency orders, we
have issued safety advisories, we have come to voluntary
agreements with the railroads to increase inspections,
implement speed restrictions, implement braking systems. And
that is what I was referring to.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And in Modesto one of the questions
that came up amongst many others was actually keeping trains on
the tracks. Are there new technologies available that could do
a better job of identifying track integrity problems?
Ms. Feinberg. There are. The ATIP is the--what we have
found to be the most effective new technology. This is a system
that moves along the rails, and the track, and does, for lack
of a better term, an x ray of the track. We have asked for
additional funding in our budget to expand that program.
Mr. Denham. Have you prepared an inventory of different
technologies that are out there, so that----
Ms. Feinberg. I believe that we have an inventory of
different technologies that are out there. I don't have it on
hand, but we would be happy to come back to your committee and
provide it.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. And which have you tested already?
Ms. Feinberg. I am sorry?
Mr. Denham. Have you tested any of them already?
Ms. Feinberg. I believe some have, but we can come back to
you with what has been tested and what hasn't.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Ms. Feinberg. Many items--I am sorry. Many items have been
tested outside of the FRA, as well. We can provide you with
that, too.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. My time has expired. Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Pass to Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. No, go ahead. OK. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
To Mr. Butters, the--on pipelines, one of the mandates from
the 2011 Act was to deal with shutoff valves. And my
understanding is that you sort of bifurcated the process, and
you adopted a number of rules looking--or two different rules,
one looking at shutoff valves and other issues that would go to
liquids, and one that would go to gas.
And it is my understanding, further, that, I guess, the--
let's see, I am getting them confused, but I think the liquids
went to OMB in May 2014. Is that the one that went to OMB? And
then one of them is sitting on the Secretary's desk. How long
has it been sitting on the Secretary's desk? And when might we
expect OMB to regurgitate the rule?
Mr. Butters. Congressman, the gas safety rule is currently
within DOT. We are working with our--with DOT to address
questions. We are working vigorously to get that rule wrapped
up and get it over to OMB. I can't give you an exact date, but
rest assured this is a high priority, and we are working with
them daily to address some of their issues that they have
raised, as we conduct the cost-benefit analysis, et cetera.
The liquid safety rule is currently at OMB. We have been,
again, working with them closely, and I believe we are very
close to having that rule out. But, again, I can't provide you
with any specific date at this point.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. And Chairman Hart, I just want--after we
chatted about your new recommendations on the tank cars, I did
talk to OMB yesterday, to Mr. Shelanski, and he said you can
call him any time and express your concerns. I did express them
for you, and he, of course, is totally opaque, but we are going
to have something soon, and we are going to be pleased with it.
So----
Mr. Hart. Thank you very much.
Mr. DeFazio. I hope that makes you feel good. It doesn't
make me feel good. I think we need to change the way OMB works.
A little more transparency, and perhaps some timelines would be
useful, particularly on things that are considered a very high
priority. That is not an issue at today's hearing.
Lithium batteries. Chairman Hart, how do you feel about
lithium batteries on airplanes? You have some concerns that
Congress has said we can't go beyond the ICAO cardboard box
standard?
Mr. Hart. Thank you for that question. Yes, we do have
concerns. We have viewed ourselves as a world leader in
aviation, and oftentimes we go beyond what ICAO, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, requires. A most
recent example is that we require a second person in the
cockpit when one of the pilots leaves. That is not an ICAO
requirement, and it is not a world requirement. That is just an
example of where we want to view ourselves as world leaders, to
push the bar, to move the bar on safety.
Mr. DeFazio. But Congress saying we can't exceed
international standards, you think that is a problem, and
Congress should lift that prohibition?
Mr. Hart. We are concerned about the United States being
limited to what ICAO does, yes.
Mr. DeFazio. Administrator Butters, would you feel that we
should go beyond the ICAO standard on--and Congress should lift
the prohibition so people can review the transport of lithium
batteries on aircraft, particularly passenger aircraft, where
people are sitting above it, and they don't even know it?
Mr. Butters. We agree that the limitation to the ICAO
technical instructions is a problem. Lithium batteries do pose
transportation hazards, and the ability for the U.S. to
promulgate more stringent safety regulations is something that
we are certainly interested in doing.
Mr. DeFazio. My understanding is there has been some
dispute over this issue over the years, and this is one of
particular concern to me. It is only a matter of time until we
lose another plane. We have lost a couple of cargo planes.
Could be a passenger plane, a combi carrier, it could be
another cargo plane.
So, you know, the FAA feels they have the expertise. There
was a dispute a number of years ago, and the FAA prevailed, and
they were sent to ICAO. They don't seem to have been able to
move ICAO. My understanding is that person is retiring, and now
we are back into a discussion of who would better represent the
views of the DOT for more stringent standards. Do you think
that PHMSA would push for regulations beyond the ICAO standard,
if you were the representing----
Mr. Butters. Well, the dangerous goods panel, which we and
FAA participate on--we work very closely with our colleagues at
FAA as related to transportation of hazardous materials and
dangerous goods by air--we would want to have the most
effective and knowledgeable representative in that seat. But I
think the important thing to understand is that, as DOT, we
work with each other, FAA, as well as--as it relates to
dangerous goods in transportation, our other modal partners, to
make sure that these hazmat regulations and danger goods regs
are as stringent and strong as possible.
Mr. DeFazio. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. DeFazio.
Mr. Barletta, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Barletta. Thanks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we
all agree that, in discussions about crude-by-rail and rail
safety in general, track maintenance is absolutely critical.
Now, the Class I railroads, they have better access to
capital to be able to finance their investment in track
maintenance. And the smaller railroads, like the many short
lines that operate in my district, do not have the same access
to capital.
Administrator Feinberg, based on your Web site, FRA has not
approved the short line railroad RRIF loan in over 3 years. As
I understand it, helping short lines rehabilitate their track
was one of the primary purposes of this program. Why isn't it
working?
Ms. Feinberg. Thank you for the question. It is good to see
you again.
We are actively working to make the RRIF program much more
accessible to applicants. So, in particular to short lines, as
we have looked at the program, particularly over the last
several months, and under the guidance of Secretary Foxx, we
would like to be more creative, and make the program much more
accessible to all applicants, including short lines.
Mr. Barletta. How many short line applications are
currently being processed?
Ms. Feinberg. I don't know the exact number. We can get
back to you. I know that there are several pending.
Mr. Barletta. And also, if you could, see how long they
have been in the application process, as well.
Ms. Feinberg. Absolutely.
Mr. Barletta. You and your agency have publicly stated that
most railroads will be unable to meet the December 31, 2015,
deadline to implement Positive Train Control. Do you plan on
fining railroads that do not have PTC systems implemented after
that date, if the current law does not change?
Ms. Feinberg. We are in--having internal discussions now,
and also discussions with members of this committee and other
Members of Congress about how to proceed. You are right, the
PTC deadline, the congressionally mandated deadline, is
December of 2015. Most railroads--in fact, I think all
railroads--have said that they do not believe that they can
meet that deadline. We believe that there is a path forward
that involves meeting with railroads, granting provisional
authority as PTC starts to come online. But we are in the
middle of those discussions now.
Mr. Barletta. You have recently called on the energy
industry to do more to control the volatility of its cargo. You
may have seen a recent report from the Department of Energy
where the agency found no data showing a correlation between
crude oil properties and the likelihood or severity of a fire
caused by a derailment.
Furthermore, a white paper from FRA stated using vapor
pressure as a metric to identify potential hazards may not
prove effective when considering real-world accident
conditions. Do you agree with your own agency's reports?
Ms. Feinberg. I think what both of those items, both of
those papers, show us is what a complicated issue this is. The
DOE report was very specific about how there is no single
component that tends to lead to an incident being worse than
another component. The white paper from FRA talked about crude
and ethanol both being very dangerous flammable products that
are risky to transport by rail.
The issue is we need more industries and more people
involved in this conversation, and more industries with skin in
the game. If the DOE and other agencies want to continue to
investigate volatility and an appropriate decrease in
volatility, and what that could lead to, in terms of safety, we
are supportive of that, and we are working closely with them.
The point is that this can't just be on one industry, or just
one agency, to regulate and to bring--and to make this product,
the transfer of this product, safer. This is something that
should be governmentwide, and that we should have more
industries involved in.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you. Thank you for testifying.
Ms. Feinberg. Thank you.
Mr. Barletta. Yield back the balance of my time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Barletta.
Mr. Lipinski, recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Feinberg, as you know, Metra is important in my
district, in the Chicago region, and you had just mentioned
PTC, so I just wanted to again bring up the fact how difficult
it is for--especially commuter rail--to have the funds
necessary to put PTC in. And I know Metra is looking at the
RRIF program for that, and I think it is something that we have
talked about. Like to see more of a focus on that, and it would
be great if you can come to Chicago some time, in the suburbs,
to get a tour and see some of the great capital needs that
Metra has. I appreciate if you could do that at some time.
Ms. Feinberg. I would be happy to. I would be happy to.
Mr. Lipinski. I want to focus first on rail safety. And,
Mr. Butters, I live in a district that has, I often claim, more
rail lines than any other district in the country. No one has
come forward and disputed that, and so I still will claim that.
But I know how--you know, I have oil trains moving through my
district. In fact, moving less than a mile from my home. And so
it is critically important to me, too, that we focus on safety.
I wanted to--since we already touched on the tank cars, I
wanted to talk about the HM-ACCESS [Hazardous Materials
Automated Cargo Communications for Efficient and Safe
Shipments] program, which is moving forward, and you expect to
report on results of the pilot program by October of 2015, I
understand. Is that correct?
Mr. Butters. Yes, sir. That is correct.
Mr. Lipinski. And this is essential technology for our
first responders. And I am very interested in making sure that
we move forward so the first responder doesn't have to board a
locomotive to find the manifest in the case of an emergency.
So, this Congress I introduced a bill to establish a
working group that would devise a voluntary standard. And I am
looking forward to PHMSA's report in the fall. Given that the
Association of American Railroads and UPS are moving forward
with their own forms of electronic shipping papers, I am
wondering if you plan to incorporate their experiences in the
report into any recommendations found in that report.
Mr. Butters. Thank you, sir, for that question. And the
answer is we will certainly take a look at that.
And, as you may know, as an emergency responder myself, a
former fire chief and chairman of the Hazardous Materials
Committee for the International Association of Fire Chiefs, the
whole notion of electronic shipping papers and electronic
information to emergency responders is something that I have
been--had high on my priority list back in the days when I
chaired that committee.
So, we believe that those systems are critical. There is no
sense in exposing emergency responders to delay or any excess
risk by having to retrieve documents out of a locomotive, out
of a cab of a vehicle, or anything else, particularly now, when
most of these documents exist electronically at some point.
We are in the midst of the HM-ACCESS program, which is
pilot testing the feasibility. We also are aware that the
railroad, through a number of different systems, operations--
respond through CSX and others, are also making this
information available. I can assure--I can tell you that, as an
emergency responder, I don't want to try to have to figure out,
by carrier, how to get to their data. Having a consistent,
seamless system is what we are going to be looking to do. And
where we can marry those platforms together so that emergency
responders really can--have to go to either one app or one
place to get this information quickly, that is our goal.
Mr. Lipinski. Great. I want to move on in my last minute to
pipeline leak detection. Also have a tremendous number of
pipelines running through my district.
I know in October 18, 2010, PHMSA published the advanced
notice of proposed rulemaking on the safety of onshore
hazardous liquid pipelines. I think we touched a little bit on
that already. PHMSA expressed its intent to strengthen
requirements for pipeline leak detection, emergency shutoff
valves, and protecting high consequence areas. I understand
that PHMSA has completed a proposed rule, but 4\1/2\ years
after the initial notice, the proposal is stuck at OMB. Ranking
Member DeFazio had touched on this.
Now, I just wanted to ask, while we wait on that rule, I am
interested what else can be done for leak detection purposes,
and has PHMSA considered working with the FAA and private
stakeholders to use unmanned aerial systems to help with
monitoring?
Mr. Butters. Thank you for that question. Through our R&D
program, we have been very active in developing and funding to
operationalize new technologies to address those very issues.
So, the answer is yes, we are working with the industry,
encouraging them to adopt and implement technologies out there
now that can be operationalized to help improve leak detection
and reduce the risk of pipeline, and better understand what
those risks are.
Mr. Lipinski. In terms of UAS?
Mr. Butters. The unmanned aerial systems is a technology
that we have actually funded a couple of years ago. A number of
industries are now taking another look at that. I believe it
shows great promise, by--able to put sensing technology under
these devices to better detect leaks along pipeline systems,
and a number of pipeline operators are utilizing this--that
technology, as well.
Mr. Lipinski. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Lipinski.
Mr. Mica?
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. And it is important. You know, we passed PRIIA
authorization and had a number of items in there relating to
safety and trying to improve our freight rail system, passenger
rail system. That was 2008, and we are working on the
reauthorization.
The pipeline bill just reminded me today when Mr. Ranking
Member had said it was 2011 and had Mr. Shuster do that bill
back then as a committee bill. That is 4 years ago, and not
much has been done.
One of the things that concerns me, it takes a long time to
retrofit some of the equipment. Since President Obama has
vetoed the pipeline bill, and we had safety measures in the
pipeline bill on which we still haven't had action by the
administration, but since the veto of that I have seen at least
two horrible incidents of accidents transporting crude. And
it--we have lost 4 years now. It is going to take some years to
retrofit.
Let me ask Mr. Butters. The amount of time it would
retrofit--take to retrofit cars--I understand your rule would
propose that car standards would affect 66,000 cars,
approximately. Where are we in that process now?
Mr. Butters. Well, as we have mentioned, the final rule is
currently at OMB. Part of that provision does and will address
not only new car specifications, but retrofit specifications.
As you know, there are a number of varieties, if you will, of
the DOT-111 car, the legacy car, which poses the highest risk
in their other----
Mr. Mica. So there is actually--no cars have been
retrofitted, because there is no rule in place, or no cars
under a rule, since there is no rule. Is that correct?
Mr. Butters. There is no--the new specification has not
been published yet----
Mr. Mica. So of old cars, how many do you think were
retrofitted by the industry?
Mr. Butters. I don't have the exact number. I certainly can
provide that to you.
Mr. Mica. I mean are we looking at dozens? Hundreds?
Mr. Butters. Thousands.
Mr. Mica. Thousands? By the industry? And they still--and,
potentially, you could affect as many as 124,000 cars. Is that
correct?
Mr. Butters. I don't know the exact number, but I will take
your point there on that number----
Mr. Mica. The industry estimates it is going to take 10
years to retrofit the 124,000 cars that are affected. How many
cars are they producing a year, new ones?
Mr. Butters. I don't know the exact number. I can provide
that to----
[The information provided by the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration can be found on page 156.]
Mr. Mica. Can you guess? One thousand, two thousand,
somebody? There is a lot of highly paid staff there for backup.
Ms. Feinberg. I think he just looked at me for backup.
Thousands are produced each year, you are correct----
Mr. Mica. And they are produced to what you would consider
your proposed rule standard.
Ms. Feinberg. Well, right now----
Mr. Mica. Going to be----
Ms. Feinberg [continuing]. Most of the backlog of new cars
is jacketed 1232s. So that would be the standard the industry
came up with several years ago, plus a jacket. The new standard
is what is included in the rule, which should be finalized in
the coming weeks.
Mr. Mica. OK.
Ms. Feinberg. And then there will be a retrofit schedule in
that rule.
Mr. Mica. Unless you are, again, on another planet, there
have been a lot of incidents in which you have had these
railcars derail for whatever reason, explosions, loss of
property, life, whatever.
Mr. Hart, is--are you aware of additional inspections since
now we are moving so much of this crude that is going on? What
do you see--you have to investigate some of these instances. Is
the Department doing an adequate job? Should we be doing more?
They don't have a rule in place, and it sounds like it could be
years, 10 years, before they can get these cars retrofitted at
the rate we are going.
Mr. Hart. Thank you for the question. Of course, the
retrofit is just part of the total solution. We also want to
keep the train on the track in the first place, and then have
informed emergency responders.
But regarding the retrofit, we are encouraged to see the
industry move ahead of the rule, because it is obviously risky,
to use a new car and not know if that car will comply with the
rule when it comes out.
We are also encouraged by an experience about 20 years ago,
when the retrofit of DOT-112 tank cars occurred, and they
managed to do that in a much shorter timeframe than the 10-year
retrofit we are talking about. We don't think 10 years is
realistic. We think it can be done much sooner----
Mr. Mica. But, again, my question--you are the inspector.
You see this afterwards. Is there more--are there more safety
inspections now--we have more crude moving. What do you see?
You are the expert.
Mr. Hart. We see activity in all three of the fronts
regarding keeping the train on the track, regarding more robust
cars, and regarding informing first responders.
Mr. Mica. So there is some positive----
Mr. Hart. There is some positive movement in all three
fronts, yes.
Mr. Mica. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Mica.
Ms. Brown?
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to go back to
the RRIF loan program.
Administrator Feinberg, my question--and I don't understand
what is the problem. It was--it has been a problem with the
past administration, and it is a problem with this
administration. We have had numerous hearings, bipartisan. We
want the RRIF loan program to work. What is the problem?
I mean, in Florida we have the All Aboard Florida pending,
been pending for months. We have had hearings where we have
brought in individuals that have applied for a loan. It is very
expensive. What is it we, as a Congress, need to do to get--I
mean billions of dollars, authority, but no programs going out
the door.
Ms. Feinberg. So we would--we agree with you. Secretary
Foxx has said that it is his goal that all of the money in the
RRIF program should be loaned out by the time his term is over.
I----
Ms. Brown. How much money is in the program?
Ms. Feinberg. About $35 billion.
Ms. Brown. $35 billion?
Ms. Feinberg. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. That would put a lot of people to work, and move
the communities.
Ms. Feinberg. We agree. We are--we have several loan
applications that are pending now. We are working through those
as quickly as possible.
I think, in the past, there has been a high bar that
applications--that applicants need to reach in order to ensure
that taxpayers will be paid back for those loans. Absolutely
agree that taxpayers have to be paid back for those loans. I
think the impetus is on us to make sure that we are working
closely with applicants, so that they have access to those
loans and to that amount of money, but also ensure that
taxpayers will get paid back.
Ms. Brown. Well, we all agree with that. But it just seems
as if it is some problem, that we don't want to do these
particular types of loans.
Ms. Feinberg. We do want to do the loans. In particular, it
has been a huge focus of mine for the last several months, and
of Secretary Foxx's for the last year. I think, in the past,
another issue that has--short lines, in particular, have run
into is that they have--they are probably more in need of the
loan than other railroads, yet it is very difficult for them to
reach the credit risk premium level. And that is why we are
trying so hard to work with them.
And I would add that, in the GROW AMERICA Act, which we
have sent to the Congress, we have some suggested tweaks to the
program that might assist short lines in getting these loans.
Ms. Brown. Well, we are definitely looking for what we can
do to help the short lines be able to participate in the
program.
Mr. Butters, what is the problem with the pipeline
regulations? You know, there are some commonsense tweaks,
things that need to happen. Why is it not moving forward?
Mr. Butters. Thank you, Congresswoman. We are placing a
very high priority on both the liquid and gas rulemaking. The
liquid rule is currently at OMB, and we are working through
that process as quickly as we can.
As you know, we--there is a process that we have to follow
with any rulemaking. And the gas rule is currently still within
the Department of Transportation. And we are--got full-court
press to try to get that rule out, as well. We are very
cognizant of the urgency of both these rules, and we are
working through these issues as quickly as we can.
Ms. Brown. Is it anything we in Congress can do? Because we
are very concerned about the problems that are out in the
community, making sure that the communication is there, that
all of our stakeholders know what is in the containers. I
mean--so it is a team effort. Is there anything we can do to
expedite it so people know exactly what is the rule and what
they need to do?
Mr. Butters. Well, as you know, we are bound by the
process. And I know that is frustrating for many, that it takes
a long time. I can't really advise on what Congress can do to
expedite that. All I can say is that we are working as quickly
on all fronts on all of these regulations to get them through.
We know how important they are to the safety of pipelines, the
safety of rail transport, flammable liquids. And, again, we are
vigorously working on these, and trying to get them out
quickly.
They are complicated rules. There are a lot of moving parts
to them. Developing cost-benefit analysis based on historical
risk is often a challenge. But we are working with our
colleagues to try to get these things through.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And I want you to know failure is not
an option. This is something that we got to get done quickly.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Ms. Brown.
Mr. Rice?
Mr. Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
members of the panel for being here today. I have learned a
lot.
I want to start with you, Mr. Hart. Is it safer to
transport flammable liquids by pipeline or by rail?
Mr. Hart. Thank you for the question. We are asked that a
lot, but it is actually difficult to make cross-modal
comparisons. People ask me, ``Is it safer to drive than fly?''
And there are lots of ways you can do the statistics. You can
come up with either answer. It is really apples and oranges,
and it is very difficult to compare and say one is safer than
the other.
Mr. Rice. All right. The trend in traffic by rail, is rail
traffic increasing, decreasing? Is it stable?
Mr. Hart. I can't speak to general rail traffic. What we
are most focused on is rail traffic of ethanol and crude, those
two substances. Ethanol has gone up at least by a factor of
four in the last several years. Crude oil has gone up a factor
of 40 in the last 5 or 10 years.
Mr. Rice. Ms. Feinberg, is general rail traffic increasing,
decreasing, stable?
Ms. Feinberg. Increasing.
Mr. Rice. How much?
Ms. Feinberg. I don't know the actual percentage, but it--
--
Mr. Rice. Has it doubled in the last 10 years?
Ms. Feinberg. Crude and ethanol, certainly. But just
general----
Mr. Rice. Just general----
Ms. Feinberg. Just general trains on the tracks, I don't
know if it has doubled. I would doubt it.
Mr. Rice. All right. Tell me about the trend in--well,
first of all, the status of the rail infrastructure. Are the
tracks generally--are they getting better? Are they getting
worse? Are they in desperate need of repair? Are they--is
industry reinvesting enough? What is your opinion?
Ms. Feinberg. The track--the rail infrastructure is
generally burdened by significant congestion. The rail industry
has said that they are investing multiple, multiple billions of
dollars in fixing, repairing, replacing track, generally.
Mr. Rice. They say it? Do you not know? Are they doing
that? Or you say----
Ms. Feinberg. No, no, no. I am sorry. They are doing it,
and they have also said that in the coming year they will
reinvest X billions----
Mr. Rice. So you think the status of the existing rail
infrastructure is adequate?
Ms. Feinberg. No, I don't. I think that it is burdened, and
needs significant attention and repair. I was just answering
that the rail industry has said that they are going to reinvest
in it.
Mr. Rice. OK, all right. How about the trend in accidents
on rail? Is it--are we seeing more and more accidents? Are we
seeing more and more lives lost? Or is the trend in accidents
improving?
Ms. Feinberg. The trend in accidents is generally
improving. The 2014 accidents were actually down. I think, in
terms of grade crossing incidents, we are actually seeing those
tick up a little bit in the last year or so. But of course, the
rail accidents that we are seeing have been dramatic and
attention-getting, because they tend to involve crude and
large----
Mr. Rice. OK. So, despite the dramatic increase in
flammable liquids on rail--and you say 40-fold--and despite the
fact that general rail traffic has increased significantly in
the last 10 years, we are still seeing a decline in accidents?
Ms. Feinberg. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rice. To what do you attribute that?
Ms. Feinberg. Increased inspections, increased safety
measures.
Mr. Rice. OK. Mr. Butters, tell me about the trend in
pipeline volume. Is the volume in pipelines increasing? Is it
stable? Is it decreasing? Tell me about that.
Mr. Butters. Well, more pipelines are being built every
year, both on the transmission side, as well as gathering
production lines. So that is increasing, particularly in light
of the energy renaissance that we are experiencing with shale,
oil, and gas production. It is growing rather significantly.
Mr. Rice. Mr. Butters, do you have an opinion on the safety
of transmission of flammable liquids, pipeline versus railroad?
Mr. Butters. Well, I agree with Mr. Hart, they are both
safe modes of transportation. Our role is to ensure that those
hazardous materials, whether--regardless of the mode that they
are transported on, are done in a safe way.
Mr. Rice. That was a really good nonanswer. Pipeline versus
railroad.
Mr. Butters. Again, it--two separate modes. Both of them
are----
Mr. Rice. Which one is safer, in your opinion, pipeline or
railroad?
Mr. Butters. They are--both have demonstrated strong safety
records.
Mr. Rice. You said that you were trying to hire 120 people
earlier, right? And you hoped to have that done by the end of
the year. How many people work for you? How many people work
at--what is the name of the----
Mr. Butters. PHMSA, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration. We have slightly shy of 500 staff, both
here in headquarters, as well as in our 10 field offices.
Mr. Rice. How long have you been trying to hire 120 people?
Mr. Butters. Well, we were authorized in December of this
year, so we have been working pretty vigorously since December.
We have hired about 30 percent of those vacancies. We had
about, on a pipeline program, 145 positions, and nearly all of
those have been filled.
Mr. Rice. I have one last question, and then I will shut
up.
You said you have very high priority on liquid and gas
rulemaking for pipelines, very high priority.
Mr. Butters. Yes.
Mr. Rice. How long you been working on that with very high
priority?
Mr. Butters. We have been working on those for several
years.
Mr. Rice. What--how long does it take for something with
low priority?
Mr. Butters. Pardon me?
Mr. Denham. Mr. Larsen?
Mr. Larsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know that over the
next year the railroad industry has said they are going to
invest $29 billion: $13 billion in repair and $16 billion in
new capital. Some time last week, Burlington Northern Santa Fe
notified its customers of some operational changes that they
are going to make, including reducing speeds on key trains from
50 to 35 in heavily populated areas, increasing track
inspections, eliminating the use of DOT-111 cars from service
within 1 year, and unjacketed 1232s within 3 years, and
decreasing the threshold on wayside detectors to increase
detection and removal of defective railcars.
So, the question is--and it is not to trumpet BNSF
necessarily, but if BNSF is doing it, why can't other railroads
do this? Why can't PHMSA mandate that kind of aggressive
action, as well? And is that what we expect to see? And this
would be for FRA, as well.
Ms. Feinberg. Sorry. We know about BNSF's recent
announcements. We are supportive of them. Not all railroads are
functioning the same geographic area, functioning with the same
kind of traffic, and carrying the same kind of product, so
there are differences of opinion in the rail industry about
those. But we are hugely supportive of the recent announcements
they have made, and I believe they make a lot of sense.
Mr. Larsen. Yes, that is fair. That is fair. So, for Ms.
Feinberg, the Association of Washington Cities approached me
with a proposal for improvements at at-grade crossings. We are
going to work on some legislative language, see if we can get
that in our--in the surface bill.
But FRA has looked at at-grade crossing improvements, as
well. Can you cover a little bit about how you define at-grade
crossing improvements, and what that might mean for safety?
Ms. Feinberg. Sure. So the first thing that we try to
remind people of is that the safest crossing is no grade
crossing at all. It would actually be the rail being completely
separated from pedestrians and from vehicular traffic.
Because of recent incidents--the Metro-North incident, the
Amtrak incident, and the Metrolink incident--we have taken a
fresh look at grade crossing safety, generally. This is a very
old problem, but one we think deserves some fresh thinking. So
we have announced that we are implementing an enhanced campaign
to improve safety at crossings. We have started with the
partnership with law enforcement to increase enforcement at
crossings for those drivers that are trying to actually beat
the train.
But that is not the only problem at crossings. We have also
got an awareness problem, so we are working on that. And we are
also hoping to announce some new technologies in the coming
months that would also assist with safety.
Mr. Larsen. All right. Look forward to that.
Mr. Butters, how has the Canadian direction on tank car
design impacted PHMSA's process and rulemaking?
Mr. Butters. Thank you for that question, sir. We have been
working very closely with our counterparts in Canada to ensure
that these safety regulations are harmonized to minimize any
disruption in cross-border movement. We are hoping that, as we
approach the finalization of this final rule, we will both be
able to jointly announce our regulations.
Mr. Larsen. Is that adding to time, or adding to the delay,
or is it everything else that is adding to getting this rule
out in a more timely manner?
Mr. Butters. Our discussions with Canada have not affected
how our rule is working through the process here.
As you know, the Canadian governmental process and the U.S.
governmental process are--have different gates to go through.
Canada doesn't have the processes that we go through.
Mr. Larsen. OK. You mean the excellent process that we
have.
Finally, for Mr. Butters, I have a letter from the State of
Washington Citizens Advisory Committee on Pipeline Safety. It
is from December 30, 2014. It is actually directed to your
boss, Anthony Foxx, but it lists six particular rules on
pipeline safety that they wanted to hear about, what the
process is.
You have covered liquid and gas, and there are three
others. And I don't want to have you answer the question where
you are on the process for the other four in this setting. Do
you have this letter? Do you know of this letter?
Mr. Butters. I believe I--we have seen that letter, and it
is a--a response is being prepared. But we would be happy to,
obviously, respond to those specific questions to you directly,
as well.
Mr. Larsen. Great. We will follow up with you directly on
that, to see where PHMSA is on a response. Again, it was
December 30th, so we are 3-plus months beyond that. And I know
you are busy on a lot of things, but these are our folks, I
think the only Governor-appointed citizens advisory committee
in the country. We created this process as part of the 2002
Act. And so, hopeful that you can be responsive as quickly as
possible.
Mr. Butters. Absolutely.
Mr. Larsen. Thank you very much.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Hardy?
Mr. Hardy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Feinberg, Mr. Butters, Mr. Hart, thank you for being
here. I have read your testimonies, and I have got to be quite
blunt. I know there is a lot going on. I know that crude rail
has increased over the last few months. But when it comes to
rulemaking, I see in here a lot of activity, but I don't see a
lot of results.
As a Member of Congress, I know that legislation can be
slow-moving. But our rulemaking process seems to be far behind.
A bill was passed back in 2011, the Pipeline Safety, Regulatory
Certainty, and Job Creation Act. It was enacted in 2012. There
were 48 mandates from Congress for the agency that bills itself
on focusing on the safe movement of hazardous materials. Out of
the 48 mandated, only 23 are completely. Sadly and shocking,
this act is about to expire in a few months.
So, let me ask this question. How are we supposed to have a
comprehensive conversation about this act with less than half
of the mandates finished? And how can we look to authorize this
act? Either one of you can answer that.
Mr. Butters. Well, we are--have been working very
diligently to address these mandates. Obviously, some of them
are more complicated and require data and research and--to make
sure that we are getting them right. That takes time.
I am not here to apologize for that process, but we are
very cognizant of the importance of these, and we are working
through to get them completed as quickly as we can.
Mr. Hardy. Thank you. And I have also read your testimony.
I would like to run by a couple of quotes. Mr. Butters, you
state, ``To date, the Office of Hazardous Material Safety has
finalized four of the six regulatory actions required under
MAP-21.'' In another quote you say, ``PHMSA had implemented all
but one of the mandates from the Pipeline Inspection,
Protection, Enforcement, and Safety Act of 2006.''
Ms. Feinberg, you state that ``Rail Safety Improvement Act
of 2008 mandated that FRA, as the Secretary's designee,
complete an unprecedented 43 discrete tasks...Today, FRA has 10
remaining RSIA-mandated, nonperiodic items left to complete.''
I have one simple question. What is going on with our
rulemaking? We are looking to reauthorize a very important
piece of legislation before all the rules. Can you help me walk
through where the train is running off the tracks, so to speak,
here?
Ms. Feinberg. Sure, Mr. Hardy. I mean, to be clear, I think
that we have a function in the regulatory process that exists.
And it is not built for speed. I wish that it was. And no one
is more frustrated by our regulatory process and how long it
takes than I am on occasion.
But if we are trying to govern and regulate as quickly as
we possibly can, the regulatory--the rulemaking process is not
the way to do it.
Mr. Hardy. Would you agree that you maybe need to do
something, then? Because we should be built for speed. We
should be built for safety. That is the obligation of this
Congress, to make sure that we implement rules and regulations
that help make the public safer. That is one of our
constitutional duties.
So, can somebody help me tell you--tell me where we are
going wrong, as a Congress, and where we are going wrong, as
Administrators?
Ms. Feinberg. I agree with you 100 percent that we should
be built for speed, and that we should be able to be more
efficient when we are trying to make the system safer. But
there are nine different steps in the U.S. regulatory process,
and I wish that we could move through them quicker, and in a
more efficient way. But the reality is that if we want to be
truly efficient, we would end up regulating by emergency order,
or the Congress would direct us in certain ways.
Mr. Butters. Sir, if I might add, the other aspect of this
is that there are a lot--many of these rules affect a lot of
stakeholders. And we have to--when we put rules out for
comment--for example, we got 30,000 comments on the rail rule,
alone. We have to go through all of those to ensure that we
understand where each of these stakeholders are coming from,
and take into consideration how they affect those industries.
And that does take time.
Mr. Hardy. I have just a few seconds left, but, you know,
in the private sector, where I come from, we have to
communicate with all sides. Is the administration communicating
with congressional committees on these issues? Are we coming up
with better mousetraps?
You know, I have to work with the engineers, the
architects, every direction that I go, in order to get a
project done on time. And it is sometimes a challenge, but it
is done right, it is done safe, and it is done to protect the
public at the end of the day, in a whole lot more efficient
time. We need to be--start that communication somewhere. Has
to--something has to change here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Sires.
Mr. Sires. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here. You know, I represent an area
that is very densely populated. You know, just to give you an
example, Hoboken, New Jersey, is 1 square mile, has about
51,000 people. And I see in the Wall Street Journal today that
FEMA, they put the--devised a scenario where they made an
explosion, and they--they didn't make the explosion, they
prepared the officials for any kind of accident that happens.
And they work with the administration of the city of Jersey
City and surrounding areas.
I was just wondering, if FEMA comes up with suggestions on
how to fight an accident like this, do you coordinate with
FEMA? Do you--do they talk to you and say, ``Look, this may
be''--as they go through these urban areas, this--``I think
this regulation may improve us in fighting this accident?''
Ms. Feinberg. Yes, sir. We coordinate with FEMA regularly,
also with the NFC, DHS, and the entire apparatus that would
respond to an incident like that. And in this specific
instance, we coordinated with FEMA and FRA participated--I
believe PHMSA did, as well--participated in the exercise.
The exercise you are referring to was a tabletop exercise
that would help train and practice responding to a significant
crude-by-rail incident in a very populated area.
Mr. Sires. So, if they make a suggestion, you will act on
it.
Ms. Feinberg. I am sorry?
Mr. Sires. If they make a suggestion, you will act on it?
Ms. Feinberg. Yes, very much. I mean we are not necessarily
the first responders, but we will coordinate with FEMA to
ensure that we are assisting.
Mr. Sires. And the other area of New Jersey is obviously--
there are a lot of pipelines under New Jersey. And a few years
ago, in Linden, New Jersey, there was a big explosion, 1,500
people--evacuate. And I know that the railroad industry is
investing a great deal of money in repairs and capital. I was
just wondering if the pipeline industry is doing something
similar.
Mr. Butters. Well, under Federal regulations--and our
Federal regulations have to be adopted by States for
enforcement in those distribution lines, and intrastate lines
that the State oversees. So there are--there is consistency, in
terms of pipeline safety, which specifies frequency of
inspections, how they should be inspected.
And, again, depending on the age and type of pipeline we
are talking about, the best way to inspect for safety is using
internal--what we call pinging devices, in-line inspection
devices. But some pipelines, because of their age or their--the
nature of their construction, are not well-suited to those. So
the operator has to choose other means of inspecting to ensure
that they are safe. And again, it depends on----
Mr. Sires. But does the industry do it on their own? You
know, let's say we have a pipeline that is 50 years old. They
say, ``Well, this may have to be replaced.'' I mean do they go
out and do it? Or--because I assume that the railroad industry,
when they see a track that is not safe, they go out and do it.
Mr. Butters. Yes, the operator is required--and it is the
responsibility--again, depending on the pipeline, if it is a--
if it is overseeing or regulated by the State, the State safety
agency ensures that that operator is complying with those
regulations. And if it is an interstate transmission line, it
falls under PHMSA's jurisdiction to ensure those operators are
doing what they are supposed to be doing. That is why we have
inspectors out there that--every day they go and either audit
companies, operators, to look at their inspection records, or
they do hands-on inspections themselves with those operators.
Mr. Sires. And I see here that you processed 19,000 special
permits and approval applications in 2014. And you are
requesting to charge a fee of $700 to $3,000. What is that
money going to be used for? Are you going to increase your--you
know, your--many people, more people, inspectors, and----
Mr. Butters. Well, there are a couple things that sort of
address that issue. Some of these special permits can involve a
complicated analysis that--the fee is intended to help recover
the cost, to reduce the burden on the taxpayer and, really, the
requesting organization, the shipper, the producer, would pay
that fee.
We are also trying to reduce the number of special permits
that are necessary, by looking at past practices and where
special permits have been issued over--you know, year after
year, that demonstrate a good safety record, by moving those
into the--into our standard regulations, so that a special
permit is no longer required, to make the system more
efficient.
But the fee is intended to help offset the cost of
processing these fees. As I said, some of them can be very
complicated and extensive.
Mr. Sires. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Babin?
Dr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Feinberg, I have a question for you, first. You have
recently called on the energy industry ``to do more to control
the volatility of its cargo.'' You may have seen a recent
report from the DOE where the agency had found no data showing
a correlation between crude oil properties and the likelihood
of severity of a fire caused by a derailment.
Furthermore, a white paper from the Federal Railroad
Administration stated ``using vapor pressure as a metric to
identify potential hazards may not prove effective when
considering real-world accident conditions.''
So, I would ask you, are you disagreeing with the findings
of your own agency and your administration counterparts at the
Department of Energy?
Ms. Feinberg. No, sir. I am happy to take that question
again. The DOE report that recently came out talked about a
variety of different components that could affect a crude-by-
rail incident: speed, volatility. The point of the report was
that there is not one single component that can be changed that
will affect the severity of the fire or the incident.
We agree with that report, and we are working closely with
DOE as they do more research to determine what, if any, level
of volatility would be more useful for the product to come to,
to increase actual safety. I don't think there is a
disagreement in the industry or among--or between the agencies
that decreasing volatility generally makes a product safer.
In terms of the white paper that came out from FRA, that
was about flammable materials, and it talked about crude and
ethanol both being flammable materials that are dangerous in
incidents when there are derailments.
Dr. Babin. OK, thank you.
Ms. Feinberg. Thank you.
Dr. Babin. I would ask you. Do you think it is safer to
haul crude by rail or through a pipeline?
Ms. Feinberg. I am sorry, is that for me?
Dr. Babin. Yes.
Ms. Feinberg. Yes, sir. Generally, I think that pipelines
are safer, because I don't have to be responsible for them. I
worry a lot more about the product that is being transported by
rail.
Dr. Babin. OK. Now, this question is for all three of you.
If, according to the white paper--have there been any of these
incidents, of all the incidents that we have had involving the
movement of crude-by-rail, has crude ever been implicated as
the causative factor in the accident? Do you know?
Ms. Feinberg. No, sir. The product itself has not been
found to be the cause of the actual incident.
Dr. Babin. OK. Would you like to give an answer to that, or
do you have the same answer, Mr. Butters?
Mr. Butters. Yes. The product itself is normally not
related to the cause of the accident in rail transportation.
There may be a factor related to pipeline, if the product
contributes to corrosion, for example, but inspections done
properly will detect those.
Dr. Babin. OK. Mr. Hart?
Mr. Hart. Our experience is the problem is how the railroad
is operated, the robustness of the cars, and the response by
the responders, not the content of the tank cars.
Dr. Babin. OK. Thank you very, very much. Appreciate it.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Babin.
Mr. Nolan, recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a couple
questions for both Mr. Butters and Ms. Feinberg. I will try to
be brief. And, if you will, too, we should be able to get them
in.
My first question is, Mr. Butters, did you feel like you
have the methods, the technology, to test the material
integrity of the steel and the tubular goods that are going
into pipelines around the country?
Mr. Butters. Are you talking about testing the actual
material----
Mr. Nolan. I am not talking about--yes, I am not talking
about the seams and the lines and brakes, but the actual
integrity of the steel that is going into that tubular good.
Quality does vary around the world, I have found. Having done a
little business in that business----
Mr. Butters. It--as part of our--on the pipeline side, as--
part of our inspection program is to look at materials of
construction, and ensure that operators are using----
Mr. Nolan. Yes, that is not what I am talking about. I am
talking about the material integrity of the steel that is in
that pipeline. Not the construction and the weldings and the
fittings and the bells and all the whistles. I am talking about
the integrity of the steel.
Mr. Butters. As part of our inspection process, we do look
at the materials that are used for pipeline--the pipeline
themselves, the steel itself.
Mr. Nolan. And you have the technology to test the quality
of that steel.
Mr. Butters. We have the expertise, and we utilize
available technology to determine the quality of that material,
yes. That is part of our--in fact, as part of our
investigations of pipeline accidents, we take the damaged
segment of the pipeline and send it to a metallurgist to
determine the causal factors related to the materials----
Mr. Nolan. And that is after the fact you have an
inspection prior to an accident or a disaster.
Mr. Butters. Yes.
Mr. Nolan. On the material integrity. You have the
technology, and you have the methods, you have the expertise,
that you can test the quality of the steel.
Mr. Butters. Two ways we do that. We--through our own
inspection, expertise of our inspectors, as well as looking at
the records of the operator, and what materials they are using
in those pipelines.
Mr. Nolan. Well, I am told that, you know, you basically do
rely on what the producer and the user supplies you, but that
you do not have the technology to inspect the material
integrity of that steel. Is that incorrect?
Mr. Butters. I guess we will have to maybe talk about that
more specifically, because I am not sure exactly----
Mr. Nolan. Right, you told me you look at the records of
the producers and the users. Well, that--I mean that is one
thing. I mean that is--you know, what do you think they are
going to tell you?
Mr. Butters. Well, our inspectors are engineers. And so
they do have experience in pipeline----
Mr. Nolan. OK. Well, then, if you have done all this, do
you find any difference in the material integrity between
foreign steel and domestic steel?
Mr. Butters. There are issues associated--yes, there are
issues associated with the quality of pipelines that operators
use.
Mr. Nolan. OK, thank you.
Ms. Feinberg, with regard to bridges, you know, I come from
the Land of 10,000 Lakes. Interestingly enough, with regard to
the Keystone, you know, one of the arguments was--is that--in
opposition to it was--is if we didn't have the Keystone
Pipeline, the tar sands fields of Alberta wouldn't be
developed. Somebody forgot to check, because that horse left
the barn several years ago, and I have got 21 million barrels
of oil coming across the border at International Falls from
that area each year over a 100,000--excuse me--over a 107-year-
old bridge. And, you know, several dozen train loads.
And, you know, I read these reports in the New York Times
and other places about all the 100,000 or more bridges. Do you
have any idea or estimate of how many of these bridges are
deficient, and what it might take, in terms of cost and
inspections to get up to speed on this thing before we have a
disaster?
The bridge I am talking about, you know, separates the
Rainy River from the Voyageurs National Park, 107 years old, 21
million barrels of oil coming--it is a great concern to all of
us.
Ms. Feinberg. The bridges themselves tend to be owned by
the railroads, and the railroads are ultimately accountable to
make sure that they are safe and have been maintained. FRA has
a staff of bridge specialists that then audit the bridge--audit
the safety programs that the railroads have in place to make
sure that they are maintaining and inspecting their bridges.
Mr. Nolan. Well, from what I read, I mean, the--yes, there
is, like, 100,000 bridges, you know, that haven't been
inspected. The railroads--again, the fox is guarding the
chicken coop here. You got, like, eight inspectors, I am told.
I mean each inspector would have to inspect about 10,000,
12,000 bridges a year.
Do you have any plans for beefing up, in your own mind, you
know, what we might be able to do to have a better method of
checking the territory--the technical capabilities and/or
deficiencies of these bridges?
Ms. Feinberg. Well, the reality is that we do not have
the--we have not been tasked with inspecting all of the bridges
in the country, the rail bridges in the country. We have been
tasked with auditing and monitoring the railroad's own
inspection and maintenance programs.
We are actively hiring a few additional bridge specialists
who can act on that, and we are now looking at whether we
should hire some additional folks on top of that. But for the
time being, you know, the railroads themselves are actually
responsible for----
Mr. Nolan. Yes. You think it is prudent to have the
railroads responsible for the bridges, as opposed to not having
some kind of a Federal inspection plan?
Ms. Feinberg. Well, the railroads tend to own the bridges.
And if the bridges are not maintained and are crumbling, then
one would think that it would not be safe for their own cargo
to be traveling. So I don't know if it is prudent or not. We
would be more than happy to throw additional resources at this,
if we can, in our budget.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you, Ms. Feinberg.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Nolan.
Mr. Duncan?
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I happened to be
at another hearing, and so most of the questions I would have
asked have already been asked. But I would like to say a couple
of things.
I noticed in Ms. Feinberg's report or statement that it
said total train accidents have declined by 46 percent over the
past 10 years. Total derailments declined by 47 percent. Total
highway rail grade crossing accidents declined by 24 percent.
There is a story here. Our main concern in this committee, and
the main concern of each of your agencies, has to be safety.
But you know, I was--before I went to law school, I got an
undergraduate degree in journalism, and taught journalism for a
year. I was a newspaper reporter on a daily newspaper for a
while. I understand that train accidents and pipeline
explosions and so forth receive a lot of huge publicity. But
the real story that should come out of here is that a lot of
people are doing a real good job here, and that where rail
transportation was one of the safest forms of transportation
before 2005. Over the last 10 years it has gotten much safer.
There is a story that should be told that our pipelines are
perhaps even safer than the trains. So you know, I wish
sometimes we could emphasize some good things always, instead
of always talking about the bad things.
But I was curious, though. Mr. Mica got into the fact that
the industry says 124,000 train cars have to be retrofitted or
replaced. Can any of you tell me how much--Ms. Feinberg or Mr.
Hart, can you tell me how much it costs per railcar to do this
retrofitting? Either of you have that figure? I am guessing it
is fairly expensive, when you multiply it times 124,000.
Ms. Feinberg. Well, it would depend on what level you are
starting at. So it would be more expensive to retrofit an
unjacketed 1232 than it would be to retrofit a jacketed 1232.
But I have seen various numbers that go anywhere from $3,000 to
$9,000 to $12,000. That is for a 30-year asset.
Mr. Butters. We could provide you with that data.
Mr. Duncan. OK. And how much have the railroads spent thus
far on the Positive Train Control program? Does--do any of you
know, have a figure like that?
Ms. Feinberg. I don't know that number, off the top of my
head, but billions.
Mr. Duncan. I have read in the past, or heard in the past,
that it is very, very expensive, and that we are talking in the
billions of dollars. But I don't really remember what those
costs were at this point. None of you know that figure?
Ms. Feinberg. We can try to compile that number and report
back to you. But I think we would generally agree that it is in
the billions.
Mr. Duncan. We have already talked about the fact that none
of the trains--none of the railroads are going to be able to
meet the December 31st deadline. Or there is going to be some
fudging on it, or something. What realistically are we talking
about, 2018, 2020, or do we have any idea on that?
Ms. Feinberg. Well, different railroads are at a--are at
different stages in the process of implementation.
Mr. Duncan. Right.
Ms. Feinberg. So some are quite close, and some have a
longer way to go.
What we have proposed thus far, and what we are continuing
to discuss internally and with Members of Congress is granting
railroads provisional authority to start to bring PTC online in
chunks.
What is important to us is to continue to work closely with
the railroads to make sure that PTC is being implemented, and
that progress is being made, rather than a blanket extension
that would give people--give companies the ability to take the
next couple of years off without making more progress towards
implementation.
Mr. Duncan. I was given a demonstration of that by
Burlington Northern--BNSF at one point. Of course, even that
demonstration, though, was a few years ago. So I just was
curious about that. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
Mrs. Bustos?
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, it was
exactly 1 month and 9 days ago today that there was a train
derailment in my district. And it was--just to kind of paint a
picture a little bit, it was in, literally, one of the most
scenic areas of the State of Illinois, in a town called Galena,
a small town. There is about 55 to 60 trains that go through
that community every single day.
And, in this case, this--the train derailment happened in a
very remote area. In fact, it took about an hour for the
workers to get back there. They had to drive on a bike trail.
And, you know, on one side of it, literally, was a cliff. And
on the other side was a slough that leads to the Mississippi
River. The entire western border of my congressional district
is the Mississippi River, the source of drinking water for
hundreds of thousands of people in my region.
And you know, this--it was the Bakken crude that was being
carried, and there was an explosion. And, literally, I went out
to the site, and it was yards from the slough that this crude
oil spilled and puddled. And, you know, you think about what
could have happened.
And, Chairman Hart, I know you said in your opening
statement about the best practice, and how these--what the
railcars should be, as far as carrying this crude, this
volatile crude. And, you know, since I think I am dead last
here, maybe I will just--am I not dead last? Wow.
Well, so it is probably maybe just a little more
clarification. I think Mr. Mica was asking some questions and I
am not sure if I necessarily heard the answer, or maybe the
answers were cut off before anybody could talk about those. But
I guess, more than anything, Ms. Feinberg, you had started
saying that there is going to be a timeline that is released
here pretty soon for the retrofit schedule.
Can you talk a little bit more about exactly what we can
anticipate? Because I would like to be able to go back to the
community of Galena and say, ``OK, here is what we know about
this retrofit, here is what we can tell you to maybe give you
some peace of mind as these 55 to 60 railcars go through every
single day in our community.''
Ms. Feinberg. Yes, ma'am. What I was referring to was the
final rule that is sitting at OMB at the moment that we believe
will be finalized in the coming weeks. And that rule, though we
have not seen it in its final form, should contain both the new
car standard and a retrofit schedule, so what schedule would be
laid out to retrofit older tank cars to become this more safe
standard.
Mrs. Bustos. OK. And can we talk a little bit more about
the volatility? Again, I know some of these questions have been
asked, I just don't know if I have a full understanding about
what can be done. Is there any talk about addressing this
volatility at the site, before it is loaded in the railcars? Is
there any movement along those lines?
And I don't know who the best person is to answer that
question, but whoever would like to address that--Mr. Butters?
Thank you.
Mr. Butters. Yes. As we have mentioned before, we are
looking--this comprehensive approach looks at everything. And
looking at the hazardous--I guess physical and chemical
properties of the product being shipped is one of those.
We are working with DOE. We recently completed our first
phase of that work to look at what research has been done. And
at this point there is not enough science right now to--for us
to definitely say how this volatility issue plays into this.
And--but also underscored the fact that the chemical and
physical properties of this flammable liquid can vary, and it
can be complicated.
So, further analysis is really needed to make sure that we
better understand how volatility, how flammability, boiling
point, and other hazardous attributes of this product
contributes to that safety, and what can be done to lower that
risk.
But, at the end of the day, it is still going to be a
flammable liquid. It is a Class 3 flammable liquid that would
still be classified that way.
Mrs. Bustos. And, Chairman Hart, because you talked quite a
bit in your statement about safety, what is the message that I
can take back to the citizens of the scenic town of Galena,
Illinois, about rail safety? And what would you like to tell a
community that has gone through seeing these explosions that
are very, very dramatic? And thank God there was no loss of
life, but you know, we are talking about now tens of millions
of dollars' worth of cleanup that is still going on today.
Mr. Hart. Thank you for the question. I think the best we
can say is that we learn lessons with each event. And to your
question about volatility, our accident investigation
experience has demonstrated that the primary indications of the
magnitude of the disaster are going to be the speed of the
impact, the amount of the release, and the size of the pool
fire, as opposed to the volatility.
But to the general question, we learn lessons after every
event. And that is, for example, why we put out recently some
four urgent recommendations, because we are learning lessons
with each new accident, and the urgent recommendations ask for
more robust tank cars. We are finding that the current tank
cars may be more robust against puncture, but they are not more
robust against thermal release. We want to inform the process
as quickly as we can and issue recommendations as needed. The
best we can say is that every event we see helps us better
inform how to improve safety.
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, sir. I have used up my time. If I
may say very quickly, Ms. Feinberg, you have been very, very
helpful. I appreciate how you reached out to me proactively, as
soon as this derailment happened in our district. So thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mrs. Bustos.
Mr. Butters, in 2011 we reauthorized the Pipeline Safety
bill, section 23, the maximum allowable operating pressures of
natural gas pipelines. Why has PHMSA failed to meet the
deadline to implement the 2011--it was supposed to be done in
18 months, it is still not done yet today.
Mr. Butters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As--that is part of
our gas rule, the notice of proposed rule, which we are working
with--still within the Department of Transportation, in trying
to get that rule in final shape, so we can get it out. So we
are working vigorously to get this thing completed, so that we
can publish that NPRM.
Mr. Denham. Working vigorously for 4 years. I mean the same
situation with the DOT-111s. This was something that was
proposed back in 2011. You said, Ms. Feinberg, in the THUD
appropriations meeting, that DOT has been working in earnest
for 18 months on the tank car rule. This has been since 2011.
Four years, we are still having challenges with pipelines, we
are still having challenges with tank cars. Why is it taking 4
years to come up with a new rule? Ms. Feinberg?
Ms. Feinberg. Thank you for the question. That is right, I
did say that in the THUD committee, and that is accurate.
I believe that their--that the agency started work on DOT-
111 rulemaking, a tank car rulemaking, earlier in the
administration and had some--and the process slowed down a bit.
I will say what I said before, which is that our only option is
to work within the process that exists for these rulemakings.
And, while I think we should always be pressured to move as
fast as we possibly can, it is also just generally a long and
very thorough process, with multiple steps that take quite a
long time.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Butters, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Butters. The only thing I would add, sir, is that,
being cognizant of this tank car issue, which NTSB, of course,
issued a recommendation, our tank--the tank car committee that
operates within DOT that brings the tank car manufacturers
together, the shippers, the carriers, have been working on this
tank car specification issue for a number of years. We have
relied on their process to develop that right specification.
Obviously, with the huge growth in transportation of this
product required the acceleration of that process. But, as
Administrator Feinberg indicates, the--we are bound by the
process that we have to follow. And, because of the
complication of this particular rulemaking that not only
addresses railcar specifications, but rail operations and other
factors, to put that final rule together is complex, and it
just--has taken quite a bit of time.
Mr. Denham. Come on, that is just an excuse. Four years. It
is 4 years now. I understand rules take a lot of time. Whether
it is an emergency or a congressional order. With the PHMSA
2011 reauthorization, it was a congressional order, and it has
still taken 4 years.
Now, again, I appreciate that the two of you are Acting
Administrators, and the two of you have been very gracious with
your time, and certainly have been very responsive in
communicating with this committee. But 4 years by this
administration? I mean, not only is this committee frustrated,
the folks that we represent, the American public, are
frustrated. They are frustrated any time we have another
pipeline that explodes or has challenges. We are frustrated
every time that there is a train that hits a high-centered farm
truck, or goes off the rails, and we have an explosion, because
there is no tank car rule. Four years is too long. We can't
have any more excuses on these.
Ms. Feinberg. I would say that no one is more frustrated
with how long this process takes than those of us who are in
the middle of the process and responsible for it. And I think
there is no one who believes that this process is one that
moves fast enough.
Mr. Butters. And the other thing I would add, sir, is that
we recognize the importance of this rule, but we also recognize
that actions can be taken and are being taken outside of the
rulemaking process to address some of these safety issues.
The Secretary of Transportation, and all the modal
administrations, are acting within their full authority,
whether it is through emergency orders, advisory bulletins, or
other actions, and using the influence that we can with the
industry to have them step up and take additional actions to
address these safety issues.
This rule that is coming out is not going to be an
overnight fix. It is going to take time. And----
Mr. Denham. And that is the frustration. We understand that
it is going to take time to implement it. As you heard from
Chairman Mica earlier, we are expecting 10 years is what the
industry is saying it is going to take to upgrade these tank
cars. We are still going to be moving Bakken crude during those
10 years. We are still going to have challenges with not only
creating those American jobs in our districts that actually
make these tank cars, but actually getting them out on the road
to make America safe.
So, again, very frustrated about the length of time it has
taken to come out with this rule. We also want to see the
implementation process and see that expedited, as well.
I have got one final question. In the Bush administration,
FRA tried to mandate the installation of ECP brakes. And last
week, Ms. Feinberg, you had said that a lot of people in FRA
believe ECP brakes could be a game-changer. Do you think that
they are a game-changer? And is there any plan by FRA to again
look at that mandate, or to come up with funding to help to
implement it?
Ms. Feinberg. We have taken a close look at ECP braking. We
do----
Mr. Denham. And I would ask for a quick response, because
my time has expired, and----
Ms. Feinberg. Yes.
Mr. Denham. You can also submit that in writing. But if you
can give me a quick response, I would appreciate it.
Ms. Feinberg. We are supportive of ECP braking. We do
believe that it is a game-changer on safety. I am happy to get
back to you with the rest on the record.
Mr. Denham. Thank you. Ms. Napolitano, you are recognized.
Mrs. Napolitano. Was Mr. Garamendi----
Mr. Denham. No. No, but you----
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, thank you.
Mr. Denham [continuing]. Happily have him go before you.
Mrs. Napolitano. That is fine, thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. And certainly there are certain questions that I have
had, because my district is one of the heaviest urban rail
traffic in the country, with the Alameda Corridor, with
freight, Amtrak, and Metrolink commuter rail.
The Alameda Corridor-East was established by communities to
build grade separations. And I have heard you talk about the
importance of those. However, there are crossings, 40-plus, in
my district, and only about 20 are--have--less than half are
built, and the others are in the process. And the--yet the
railroad only provides 1- to 3-percent contributions.
I wish somebody would start working on being able to impose
upon them the ability to get that--how would I say--delivery
expedited, delivery to the east, a little more seriously, in
order to be able to get that done. And I am glad the
administration's GROW AMERICA includes a section on that for
the freight program to mitigate the negative impacts it has on
urban areas. And I think that is important, not only for
passenger safety, for employee safety, but also the fact that
we have had--not recently--derailments in my area, and train
accidents that, thank God, UP was able to replace miles of that
with new rail, because the increase--expected increase in rail
traffic.
But on the Positive Train Control there is a lot of
discussion on that. But we need to be able to get a report on
the cost, on the ability, and the feasibility of being able to
implement it, especially in urban areas that have a greater
impact.
And also, the implementation, what is the timeframe that we
have? I know it is December of this year, and there may be an
extension, based on the need. Most of them are--say it is
financial. But we need to be able to understand it a little
better on that area.
And we talk about the ability to get all these things done,
but what about your budgets? Do you have enough budget? Have
your budgets been cut? Because we expect a lot, and yet we are
initially saying, ``OK, cut different projects and programs
that are important to the safety and welfare of our communities
at stake.'' So that is another area that I would like to have
you tell us about.
And the shipments, whether it is 110, 120 containers per
railroad shipment. There is over 40 coming through my district
now. And I know that at one point there was an effort to put in
a 3\1/2\-mile train, which would have created a lot of issues
for my area.
The other area is inspectors and inspections. Do you have
enough inspectors? I understand you still--for the bridges, you
only have--you have eight, of which two are vacant. And where
are we with that?
Then the aging infrastructure that we talk about, we have
had a report from this committee years ago by the--an agency--I
can't remember, it is outside--that graded our bridges and gave
us Ds and Cs, mostly. Are we putting away enough money to be
able to provide assistance to the locals when they are
privately owned, but are we doing--are we--do we have enough
money to be able to get those bridges safe enough to where, if
we are utilizing for trucks or rail, that we have that ability
to do that?
Pipelines, yes. I have one in my area. But it was a leak on
a transfer station that is still being cleaned up, after 25
years. So those are major issues that we need to be able to
ensure that technology advances to--that we are able to detect
leaks and take care of them. Because the taxpayer ends up
paying for it.
Any comments on all my comments?
[Laughter.]
Ms. Feinberg. Sure. And we--in order to keep with the time,
I am happy to give you more fulsome answers. We can get those
back----
Mrs. Napolitano. That is all right. He took a minute and a
half----
Ms. Feinberg. No, no, I will keep going. But just--if I
don't get to everything, we are more than happy to provide
more. So I will go through some of these, though.
On crossings, we have asked for additional funding in the
GROW AMERICA Act. And, in fact, we also just released a notice
of funding availability on some grants----
Mrs. Napolitano. How about from the railroads, themselves?
Ms. Feinberg. The railroads do pay a small portion of--
agreed. And I know that these are burdensome expenses for local
communities.
We also put into our budget a significant increase in a
pool of funding that is available for communities to ask for
assistance in grade crossings, grade separations, and also rail
relocations. And so we have sent that to the Hill, as well.
In terms of PTC, we actually have a report due to the
Congress in the next few months--I believe in June--which we
are aiming to get to the Congress on time, if not early, which
would be an update to our latest thinking about PTC
implementation. I know the commuter railroads, in particular,
need assistance with PTC implementation. And we have both
called for that in GROW AMERICA, and also in our budget, as
well.
I want to make sure I talk about everything you asked
about. Bridge inspectors, we covered that a little bit earlier.
You are correct, that we have six of eight positions filled at
this point. The responsibility for the inspection and
maintenance of bridges is a responsibility of the railroads. We
audit and inspect with the railroads to ensure that they are
holding up their end of bridge maintenance and inspection.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Denham. This is once again my time, but I would gladly
yield 5 minutes to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much, Mr. Denham and,
Chairman, thank you.
First of all, Ms. Feinberg, thank you very much for joining
us last week in Davis, where we talked about the volatility of
oil. I would recommend or ask that the DOE report--which was
actually not a study, but, rather, a study of studies--be part
of the record. I think it would be informative. I think it has
been--that study has been misused here in some previous
questions.
Also, PHMSA, you released a report in August of 2014, in
which you concluded that the Bakken crude light crude oil with
high gas content, low flash point, low boiling point, and high
vapor pressure, and, therefore, highly volatile. Is that
correct? Did you do that?
Mr. Butters. Highly flammable----
Mr. Garamendi. Yes, you did.
Mr. Butters. Yes, it was highly flammable, yes.
Mr. Garamendi. Yes, highly flammable.
Mr. Chairman, a moment ago--well, actually, a few moments
ago you spoke very clearly and strongly about the frustration
that you have about the process taking so many, many years.
And, indeed, it has, usually because of our intervention,
because of industry intervention, and also because of the law
itself.
We know, categorically, that Bakken crude is highly
volatile and very explosive. Is that correct, from all three of
you? Is it?
Mr. Butters. It is a highly flammable liquid, and there are
variations, but it does have high volatility, as well.
Mr. Garamendi. Is it explosive, Mr. Hart?
Mr. Hart. It is flammable. Explosive and flammable are
variations on the same thing, yes.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. So, Mr. Chairman, let's end our
frustration. We are going to be writing legislation here very,
very shortly to extend the surface transportation bill. Why
don't we write in to that legislation the regulations that are
forever stuck in OMB that have been written by the two
organizations here that speak to tank car safety standards,
that speak to volatility, speak to tracks maintenance,
information to the first responders?
All of those things are in the proposed regulations that
are stuck in OMB. And, given the nature of regulations, the
chances of those regulations, if they ever get out of OMB,
being held up by some court challenge is very, very high. We
could write laws that protect the public. We have the basic
information. It is available from the regulations that have now
been sent on to OMB. Why don't we do that? Why don't we take
this as our responsibility, and not only the responsibility of
the agencies, but rather, our responsibilities?
Set a standard. Texas has set a standard for volatility.
Canada has set a standard for volatility. The United States
sits here and goes back and forth and, ultimately, puts
millions of our citizens at risk. I know they are in your
district, Mr. Denham, as they travel down through the Central
Valley. They are in my district, in Marysville, West
Sacramento, Sacramento, Davis, Dixon, Suisun City, and beyond.
Why don't we just do it? Why don't we take the Texas
standard, put it in place? Apparently, Texans are able to get
along with it. Why don't we take the Canada standard, cut the
difference between the two in half, and let it go? It is
clearly better than where we are today.
OK. So, I would ask that the two statements, the PHMSA
statement of--report of August 2014, and the DOE study be put
in place. And maybe we ought to subpoena the proposed standards
that have come out of Ms. Feinberg and Mr. Butters's office.
Enough. I yield back my remaining time. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Oh, and by the way, before I quit, there has been a bill
introduced, 1697, which I introduced. Love to have you as a co-
author, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi.
Ms. Hahn?
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Chairman Denham. I think I am dead
last. Thank you, though, for holding this hearing. I really
appreciate it, and I know that you know that I have been very
concerned about this, and I have spoken with you on a number of
occasions about pipeline spills in my district. And this
ongoing rulemaking is something I have been following very
closely, particularly since I had a pipeline spill in a
community that I represent in Los Angeles, the community of
Wilmington.
And I think part of what concerns me is that our pipeline
safety is completely dependent on simply taking the word of the
operators. And this was precisely the problem in Wilmington,
where Phillips 66 reported to the State of California and PHMSA
that the pipeline that they operated was empty. They even tried
to tell me it was idle, which was, apparently, not even a
category, when, in reality, it held over 1,000 gallons of oil.
And when this pipeline ruptured, it spilled, you know, a lot of
barrels of oil into a residential community.
And so, if operators can't meet their end of the bargain to
know and report what is in their pipeline to ensure the
public's safety, I believe our Federal agencies need to do
more, and I really urge you to continue to act in the name of
public safety, first and foremost.
And, Mr. Butters, I will just echo what everyone said here.
It is unbelievable that this relatively simple rule, which has
universal support, is still pending. And I know you have spoken
that a lot, but you know, I think, in my community, no one knew
the danger of this particular pipeline.
So, let me just move from the recordkeeping, which is part
of this rule, which is still pending, and how your agency will
define high consequence areas. There are hundreds of pipelines
in southern California, many of which are inactive, many of
them are active. There are lots of pipelines in my district.
And I am concerned about another accident.
I was particularly frustrated with this spill in
Wilmington, which resulted in only a $75,000 fine against
Phillips 66. You know, this really--we--it clearly was not on
the same level as San Bruno, but my residents were highly
inconvenienced. Roads were damaged, yards were damaged,
jackhammers which went to try to discover and stop this leak
completely disrupted the streets for a week, people couldn't
even get to--out of their houses or back into their houses.
So, can you give me some assurance, and my constituents,
that there will be appropriate penalties for spills in high
consequence areas?
Mr. Butters. Thank you, ma'am. As part of the rulemaking
process, that is exactly what this will do. It will be a notice
of proposed rule, which will outline what we believe should be
the appropriate penalties and actions. We are going to seek
input on that from the public, from other stakeholders, as
well.
We want to ensure that we have the necessary incentives, if
you will, to do things safely. As you pointed out, the
situation in Wilmington, the operators are required to know
their own systems. And in this case, you know, there is no such
thing as an idle pipeline. It is either abandoned----
Ms. Hahn. Right.
Mr. Butters [continuing]. Or it is an active line.
Ms. Hahn. Right. And when it is abandoned, there is a
specific process that takes place. It is cleaned out, it is
sealed. And, if it is active, there are inspection procedures
in place.
Mr. Butters. That is----
Ms. Hahn. So, for them to claim that it was idle meant that
they did neither. They neither cleaned it out and cemented it
on both ends, nor did they have this regular, you know, zipping
through the pipeline on regular inspections. This put my
community at risk.
Mr. Butters. And we certainly appreciate and are--you know,
understand that.
One of the things I wanted to say about the civil
penalties, obviously, you know, we do have limitations on what
civil penalties we can enforce. But, at the same time, in order
for a pipeline operator to either restart a line, we dictate
a--usually, a very extensive corrective action order that, in
order to comply with that order, costs quite a bit of
investment of capital, and requires a lot of these operators to
do that. And it can run into the millions and millions of
dollars. So we want to ensure that before they bring a pipeline
back into service, that they have addressed thoroughly all the
safety considerations that need to be addressed.
Ms. Hahn. Right. And I have even suggested--this was about
a purchase 15 years earlier of this pipeline. I have even
suggested that we have a third party verify when they try to
tell us it is inactive, idle.
And the other thing, you know, we had a big
misunderstanding with the California Fire Marshal on this
issue, in terms of how they interpreted our Federal law and the
classifications of pipelines. So can you tell me what PHMSA has
done in the last couple years to improve how our States are
interpreting the Federal law, and maybe what actions are being
taken to improve this relation? That was--half my battle was
with the California Fire Marshal, and how they saw this Federal
law applying to active, inactive, idle.
Mr. Butters. Sure. In California, the California Fire
Marshal has regulatory oversight over liquid lines. The utility
commission has over gas lines.
Part of our training program with our State partners is to
ensure that these agencies understand the regulations. And
there are times where the understanding, interpretation, isn't
what it needs to be. When we identify that, we act on it. And
it is a continuing activity with us, with our States.
You know, as you know, we provide funding to the States to
support their inspection program. Part of that program includes
ensuring that they understand regulations and how they should
be applied. But, obviously, there are going to be situations
where there are some inconsistencies. And when we find out
about those, and we are made aware of those, we act very
quickly to address them.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you.
Mr. Denham. Thank you.
Ms. Hahn. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the extra time.
Mr. Denham. Thank you, Ms. Hahn.
Ms. Hahn. I yield back.
Mr. Denham. Mr. Capuano.
Mr. Capuano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for having this. And I thank the panel for being
indulgent with your time, and my colleagues, as well.
I hope you take away the importance of this issue. I have
never seen more Members attend a hearing and stay as long as
they have to ask questions.
Ms. Hahn. Yes.
Mr. Capuano. This is an issue that is important,
personally, to a lot of Members, which is why I let my other
colleagues go, because, fortunately, I have had no personal
experience with these items. Many of my colleagues have, if you
heard them. And I think, if nothing else speaks volumes, it
should be the fact that they are still here, and every single
Democratic Member wanted to speak--I think only two Members had
to leave because they had previous commitments--and they wanted
to speak, as well.
I think you have heard a lot of the frustration. For me,
these issues, a lot of these issues are--to be perfectly
honest, as I learn more and more about them, I am amazed at how
many issues we have on the table, and how many open issues we
have. There's too many of them. And they are not new.
You know, just a quick list. We have got the 111 cars, we
have got Positive Train Control, first responder notice, in-cab
video just on the rail side. On the pipeline side we have got
the automatic shutoff valves, the remote shutoff valves,
pipeline integrity, pressure management, the Grandfather
Clause, and HCAs, which is an interesting term in itself.
Basically, you should just say cities, but that is a different
issue, all together.
And, on top of that, we have got the NTSB that has been
calling for various regulations forever. Forever. We have had
Congress, on several occasions, had to put in statute how long
it should take to do these things. And that has been blown by.
Now, I don't want to, you know, besmirch either Ms.
Feinberg or you, Mr. Butters. You are both new to your terms,
but you are not new to the issue.
Mr. Hart, I guess the question I have to ask you is not
specifically on the specific items. You know, we have to
reauthorize PHMSA reasonably soon. Should we? Or should we come
up with something new? Is it working? Is it not working?
And, again, I don't mean--I am not trying to besmirch the
agency, but there is something wrong. There is something wrong.
And I am not sure, as one Member, whether it is both agencies
have become captive to the industry. You won't be the first
regulatory agency to become a captive of those you are supposed
to regulate.
I am not trying to kill the railroads. Railroads are
important to this country. We need to be able to transport
goods. But we need to be able to do it in a safe manner. And,
to be perfectly honest, taking 4 years for a regulation, there
is no excuse, period. None. On an issue like this it is not
that complicated. Either you do it or you don't. Canada did it
in about a blink.
We now have--I have never seen this. We have a major rail
company that is ahead of the regulators. They are about to stop
the use of 111s and lower their speeds without being told to do
so. That is amazing to me. I have served the entire time here
on the Financial Services Committee. No bank has ever done
that. And yet here we are.
And, by the way, when that happens, what is going to happen
to the more dangerous cars? They are going to be shifted. They
are going to be shifted out of Canada, and they are going to be
shifted off of that one rail company's rail lines into my area.
How is that right?
Mr. Hart, should we reauthorize PHMSA? And, if we should,
what should we do to make sure that this works?
Mr. Hart. I will take the liberty of taking the
reauthorization question as a rhetorical question. But I would
like to say that----
Mr. Capuano. It may not be.
Mr. Hart [continuing]. We have experience in other
industries where we certainly need the regulators. We need the
regulators at the appropriate levels. A model that has worked
best in many industries to improve safety is collaboration
among everybody in pursuit of a common goal, which is improving
safety. That is what we find works best--not just push by the
regulator--everybody collaborating to work together toward a
common goal.
Mr. Capuano. So where is the problem here? Is it at PHMSA
or is it the individual agencies? Is it OMB? I mean is it the
Secretary? I mean these rules are kind of around. First of all,
we don't have half the rules that I think we should have. And
the ones we do have seem to be lost somewhere on the
Secretary's desk or somehow lost in OMB. And, by the way, we
don't even know what is in the rules that are lost. What kind
of a process is this? And how do I make it better? Whose butt
do we have to kick? Whose budget do we have to cut? Whose
budget do we have to enhance to make this work?
Mr. Hart. The best I can say on that, again, is that the
experience--and I am speaking specifically of the aviation
industry. They have such a powerful collaboration that has
improved their safety over the years without many new
regulations, without--I mean the Federal regulator plays a role
in that process, to be sure. But the real advances have come
because of the----
Mr. Capuano. The aviation industry has other problems. They
can't seem to be getting all the things that we all want
actually in place. But that is, at least, a different issue.
Now, Ms. Feinberg and Mr. Butters, I really don't have
questions--my time is up anyway--because I have so many
questions it is not worth the 5 minutes to do it. Plus, we have
met privately, we will be meeting again.
The more I learn, the more I realize we have got to make
this work. And if you need help, you need to ask. You need to
tell us what you need. Otherwise, it will become something a
lot more controversial, because it will become something more
face-to-face. And that is not helpful, that is not what I want
to do. It is not what you want to do. Tell us how to help you,
as we go forward, and we will try to do it. And if we can't, we
will tell you that. At least let us know what the problems are.
But to sit here and tell us that, you know, ``We are working on
it 18 months, 4 years,'' you know that is unacceptable. You
would never accept that if you were on this side of the table.
And please don't expect us to.
I look forward to the next hearing. And, again, I thank the
chairman for his indulgence. I thank my Members for showing up.
And I thank the panel for helping us out on this.
Mr. Denham. I, as well, would like to thank the panel. As
you saw, we went over time today. Certainly appreciate your
indulgence. As you can see, this is an issue or issues that
have the entire committee concerned, interested, focused on.
Affects their district, affects the entire country.
And so, we will be following up with questions in writing,
and we will be holding another safety hearing later this year.
I mean, obviously, we are looking to see the rules moving
forward, but we are also going to be holding you accountable to
those rules, as well as implementation of them.
I would ask unanimous consent that today's record--hearing
remain open until such time as our witnesses have provided
answers to each of those questions that may be submitted to
them in writing, and unanimous consent that the record remain
open for 15 days for any additional comments and information
submitted by Members, other questions that might be submitted
by Members that had to leave early included in today's record
of the hearing.
[No response.]
Mr. Denham. Without objection, so ordered.
Again, I would like to thank our witnesses for their
testimony today.
If no other Members have anything to add, this committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:29 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
