- COAST GUARD MISSION NEEDS AND RESOURCES ALLOCATION

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COAST GUARD MISSION NEEDS AND RESOURCES ALLOCATION

=======================================================================

(114-44)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 14, 2016

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

20-498 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                             Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN KATKO, New York                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JARED HUFFMAN, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada                JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
MIKE BOST, Illinois
------

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    JOHN GARAMENDI, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      CORRINE BROWN, Florida
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         JANICE HAHN, California
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York                  Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Admiral Charles D. Michel, Vice Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard.....     3
Jennifer A. Grover, Director, Homeland Security and Justice, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...............................     3

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Admiral Charles D. Michel........................................    35
Jennifer A. Grover...............................................    48

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Admiral Charles D. Michel, Vice Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard,
responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Duncan Hunter of California.............................    40
Hon. Don Young of Alaska.....................................    43
Hon Daniel Webster of Florida................................    46
Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio.......................................    47

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

COAST GUARD MISSION NEEDS AND RESOURCES ALLOCATION

----------

TUESDAY, JUNE 14, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Duncan Hunter
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Hunter. The subcommittee will come to order. The
subcommittee is meeting this morning to review the Coast Guard
mission needs and report released by the GAO reviewing how the
Service allocates its resources. Under section 2, title 14, the
Coast Guard is responsible for a wide range of missions, from
search and rescue, icebreaking, and marine environmental
protection, to port security and drug interdiction. The Coast
Guard is using a strategic planning process which determines
mission priorities based on risk and helps guide the Service in
allocating resources among its statutory missions.
GAO noted in its report that not all of the processes used
by the Service to allocate its resources have been transparent.
And I actually went through some of the stuff. The MNS and some
of the other things that you use in the Coast Guard to
determine what gets used where and how many hours are allocated
as opposed to how many hours are actually used. And it was very
complicated. But I'm not that smart, enough to actually see
through it. So we'll talk about that more today, and maybe find
a way to dumb it down so that us mere mortals can understand
how the resources are allocated and what the top lines are, and
so forth. OK, good. Maybe you could translate it to us, please,
Ms. Grover.
As the Nation's primary maritime response organization, the
Coast Guard often must surge assets and personnel to respond to
a hurricane, oil spill or other national or international
emergency. As the Service did on April 10th--excuse me, April
2010, it moved over 150 assets and 7,500 personnel to the Gulf
Coast to lead response efforts to the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill. The Coast Guard is also tasked with preventing maritime
accidents, keeping our borders secure, and protecting our ports
and waterways. In fiscal year 2015, the Service conducted over
12,000 safety, security and environmental inspections of U.S.
and foreign-flagged vessels, and interdicted 6,000 undocumented
migrants, and 179 metric tons of illegal drugs.
The Coast Guard works hard to meet its missions. And this
subcommittee wants to ensure that the Service retains its core
competencies and acquires the assets needed for its response
missions and day-to-day prevention work. However, it does seem
at times that the Service presents a rose-colored glasses view
of the capabilities and capacities of its assets. This
subcommittee also needs to understand where current assets may
be failing to support the Service's ability to meet its mission
demands. And how the Service then conducts risk assessment, to
move assets around, to cover mission gaps, when it may not be
possible to cover those gaps, and what missions are impacted.
We'll talk specifically about icebreaking, we'll talk
specifically about land, land-based UAVs too, when we get into
the hearing.
The GAO report notes that for the most part, Coast Guard
assets are not reached in the allocated resource hours the
Service includes in its planning documents. And its field units
are not uniformly tracking data to show what missions are being
supported by the assets when in use. This is another thing
we're going to--what I'd like your help on is this is, how do
we not bureaucratize the Coast Guard to where everybody's just
simply filling out time sheets 24/7, trying to track what their
assets and doing are when. So you can actually go out and do
your missions. But at the same time, kind of present a real,
call a transparent or easily understandable view on what your
assets are doing and how they're being allocated.
There are a lot of moving parts to understand how the Coast
Guard manages its resources. For those of us trying to support
the Service, the various documents, the Mission Needs
Statements, Capital Investment Plan and Programs of Record can
be less than helpful in revealing how the information they
provide flows into the annual budget requests and influence
overall decisions on asset use and acquisitions. We here are
your supporters. It should not be this difficult to unravel the
needs of the Service or to understand how existing assets are
performing. The Coast Guard updated its Mission Needs Statement
in 2015, and I look forward to discussing how that Mission
Needs Statement will be used to establish an achievable asset
acquisition plan.
We have been at this, recapitalizing the services assets,
since the late 1990s. John and I have been doing this for
about, what, 4 years now, specifically here. While the
complexities of the world continue to grow, we need to make
sure the Coast Guard is at its most capable, now more than
ever. I look forward to having a frank discussion with our
witnesses, and I thank you all for coming. With that, I yield
to the ranking member, Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, for scheduling
this meeting to assess the Coast Guard's new Mission Needs
Statement, and implications of how the Coast Guard allocates
its resources. I'd first like to state my greetings to Vice
Commandant of the Coast Guard, Admiral Charles Michel. Welcome.
Delighted to see you and have a little conversation before we
even started the meeting. And also welcome, Jennifer Glover,
from the Government Accountability Office, who can answer all
the questions that the chairman just raised. Thank you very
much for being here.
Even the most junior boatswain, mate, can tell you before
you can accurately chart a course to arrive safely at any
destination, you first need to have a reliable compass to give
you an accurate heading. Well, is that what the Mission Needs
Statement provides for the Coast Guard? We're going to find
out. Is it a reliable compass to guide them forward? We hope
so. And we'll hear about it today. But we can all agree that
far too much time has elapsed between today and when the Coast
Guard's last Mission Statement was developed in 2005.
In many respects, the assumptions embedded in that analysis
reflect a much different time and a much different Coast Guard.
For example, the mix of assets available to the Coast Guard to
meet its mission needs is now, the Coast Guard is now in the
midst of the large recapitalization effort in the Service's
history, including a whole bunch of new airplanes they didn't
even know they'd ever get, like the 27s. Yet this transition is
not without irony. For at a time when the Coast Guard is
receiving the most modern and most capable assets in its 225-
year history, missteps and delays in the acquisition of these
assets have forced the Coast Guard to rely on its remaining
legacy assets, which have become ever less reliable and ever
more expensive to operate each year. So we hope the Coast Guard
is prepared to get on with its future, with its new assets, in
a timely and appropriate-cost way.
Additionally, a changing global climate has accelerated the
opening of the Arctic region. This circumstance has prompted
new operational challenges for the Coast Guard, while
simultaneously creating a shifting, uncertain geo-political
environment for the Coast Guard to operate in. Most
regrettably, the spectra and reach of nonstate terrorists or
transnational criminal organizations continually place the
Coast Guard in ever growing demands to ensure the safety and
security of the United States. Our maritime commerce as well as
our people. And it's not just here in the Western Hemisphere,
but it's globally.
I had the pleasure of seeing some of the Coast Guard ships
stationed in Qatar, or excuse me, Bahrain, when I visited there
a few months ago. And so the Coast Guard has a new compass, the
Mission Statement. We're going to explore that today. We know
we must do our work to ensure that the Coast Guard uses this
new analysis to best allocate its resources, and for Congress
to provide the support necessary to carry it out. So if the
Coast Guard is semper paratus, so too must the Congress. Your
11 Statutory Missions are your guideposts. The Mission
Statement is how you're going to get there. Mr. Chairman, thank
you for scheduling the hearing. I look forward to the
discussion.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member. Let me introduce
the witnesses. They're Vice Commandant Charles Michel. Admiral,
congratulations on your recent promotion. And Ms. Jennifer
Grover, Director of Homeland Security and Justice for the
Government Accountability Office. And with that, Admiral,
you're recognized.

TESTIMONY OF ADMIRAL CHARLES D. MICHEL, VICE COMMANDANT, U.S.
COAST GUARD; AND JENNIFER A. GROVER, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND
SECURITY AND JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Admiral Michel. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Garamendi, and members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today to speak on
behalf of the 88,000 men and women of the United States Coast
Guard, serving around the globe today. I ask that my written
statement be accepted as part of the official record, and I'd
be allowed to summarize my remarks.
This subcommittee has significantly advanced our long-term
acquisition strategy and provided critical support for our
Coast Guard men and women. Thank you for helping us build a
21st-century Coast Guard, capable of achieving national
objectives, wherever American maritime interests may lie. We
are operating in both polar regions, where human activity is
increasing dramatically, particularly in the Arctic. We are
managing emerging cyber challenges in our maritime industry. We
are combatting transnational organized crime throughout our own
hemisphere. And we are keeping pace with changes in the
commercial maritime industry to ensure that we facilitate and
not impede the vitally important industry that we regulate.
Notably, our increased efforts, along with those of our
interagency and international partners are contributing to
significant disruptions against organized criminal networks, to
include the detention of over 700 smugglers and over 190 metric
tons of cocaine bound for the United States in 2015. And I just
got the latest figures here. This year, we and our partners are
on a record pace, having already disrupted over 245 metric tons
and detained 391 more narco-traffickers. And they told me the
projections would be that we're likely to see a 400-plus metric
ton disruption year. And we can talk about the reasons for
that. I just got those figures this morning, sir, from my intel
folks.
In very real terms, we are taking billions of dollars from
the hands of illicit cartels. And each interdiction contains a
treasure-trove of intelligence that we can use to exploit the
gaps and seams in criminal networks that lead to even more
seizures and arrests. Intelligence drive operations like they
never had before. And we can talk a little bit about that, sir.
And these successful interdictions do far more than just remove
drugs from the stream of commerce. Dismantling criminal
networks reinstates the rule of law, curtails violence, and
brings needed stability to Central America.
The widespread violence in our own hemisphere is directly
related to illegal migration on our southern border, as we saw
in 2014, when over 68,000 unaccompanied minors arrived in the
United States. To be sure, our own national security is
challenged by cartel syndicates operating well inside our
homeland, from Texas to New England and everywhere in between.
Removing cocaine at sea strikes directly at their financial
supply lines, and it remains vitally important that we continue
to fight this fight.
The appropriation you provided in 2016 and the President's
budget requested in 2017 will allow us to move forward with the
recapitalization of our over 50-year-old Medium Endurance
Cutters, with the Offshore Patrol Cutter. We are confident that
we will down-select to a single ship builder and award OPC
detailed design by this end of this fiscal year. Turning to the
far north, cutter Healy began a deployment just last week to
the Arctic, where she will further United States sovereignty
interests by collecting seabed data that will directly support
any U.S. extended continental shelf claim. This is an area
potentially twice the size of the State of California.
We're tremendously grateful for the President's commitment
to building new, heavy icebreakers, and for your support to get
us through the critical design phase we are now undertaking. We
look forward to continuing to work with you to accelerate heavy
icebreaker acquisition. We've provided a Coast Guard Mission
Needs Statement, and we are undertaking an updated Fleet Mix
Analysis that will take into account operational data,
technological advancements, and new assets, like the C-27J that
Representative Garamendi mentioned, and a ninth National
Security Cutter, that were not available during our last
analysis. I took forward to sharing those results with you as
we work forward, to determining the composition of our surface
and air fleets.
As important as these new platforms may be, investing in a
21st-century Coast Guard is as much about people as it is about
ships, boats and aircraft. Our 2017 budget request recognizes
the critical importance of building the workforce of the
future. This is not without challenges. Though we have the best
workforce in Coast Guard history, we are seeing the impact of
decreased retention and slowed accessions. Our increasingly
uncertain and complex world requires high-end skill sets from
an in-demand talent pool. Cyber intelligence, marine
inspection, and other technically trained professionals have
many options today, and we strive to be their employer of
choice. I look forward to this committee's continued support of
our Coast Guard. Again, I thank you and look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Admiral. Same here.
Ms. Grover, you're recognized.
Ms. Grover. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hunter,
Ranking Member Garamendi, other members and staff. As the
admiral noted, the Coast Guard, like other organizations, is
only as good as its people and assets. During our work, we find
the servicemembers of the Coast Guard to be consistently hard
working and talented. But one of the challenges facing the
Coast Guard is making sure that it has the right mix of assets
deployed to the right missions at the right times, to best
equip its people to carry out those missions.
My statement today will focus on two points. First, a call
for the Coast Guard to make tough decisions about the mix of
assets that it needs and can afford in today's budget
environment. And second, recognition that the Coast Guard is
taking steps to enhance the effectiveness of its strategic
asset allocation process, which will help ensure that its
limited assets are deployed effectively and as intended.
First, regarding those tough decisions about an effective,
realistic mix of assets for today. The 2007 baseline stands as
the official record of the Coast Guard's plan for its intended
asset mix. Yet it does not reflect the mix of assets that the
Coast Guard has acquired since then. Since the baseline was
developed, the Coast Guard has received additional assets
beyond those planned, such as the C-27Js, and the ninth NSC.
And some planned assets have been delayed or reconsidered, such
as the unmanned aerial vehicles and the full component of the
HC-144 aircraft.
Also, the Coast Guard's understanding of its asset
capabilities has evolved. In several cases, planned
capabilities have been revised downward to reflect more
realistic operational targets. For example, the fast response
cutters are now expected to operate at 2,500 hours per year,
not 3,000. As a result of the delays in acquisitions and
reduced operational capacities, the actual resource hours that
were used during FY 15 fell short of what was originally
planned for every asset type.
For example, in 2015, a mix of legacy and new patrol
cutters used 48 percent of the resource hours that were
specified in the baseline. In addition, the cost of the
acquisition portfolio has grown far beyond original
expectations, which in part reflects optimistic funding
assumptions. As a result, the Coast Guard has been shaping its
asset acquisitions in a reactive mode, through the annual
budget process. These short-term budget decisions may not lead
to good long-term investments. A long-term Fleet Modernization
Plan, that is affordable, would help the Coast Guard to ensure
that they end up with the fleet that they need to optimize
performance going forward.
My second point, based on a new GAO report completed at the
request of this subcommittee and being released to the public
today, is about improvements that the Coast Guard is making to
its strategic deployment of assets. The Coast Guard has taken
several steps to improve its asset deployment, including
collecting better data on asset hours used by mission, tracking
how increased strategic commitments are affecting the hours
available to field unit commanders, and incorporating more
realistic information about asset capacities into strategic
planning documents.
On this last point, we found that in FY 15, Coast Guard
units used only three-fourths of the asset resource hours that
were allocated by headquarters through the strategic planning
process. This is not a failure of Coast Guard personnel to make
full use of their assets. Rather, the shortfall reflects an
unrealistic statement of asset capacities, based on
manufacturer maximums that are not adjusted for asset age or
condition. Incorporating more realistic information from the
field units will allow the Coast Guard headquarters to have
greater strategic influence on how asset hours are used.
In conclusion, the Coast Guard is taking positive steps to
improve the accuracy of its asset allocation process. This will
help ensure that its limited assets are used as effectively as
possible. Yet more work remains for the Coast Guard to identify
the costs, capabilities and quantities of the assets it needs
for its modern fleet mix, as well as the tradeoffs necessary,
given fiscal constraints. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member
Garamendi, this concludes my statement. I look forward to your
questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Ms. Grover. Thank you both. We'll start
taking questions now. I recognize myself. I guess the first
thing is, let's just touch on what you just talked about. It's
not that the Coast Guard, it's not that they put the bar where
it's supposed to be, then they can't reach the bar. The bar
needs to be lower. Meaning, meaning, the bar needs to be lower
in terms of what their assets can actually do. And that would
make them actually look like they're doing their job better,
and in allocating resources correctly?
Ms. Grover. In terms of the asset allocation process,
that's right. They're using assumptions about asset
capabilities that aren't realistic with what the assets can
actually do.
Mr. Hunter. So, Admiral, why, why would you set the bar
unrealistically high, then say, every year, we can't meet the
bar?
Admiral Michel. This is, it's a complicated issue.
Mr. Hunter. And we talked about this, by the way. When I
first got this job at some point 3 or 4 years ago, I said, you
guys aren't, by your own admission, reaching your full
capacity. And it was--but you are, really. You are reaching
your full capacity, it's just that the bar is set too high in
whatever formula you used to say what your capacity should be.
Admiral Michel. Yeah. I mean, this, it's a complicated
issue, Chairman. It has to do with accounting. So when we, when
we do our budget models and we figure out how many spare parts
and our dry dock schedule and things like that, they're based
on baseline uses for that particular asset. And some assets,
like our rotary wing fleet we operate within just a few
percentages of what we allocate. And there are reasons for
that.
The vast majority of the operating hours that we have are
down at our small boat stations. And there are very good
reasons why our small boat stations don't operate at 100
percent capacity. Part of it is our small boat stations need
surge capacity for things like hurricanes. So they're not
supposed to exceed their--when they start exceeding their
hours, then they're burning the candle at both ends, and
they're taxing the logistic systems, they're taxing our
platforms. They're ending the service lives of those platforms,
because they're operating above platform maximums. But they've
got to plan all the way to the end of the fiscal year. I know
you mentioned about surging 150 assets down to Hurricane
Katrina. If you don't have that capacity in the system to
surge, then you're going to exceed your----
Mr. Hunter. But Ms. Grover is saying that you are operating
at just about full capacity. It's simply not reflected in where
you have the bar. Meaning that gap doesn't really exist.
Admiral Michel. Well, if I lowered the bar artificially,
I'd still have to take into account the maintenance schedules
and budgeting and crew training and crew manning that come with
that particular asset hour. And then what the guys at the small
boat station will do, they'll take another cut even below that,
so they make sure they have enough surge capacity to come along
at the end of the fiscal year. And regrettably, the end of the
fiscal year is July, August and September, which is the height
of hurricane season. And you've got to have some surge
capacity. You can't budget every single hour up to the maximum
allotted, or you're not going to have any surge capacity left.
Or you're going to exceed the operating hours on the platforms.
And that has its own baggage, when you go beyond the operating
hours.
I'll give you another example. For Great Lakes icebreaking,
you can't predict what type of an ice year you're going to get
up on the Great Lakes. A couple of years ago, we had so much
ice up there, we had to rely on the Canadians and others to
help us out, or we would have been in a real world of hurt. But
last year we had hardly any ice at all. So how do you assign
the operating hours for those platforms with any degree of
certainty? And that's just one example. That goes across the
entire enterprise.
So it's an accounting measure in some perspective. And I
could lower the bar. The problem is, it's going to end up
lowering the bar again. So I would prefer to stay with the
maximum operating hours. That allows us to budget so that we
can determine the service lives for these platforms and allow
our operational commanders to manage that surge gap. But I do
agree with, and we did provide, back to GAO's recommendation,
that we would include better field input in trying to come up
with realistic measures on this. And we agreed to do that. And
I think we can close the gap to a certain degree. But I don't
want to give you the illusion we're going to budget down to the
last hour here.
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Admiral Michel. It's just not possible. And not actually
even desirable, Chairman, to do that.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So let's talk icebreaking then, since you
brought it up, Admiral. The Senate just appropriated or is
going to appropriate $1 billion for an icebreaker. Do we all
know that now? It hasn't been passed yet, but they're going to
do it. That's a pretty big leap. That's, that's great that they
are going to do it. So here, here's my question. We're going to
give you--you're now going to have the authority to buy lead
materials. You're going to have the authority to do block buys,
multiyear procurement. You'll have the ability to buy two or
three icebreakers if you wanted to at one time.
So let's say that they do $1 billion--was sitting here and
testified that if you build two, you can save $100 million.
We're going to need more than one. Would the, would you say,
would you agree with that, we're going to need more than one
icebreaker in the next 25 years? And this is all considering
the fact that it's going to take 10 years to get this done
probably.
Admiral Michel. Well, first of all, when we talk about
icebreaking, I talked about domestic icebreaking, which is in
the Great Lakes, rivers and things like that.
Mr. Hunter. But I mean----
Admiral Michel. That's its own, that's its own world.
Mr. Hunter. Arctic icebreaking.
Admiral Michel. So we're talking about polar icebreaking.
Mr. Hunter. Yes.
Admiral Michel. And we're talking specifically about heavy
polar icebreaking.
Mr. Hunter. Medium to heavy, right.
Admiral Michel. Well, we need to talk about that, sir,
because there's different capabilities and different things
that come along with medium and heavies. The Senate marked us
for a heavy icebreaker. The President's budget request isfor--
--
Mr. Hunter. One.
Admiral Michel. A heavy icebreaker, yes, sir. And the
President, in his statement at the Glacier Conference, said,
``We will begin construction activities on a heavy polar
icebreaker, begin construction activities in 2020 and plan for
additional icebreakers.'' Our Commandant--heavy icebreakers.
Our Commandant has also testified that we need self-rescue
capability for our heavy icebreaker. And that includes the
existing Polar Star that we have out there now. So that means
at least two. The high latitude study says three heavy polar
icebreakers is what the Coast Guard's requirement is. So that's
kind of what we're talking about for heavy icebreakers.
Mr. Hunter. OK, so, right. So my question was, though, is
the Coast Guard going to need more than one heavy icebreaker
going forward in the next 25 years?
Admiral Michel. Yes.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Then why don't we work with the Senate
right now to work on saving $100 million and trying to build
two. Or at least getting the lead materials and the designs for
two instead of one. I would guess once you design one, you're
going to find flaws in that. Kind of like the NSC and some
other, other ships that we have built. You're going to find
flaws in the first one. It's going to cost money to fix those
flaws in the first one. But that will set you up for success on
your second one and follow on ships, right?
Admiral Michel. Yes, sir. And I have staff looking at
potential block buys of vessels of that, that are actively
looking at that. Right now the President's budget request is
$150 million for the construction of a heavy polar icebreaker
and I support that request. We need that request, and we need
that on the schedule that it is. I understand the Senate also
included in the Navy shipbuilding budget $1 billion for a heavy
polar icebreaker. Obviously that's beyond the President's
budget request. But I think it is a signal of at least on the
Senate's side, of interest in constructing a heavy polar
icebreaker. And that, my understanding of that language, that
is a single vessel.
Mr. Hunter. OK. What would be the delivery time, if
everything was on schedule? What would be the delivery time for
the, a heavy icebreaker?
Admiral Michel. So if the Congress were to approve the
President's budget request for $150 million--I think it's $147
million, but I'll just use the $150 million request--that is
designed, sir, that figure is designed to meet the President's
statement that he made at the Glacier Conference. So that would
begin construction activities in 2020. And the estimated
completion time to get that vessel online would be 2024 to 2025
is the best estimate that I have, having talked with my
shipbuilding experts, and also having sort of traveled around
the world to a certain degree, talking with icebreaker experts
as well as domestic shipyard people. 2024 to 2025 is my best
estimate for getting that ship online.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So let's just for argument's sake, for this
hearing, so let's say it's say 2026. So let's say it's 10 years
out from now. What is your plan to address the capability gap
in the next 10 years?
Admiral Michel. Well, and once again, we're talking about
heavy polar icebreaking. This goes to a discussion Ranking
Member Garamendi and I just recently had right here before the
hearing. Right now we have the Polar Star operating. It's got
about another 5 to 7 years left of projected life, unless we
want to take another recapitalization, like a rolling
recapitalization of that vessel. And we have not made a
decision to do that. We just had Polar Sea, which is inoperable
currently, out of the water, at Vigor Shipyard. And an
assessment is due to the committee on July the 24th, as
promised by the Commandant, a material assessment of that
particular vessel. And we are on schedule to deliver that to
you.
But all those decisions on a rolling recapitalization for
Polar Star, or what we want to do with Polar Sea, need to be
judged in context. And I have underway an alternatives analysis
that will take a look at how we want to bridge out to that new
icebreaker. And that's what I'd like to do is bridge out to
that new construction icebreaker that I request the Congress'
support and assistance in the President's budget request.
Mr. Hunter. So how do you plan to fill the capability gap
over the next 10 years? So let's say that oil goes up to 120
bucks a barrel tomorrow and then you get Shell and everybody
else goes to the Arctic, they start trying to find oil there.
It becomes very busy. What do you do? How do you fill the
capability gap over the next 10 years?
Admirable Michel. Well, that's a broader question said,
sir. And when you're talking about working in the type of work
that Shell does, you're not necessarily talking about heavy
icebreaking capability. Heavy icebreaking capability is a sort
of sui generis. It's a world of its own. It provides you with 7
by 24 by 365 access to ice covered regions. That's what heavy
icebreaking capability does for you. Lesser types of vessels
may be used, useful in seasonal areas or in less demanding ice
environments than currently exist in Antarctica or certain
types of conditions that they get up in the Arctic, with
ridging. And during certain parts of the year.
We also have the vessel Healy, which is a medium
icebreaker, that is available. We're going to have to take a
look on, and we already have a group underway on serving and
design work for a midlife program, or a service life extension
program for the Healy. That vessel is usable for that type of
work that Shell does, but it's not usable in the heavy
icebreaking environments.
So for example, we took the Healy down in the early 2000s
with Polar Sea and Polar Star. I can't remember which one it
was actually with. We took it down to Antarctica to see whether
it could operate down there, during the summer in Antarctica,
and it got stuck in the ice. And we had, we were lucky we had
Polar Sea or Polar Star in there and break that thing out. So
there are ice environments that are not----
Mr. Hunter. Conducive?
Admiral Michel. You can't use medium icebreaking capability
there. It ends up getting stuck. Like the Xue Long, if you
remember the Chinese medium icebreaker got stuck, and the
Akademik Shokalskiy got stuck. We cannot afford to get ships
stuck. Right now where we are is we have the Polar Star
operating, the Nation's only heavy icebreaking capability, and
there is no back up for it.
Mr. Hunter. I'll pass this on to Mr. Garamendi. How do you
plan on filling the capability gap until you get a heavy
icebreaker, which is 10 years at the least, based on the best
projections of Congress and everybody working together? You
still haven't answered that one.
Admiral Michel. Well, right--the alternatives analysis will
provide the answer to that, and it's probably going to be
either a rolling recapitalization of the Polar Star or to try
to bring, let Polar Star taper off and then try to bring Polar
Sea back on and bridge out to the new icebreaker. I do not know
which one at this point, which path we would want to take. I'm
not aware of any other--we've looked out there for vessels to
lease for heavy icebreaking capability. There's nothing out
there on planet Earth that you can lease in the heavy
icebreaking area. So that's kind of where we are, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Was it the Fins that just came into my office?
I can't remember whether we had the Norwegians or the Fins. I
mean--have you--you've all looked at that, right?
Admiral Michel. Yes. As a matter of fact, I traveled to
Sweden and Finland.
Mr. Hunter. Yeah.
Admiral Michel. And talked to them. And they do not have
heavy icebreaking capability that will meet the needs as in the
Fed Biz Ops. As a matter of fact, what I'm talking, Fed Biz
Ops, there's a technical package that Coast Guard put out for
our heavy icebreaker. It kind of lays out our basic
requirements, including the long pole in the tent, which is the
icebreaking requirement. Which is 6-foot minimum at 3 knots,
desirable 8-foot minimum at 3 knots, and then 21 feet backing
and ramming.
When I talked to the shipbuilders over there, they said
there is not a vessel like that that currently exists that will
meet those requirements in the Fed Biz Ops technical package.
So you'd have to build a vessel like that. And that's the type
of vessel that we're looking for.
Mr. Hunter. So the Fins, they have to break themselves out
of their own sea every year. But that's, that's not the same
type of ice that's in the Arctic?
Admiral Michel. Well, it's not as thick. It, medium
icebreaking capability works in places like the Gulf of
Bothnia, because the ice is only--I forget the, down there. But
when you go down to Antarctica, for example, like first year
sea ice is 6 to 8 feet thick. Multiple year sea ice is many
times that. That's why the Healy got stuck down there.
Mr. Hunter. So it's good to--so the options that you're
telling us, you either take the Polar Star as it either tapers
off, you recapitalize the Polar Sea and make it work again. Or
you recapitalize the Polar Star and keep it going so it doesn't
taper off as it's end of life. And those are your, those are
your two options?
Admiral Michel. Those are--those are----
Mr. Hunter. And you're also saying, and you're also saying
that zero capability is better than medium or heavy capability?
Because you have medium-heavy icebreakers out there that are
available for lease, but you want heavy only. And you're saying
that you'd rather have zero capability than 80 percent
capability?
Admiral Michel. Sir, I think you're--I don't think that's a
fair characterization. And that's why it's very important to
hear on----
Mr. Hunter. You actually spent 2 or 3 minutes saying how
you don't want medium icebreakers at all.
Admiral Michel. I didn't.
Mr. Hunter. How they do no--don't do very well.
Admiral Michel. Sir, you----
Mr. Hunter. They get stuck. You gave a Chinese example. But
so the question is then, to, to fill the capability gap over
the next 10 years or 20 years or however long it is, your only
answer is the Polar Star or the Polar Sea. Leasing a vessel
doesn't, there is no vessel that exists in the world that could
be leased by the Coast Guard to fulfill 75 percent of what you
needed to right now. Is that what you're saying? And you would
rather not have those?
Admiral Michel. Sir, what I said was, my options for heavy
icebreaking capability, which is the only ensured global access
to ice-covered regions, regardless of seasonality and
otherwise--the only things on the table that I'm dealing with
right now are Polar Star, Polar Sea, and a new icebreaker that
we need to begin construction activities on. If you want to
have a broader discussion about other icebreaking functions,
then we can talk about that, sir. But that's a different area,
because that is not global ensured, 7 by 24 by 365 access to
ice-covered regions.
Mr. Hunter. It's not a 100-percent solution.
Admiral Michel. As one of our--it's not a 100-percent
solution. And in certain scenarios like down in Antarctica,
it's not only not a solution, it can potentially get you into
real hot water. That's a broader discussion, because that's a
different mission set. That's why I used those words, heavy
polar icebreaking. Because it is a world on its own. And we
need to talk about that, because that is a national capability.
That is a national sovereignty capability. A national defense
function, to provide global ensured access to ice-covered
regions 7 by 24 by 365. And that only gets done by heavy
icebreaking capability.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So here's my last question. Could you
explain to everybody why it's important to break ice? And then
tell me this. If we're looking for 7/24/365, what are we
operating at now?
Admiral Michel. So icebreaking in and of itself, there are
times that you really do need to break ice, for flood control
reasons or to escort vessels in and out.
Mr. Hunter. And tell us this. So let's narrow this down.
Why is it a national security strategic priority to break ice?
On the national security side. I don't care about, you know,
some ship getting stuck who's doing science stuff. Why is it a
national security priority?
Admiral Michel. Sir, if you cannot provide presence to an
area, you cannot assert national sovereignty.
Mr. Hunter. Then what are we doing right now?
Admiral Michel. The Nation's only operating heavy
icebreaking capability is the Polar Star. And that ship is
current----
Mr. Hunter. That operates 24----
Admiral Michel. That ship is currently operational. It
requires a significant amount of maintenance just to keep the
thing running. It has no self-rescue capability, unless we
happen to call in some other country that happens to have a
heavy----
Mr. Hunter. That's what I'm trying to get to. So what is
our capability now, then? Right, right now?
Admiral Michel. The Polar Star, sir.
Mr. Hunter. OK. And is it 7/24/365?
Admiral Michel. It has the capability, but it has such a
maintenance schedule that it gets pulled out of the water
regularly. And you're going to have to button the ship back up
in order to get anywhere. That's the problem with having only
one, sir.
Mr. Hunter. So we don't have--so what you're saying is
right now--how would you measure the capability gap that we
have right now, that exists right now today?
Admiral Michel. Well, we have one, one heavy polar
icebreaker.
Mr. Hunter. That operates how many days----
Admiral Michel. That ship does----
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. Out of the year?
Admiral Michel. Well, that, that ship has the capability of
accessing anywhere in the ice-covered regions, 7 by 24 by 365.
It has that capability. Except for very shallow areas, where
you may have----
Mr. Hunter. Yeah, I understand the capability of it. How
often does it do that, or how often can it?
Admiral Michel. Well, this is what the maintenance
schedule--last year, that ship, that ship's crew spent 305 days
away from their families, either down in Antarctica or at the
shipyards, which was away from their homeport, getting that
ship prepared. So you can operate.
Mr. Hunter. So beyond getting it fixed, what is our
capability right now in heavy ice? What is the capability right
not today? If that--is it operational right now?
Admiral Michel. The Polar Star is an operational vessel.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. OK. And what, so what is our capability like
this year, for instance?
Admiral Michel. Well, we typically have that ship programed
to operate 185 days away from home port. But it's got such a
significant maintenance load, it basically goes from the
shipyard, and then it does its work down in Antarctica, then it
goes back to the shipyard. And it gets refurbished, and we send
it back down to Antarctica again.
Mr. Hunter. So here's, so this is it. I've taken way too
long. If it's so important that the President has asked for
this, that OMB has put it in, we don't have the capability
right now. So how can it be that big of a priority? If you
don't have the ability to do what we need to do now to match
what the President is requesting, is it really that big of a
priority? Do we really need an ice, two icebreakers, two heavy
icebreakers?
Admiral Michel. Absolutely, sir. And we've had that.
Mr. Hunter. If it's so important, why don't we have them
now?
Admiral Michel. That's a very sad and long tale, sir, as to
why it has taken so long to recapitalize this category of
vessels. I don't know how much time you want to take on that.
But this, I used to be a Commander, and I used to work----
Mr. Hunter. Zero. I'm going to--I'm hearing her talking in
my ear. I'm going to yield to the ranking member here.
Admiral Michel. I worked on this issue 15 years ago myself,
sir.
Mr. Hunter. We're going to beat this horse more.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm not sure we
broke through the ice yet. But we know that we do have a
hearing coming up on the 12th, and I think Admiral Michel has a
pretty good idea of the kind of questions that's going to be
coming at him on the 12th of June--July. And it'll be a very,
very important meeting. I did note in your testimony you said
that you really need three heavy icebreakers to do the job that
the chairman was trying to get to. That's the Arctic and the
Antarctic, in the most extreme environment. So the question for
the 12th will be how do we get those three icebreakers, over
what period of time. What is the schedule for them. And also
the role of the Polar Star and the Polar Sea in the interim. So
we'll go at that in detail. In between now and the 12th, I'm
sure that we'll have some additional questions to ask.
A 10th National Security cutter is in the works, at least
the legislative works. That is two beyond the original call of
eight. When those, when the ninth is added, which is not so far
off, and then perhaps a 10th, that changes your force
structure, your person power and your budgeting. Should we go
there at all? Should we simply say that nine is quite enough?
The 10th is a ship too far, too much? And that we should spend
the time and the energy and money on the Offshore Patrol
Cutter? Admiral Michel?
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, NSC 9, and if there is an NSC
10, none of those are in the President's budget request. Those
are beyond the program of record. I've testified on that
before. Obviously, you know, if the Congress provides us with
National Security Cutters, we'll do our best to put them to
good use. They're a great ship. They're delivering incredible
results out there. But those are beyond the program of record.
And right now my number one recapitalization priority,
despite my urgency on the heavy icebreakers, which is you know
another one of the burning fires I have to deal with, is the
Offshore Patrol Cutter. And that is our number one
recapitalization priority. And we need assistance from the
Congress on the $100 million in long lead time materials in FY
17 for the Offshore Patrol Cutter. That's where my focus is
right now. Again, if, Congress gives us the National Security
Cutters, we will try to make them work. They're beyond our
program of record. They're much more expensive to operate than
the Offshore Patrol Cutter is going to be.
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral, we're going to have to be much more
specific. I know you will do what Congress tells you to do, if
you have the money to do it. But we're going to have to make
some decisions here. Do we do a 10th NSC or do we not? If we do
then obviously there's the capital cost of the ship and then
there's the ongoing operational costs, that have to come out of
some other program. The other programs may be the OPC, maybe
we're going to delay the acquisition of the second or third
heavy icebreaker, or maybe we're not going to be able to use
UAVs or whatever.
So we need your help, very specifically. And the Mission
Statement that came out in January of this year will help
advise us on this. But somebody wants a 10th National Security
Cutter. Do we do it or not? That's going to be a decision we're
going to have to make in the next couple of months. If we make
that decision, then something else isn't going to happen. What
isn't going to happen? Perhaps it is the icebreaker. I want to
really hone in on that. It's something we must deal with here,
without our two houses.
The other questions really go to, we'll come back to the
icebreaker on the 12th, I'm sure. UAVs we talked about forever,
but not yet in place. What do we need to--is it important? Is
it a critical mission asset that the Coast Guard needs? If so,
how do we get it? What's the cost? Where does it fit into the
mission statement, UAVs?
Admiral Michel. So another broad category of things. So on
the small UAV front, I think you know, we've already deployed
ScanEagle. A number of platforms are going to have ScanEagle,
or the small UAS deployed on the NSC permanently here for the
first time. So in that small category, I think we're OK. We're
also in a partnership with CBP on their Predator--it's
essentially Predator B. They call it Guardian. As a matter of
fact, it's flying down in the transit zone today or it's at
least deployed down in the transit zone today. So we work with
them on, on that mission set. The broader piece on the UASs,
actually one of the pieces here from the 2005 mems, that Jenny
identified that we're going to have to take a round turn on
what our view is on these large UASs, land-based UAS or ship-
based.
We also have worked closely with the Navy on the Fire
Scout, which isn't really the right sort of platform for us,
but I don't know what the right answer to that is. I think the,
both the land-based and the ship-based UASs or UAVs, the larger
systems, are something I'm intensely interested in. When I was
JIATF South Director, we would use platforms like this to
provide wide-area surveillance capability. And that makes your
assets a lot more effective. And the Coast Guard could
definitely benefit from that.
So we have an eye on working on all those programs. We've
got some unique connections with DOD and also with DHS and CBP.
So I think we've got the connections. We're going to have to
make some decisions right now. Our priority, our organizational
recapitalization priorities are as laid out in the FY 17 and as
in the FY 17 to 2021 SIP, that I know you have a copy of. Those
are our organizational priorities. And right now those larger
UASs are not built in there.
I can tell you as the Vice Commandant as the Coast Guard,
same thing when I was a Deputy Commandant for Operations. I'm
intensely interested in that area, because the technology gets
better and better. At all times, get better and better. The
sensors get better and better and smaller and smaller. And the
back end processing pieces get better and better, and those can
make our assets so much more effective. When I was JIATF's
South Director, those were great things and I loved having them
down there. And I'd like to see the Coast Guard get into that
game. But you know, we got, there's only so much money out
there, and our organizational priorities are currently as set
forth in the President's budget and SIP that we provided to
you.
Mr. Garamendi. I appreciate your intense interest in this.
Our task is to make choices. And we have one choice that's
coming down on us right now. A 10th National Security Cutter.
Which is over half a billion dollars, not including the
operational cost. And so the question for the Coast Guard, and
we need an answer here. Do we do that, or do we spend that
money on UAVs, UASs, and the like? That's the question. What is
your answer?
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, I mean, that's a very easy
question from the Coast Guard. Our organizational
recapitalization priorities are as set forth in the President's
FY 17 budget request, and then the SIP that we provided to you.
If they're not included in there, it doesn't mean they're not
things of value. But our organizational priorities are as we
provided them to you. And that's our best judgement as
operators and as stewards of the enterprise.
Mr. Garamendi. Does that include a National Security
Cutter? Does that include a 10th National Security Cutter?
Admiral Michel. No, sir. That is not, that is not currently
in the SIP or in the present budget request.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Ranking Member. Mr. Gibbs?
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Admiral, for
your service, and the nearly 90,000 men and women that help
protect our country. Back in March, I submitted questions for
the record to the Coast Guard regarding the icebreakers on the
Grand Lakes. And the first question inquired about the Coast
Guard's memorandum. My understanding was the Canadian Coast
Guard to provide icebreaking vessels. And the second inquiry
was about the Coast Guard setting performance targets for
keeping the high-priority waterways open on the Great Lakes and
the eastern seaboard. During the ice season, 95 percent of the
time, that's, I heard, the Coast Guard's goal. However, you
only collected the data of whether you met the target in fiscal
year 2014, at which the time the Coast Guard fell short of its
goal by 10 percent. And I realize that was the bad ice year, I
believe. Have not received an answer on FY 15 or 2016, which I
think there wasn't much ice last year. So that probably was not
too much of an issue.
But back on the memorandum of understanding, it's my
knowledge that Canada has gone from seven to two vessels for
icebreaking on the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence Seaway. So
I'm concerned about, you know, what's in that memorandum of
understanding. Because the peak demand for the upper Great
Lakes opening up for the season would be probably close to the
same time as opening up the seaway. And you know, what's our
situation with that memorandum of understanding of what we're
going to do to ensure that the Canadian icebreaker would be at
the Soo locks for example, when, probably at the same time they
need to be. You know, that, and the eastern part of the Great
Lakes and the seaway.
And so I don't know. Usually the Coast Guard's been pretty
good at getting back to answering these questions. But I
submitted these questions for the record back in March, and we
haven't heard back. And so hopefully you can provide them now
or provide them in the future in a timely manner.
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, I apologize in advance that you
have not received that information. All that information should
be available to you on both our agreements with Canada as well
as our performance metrics on the, on the ice, which you
rightfully noted. I mean, that's an example of one of those
problems that's just very difficult to predict. I mean, some
years you may end up with a large amount of ice. Like I said,
in 2014, and we needed the Canadians' help to do all that
stuff. Whereas last year we hardly had any ice at all. So it's
difficult to predict. So you've got my commitment to provide
you with all of that information. We have that information on
the performance data and we'll definitely get you the
information on our workings with Canada, which like I said, are
essential. And we think we add a lot of value to the Canadians
too, so we help them out. It's a quid pro quo, and really a
good arrangement that we have with our neighbors to the north.
Mr. Gibbs. We really only have, well, on the Great Lakes,
the Mackinaw, is that unavailable right now, or this past
season? What's its status with that?
Admiral Michel. No, sir. Mackinaw is up and running. I
think it's actually in the dockside maintenance period. As a
matter of fact, I had the commanding officer of the Mackinaw
was in my office yesterday. He wasn't there to talk about
Mackinaw, he was there to get some career counseling from the
Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard. But I talked to him about
his vessel, and he's really happy with it.
That's a really interesting vessel. And I'd bring that one
to your attention. If you haven't seen that, this is a modern
icebreaking vessel. It's got steerable azipods. It's not a
blunt instrument like the old icebreakers that we used to have.
And we also have the 225-foot WLBs, which do icebreaking,
icebreaking up there. And the 140-foot harbor tugs, essentially
icebreaking tugs, which work in that area. And the good thing
about having a down ice season like this, we were able to get a
number of those vessels down to the Coast Guard yard, and they
got refurbished. So we're actually in pretty good shape with
our----
Mr. Gibbs. Let's, let's say we, let's say next year we
have, next winter season we have a big ice season like we did
in 2014. I don't know how many ships, how many icebreakers
Canada had. But is that correct that they filed them down, from
seven down to two?
Admiral Michel. Sir, I'm going to have to get back to you
on the status of their fleet. They're in a recapitulation
effort as well, but I'll get you that information.
Mr. Gibbs. Because I'd be, you know, concerned if they had,
say they had five of those, five ships in operation in 2014 and
now they're down to two. And you know, I guess I'm concerned,
since we had the memorandum of understanding to try to work
together. Obviously Canada is a great ally. But we want to make
sure that, if that's going to be an issue. Because the Great
Lakes, those will be opened up in a timely fashion. That's,
it's interesting. We did, Mr. Chairman, we did the award in
2014, we put the Great Lakes as a unit for the Army Corps of
Engineers.
And what was interesting, we learned that when you add, put
all the Great Lakes pushed together, it's 25 percent of the
economic activity of all the ports. And my good friend from
California, the both of them from California, I know how big
the ports are out there on the coast. But 25 percent, when you
add--and it's interesting what's going on in the Great Lakes
that's unique, compared to the ports on the west, east and gulf
coasts.
There's a lot of the stuff moving in between the ports. So
if one port can't, if you can't, the Soo locks aren't opened
up, what that does to the Lake Erie and Ontario regions is, you
know, a severe impact. Because so much stuff, we're
interdependent within the Great Lakes. It's obviously moving
stuff through, through the seaway. But we have a huge
interdependency. So it's important not only to get the seaway
open, which I think Canada is probably, you know, maybe they're
more principal in that. But also to make sure we have the Soo
locks and the access up to Lake Superior. So thank you. I yield
back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Ms. Hahn?
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Garamendi, for having this hearing. Admiral Michel, I am glad
my colleague, Representative Gibbs, brought up the ports. I
represent the Port of Los Angeles, and Long Beach is right next
door. We're America's ports. Over 40 percent of all the trade
that comes through this country comes through our ports. And
since 9/11, I have been particularly concerned about the threat
of our national security as it relates to our ports.
While we have no ice in Los Angeles or Long Beach, I think
the greater threat really revolves our ports. If there was ever
something to happen at our port, it would not only cripple the
regional economy, the national economy, it would cripple the
global economy. Since FY 01, the Coast Guard's largest
percentage of funding for missions has been dedicated to ports,
waterways, and coastal security. However, I've been troubled to
see in recent years the percent share of funding for these
vital missions has just decreased. And I would like for you to
share with me--and I know it's going to be about resources and
it's going to be about priorities, but I would like to hear
from you, Admiral, why the share of funding to our ports has
decreased in recent years.
Admiral Michel. Well, I think you're talking about Coast
Guard resource hours from September 11th. So if I can just kind
of take you back to September 11th. Right after September 11th,
the Coast Guard was at an all hands on deck evolution, and we
threw whatever we could at ports, waterways and coastal
security, because that was deemed to be the threat at the time.
And there were a lot of Coast Guard boats that were operating
out. There were a lot of hours, these operating hours that were
being burned up by boats doing things.
Today we're in a much actually better position. Because of
intelligence driven operations, because of programs like
Protect, which is a randomization algorithm that we use that
makes out assets actually more effective in deterrence, we're
able to, with less boat hours, actually provide more
protection. Just like in the port of L.A.L.B. Think about the
additional cameras and sensor networks, and the information
sharing, and the command centers that have been put in place to
actually inform operations out there. Rather than just throwing
boats out there just to have kind of a cop on the beat. We're
so much better than we were back in September 11th, and we can
do things, Congresswoman Hahn, with less brute force, and
achieve higher degrees of performance.
Which, you know, we were talking about operating hours. I
mean, operating hours are very interesting, and they're
important for spare parts and dry dock and stuff like that. But
you want to get at the organizational performance. And an op
hour, back in September 11th, was way less valuable than a boat
op hour today, which is all informed by intelligence driving
operations. Much more capable small boats that we have. Much
better communications here. Better working relationship with
the local authorities. I mean, it's just all there. We're much,
we're much better than we were back then.
Ms. Hahn. So you, you're, you will say that the threat
still exists? I mean, after 9/11, I know our ports were
sometimes in the top 10 of potential targets. So the threat
still exists. Is that what you're saying? But you think you're
doing it smarter.
Admiral Michel. We're doing it smarter and we understand
the threats much better. So back----
Ms. Hahn. And share with me how you do lever, since the
resources seem in my opinion to be less, you may be working
smarter and with algorithms, but that doesn't make me feel any
better. Share with me how you're leveraging your limited
resources with the Port Police, the L.A. County Sheriff's
Department, FBI, some of the counterterrorism groups that are
situated right there in the harbor.
Admiral Michel. Sure. Well, there's a whole piece there.
And we have an Area Maritime Security Committee.
Ms. Hahn. Right.
Admiral Michel. So that, prior to--or after September 11th,
and at least in its fullest form. And it brings together all
those port partners, you know. They're all brought together.
And they deal even with this as sophisticated as cyber, it is
on the AMSC agenda. And the Coast Guard chairs that. The Coast
Guard is by statute, the Captain of the Port is the designated
Federal maritime security coordinator. And he or she has that
role. And they can bring all those people together and they can
pool all those different assets and they can set together
interoperable communications. They can set together combined
operations. They do exercises. They build on all that stuff. So
again, it's a much more sophisticated enterprise. And I don't
want to leave you that you know, the Port of L.A.L.B. is just
protecting L.A.L.B. You also have to understand that we've got
mechanisms overseas that work on the cargoes----
Ms. Hahn. Right.
Admiral Michel [continuing]. And the foreign nationals and
foreign ships before they even show up in the Port of L.A.L.B.
Ms. Hahn. Correct. And I understand that. And I know the
layered approach to security. But let me just, if I may just
take a couple, a little bit longer. You know the new----
Mr. Hunter. Please take as long as you like.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. I'm--that was so good. Because if
you'd have said anything different, I would have been really--
I, you know, the CMA CGM Benjamin Franklin, the megaship,
called both at Long Beach and Los Angeles, megaships can hold
up to 22,000 containers. You know that's a lot of containers
coming into our ports at one time. Much greater than you know,
we're used to. Explain to me how you know, the Coast Guard is
ready for that, is prepared for that, you know. Hopefully it's
more than just algorithms that you're using to consider that
certain cargo could be at risk.
Admiral Michel. Well, I mean, it's a challenging question.
It deals with not only the volume on a particular vessel, but I
mean, you've just got more containers moving all the time. And
that becomes a harder and harder risk. The Coast Guard works
with CBP primarily, but also international partners. And we try
to vet as many of those shippers. I mean, the good part about
22,000 containers on a ship is you only deal with one ship. So
you know, you look at that crew, you look at that ship. Instead
of multiple ships where you got to look at multiple crews. But
you got more containers. And all those containers, the, ideally
you don't want those ships to even show up in the United States
before they've undergone at least some screening.
So you deal with things like the Container Security
Initiative or the Customs Transnational Partnership Against
Terrorism. CTPAT. Whatever trusted shipper programs, which help
a lot. So a lot of that box traffic that comes into L.A.L.B.
comes from people like Walmart and things like that. And they
have a vested interest in making sure that they provide global
security chains. And that can help things move through the
system quicker. So there are screening programs that start all
the way overseas, with 24-hour lighting rules from the Customs
service, and electronic manifesting that allows you to look at
all these different electronic manifests, and try to screen
those containers before they even show up.
But it's a challenge, Congresswoman, that increasing global
trade and things like Panama Canal expansion are going to
increase all these challenges. Because we love global trade and
it brings all these great things from the outside, but for an
agency like the Coast Guard it taxes our system. Because it's
just more volume that you have to be able to dig through. But
we try to look at all that stuff.
Ms. Hahn. And I appreciate it.
Admiral Michel. That's----
Ms. Hahn. I appreciate it. And I have had a long
relationship with the men and women of the Coast Guard. And the
Long Beach L.A. sector is just such a great place, with the
wonderful men and women who--our commanding officer out there,
Captain of the Port, Captain Williams, has been amazing in
working with us. But I will tell you, I'm going to end by
saying, I still think our port's a vulnerable entryway into
this country. And I don't want for any second to feel like
we've let our guard down. Because I think that's what they're
waiting for. And they know. One incident of, you know, a mass
explosion at that port complex could create havoc in this
country and globally. So you know, pay more attention to the
ports and less attention to ice.
Admiral Michel. You've got my full attention,
Congresswoman.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentlelady. OK. Let's go on a
little bit more on the icebreaker. Because I get to ask that if
I want to, because I'm the chairman. So here's my question. We
were looking back over time, after World War II, in the 1940s,
we started making icebreakers. We didn't build a heavy
icebreaker until 77 or so. That was the Polar, s word?
Admiral Michel. Sea and Star.
Mr. Hunter. Sea or Star, yeah. So, so we went through the
majority of the Cold War, we went through 30, 40 years without
a heavy icebreaker, but multiple medium icebreakers. So my
question is what were they doing with those non-heavies during
the Cold War when we had to be in the Arctic? And I'm guessing
there's a couple of reasons that we wanted to be in the Arctic.
Russia was the main one. How did we do that without a heavy?
How did we go for 40 years of the Cold War with no heavy
icebreakers?
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, it's an interesting question,
when you go all the way back in there. And it depends on how
you classify things. Certainly, Polar Sea and Polar Star, by
today's, are heavy icebreakers. As a matter of fact, they're
the most powerful non-nuclear icebreakers that exist. They're
75,000 shaft horsepower. They can operate independently. You'd
like to have self-rescue capability. You can operate
independently. What has happened is, when we--a number of these
Arctic--we'll only go back to World War II. So a number of
these icebreakers were built in World War II. The Glacier is an
example of that. The Island class, Burton Island and the
different ones. Part of how they got around it was these were
medium icebreakers. It depends on, Glacier, it depends on how
you classify it. But these were medium icebreakers. Because you
have a bunch of them.
When the Commandant of the Coast Guard came in, we had
seven polar icebreakers. When the Commandant came in. When I
came in, we had five. We had Polar Sea, Polar Star, Glacier,
and two Wind class icebreakers. And when you can send mediums
down there, multiples of them, it buys down some of your risk
for getting in a bad situation.
Mr. Hunter. But let's, but let's keep this simple, because
I don't want to go on about icebreakers forever again. I'm just
curious. We didn't have a heavy until the mid, or the late
1970s. So what did we do in the Arctic, if you had a sub or
something that needed to get out of the ice. How would we have
done that without a heavy at all? Because we didn't have a
heavy at all.
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, it depends on how you classify
those vessels. Glacier----
Mr. Hunter. But Admiral, keep this simple for me. I'm not
trying to use special words to try to--I'm just asking you, you
didn't have a heavy. OK, so how do you classify--but you said
you have to have a heavy-heavy. Because I said medium-heavy,
and you said no, it's got to be a heavy-heavy. It's got to be
365/24/7, heavy icebreaker, which we don't have at all now. Or
we do. They can work half the year or when it has to or when
it's not getting work done. You don't have the capability now,
you didn't have the capability for 40 years, post-World War II.
So what, what is different now to where multiple mediums or
medium heavies can't take the place of a heavy for the next 10
years to fill that capability gap? I'm not understanding now.
Now, I'm totally perplexed because we didn't have it until
1977.
Admiral Michel. Clearly, we did not have a vessel as
capable as Polar Sea or Polar Star.
Mr. Hunter. Yeah, but you're going for the 100-percent
solution. I'm asking, how did you not have a 100-percent
solution but still get the job done for 40 years? That's all
I'm asking. How did the Navy do that, the Coast Guard?
Admiral Michel. Sir, I don't know. I'd have to, I'd have--
--
Mr. Hunter. Well, there's----
Admiral Michel. How they operated----
Mr. Hunter. The answer is because they didn't have a heavy,
and they still got the job done. They were able to make do with
an 80-percent solution, which you're telling me is impossible
and not what the Coast Guard wants. And you're willing to wait
till what, 2026, 2030, for multiple heavies to come online, in
our dreamline, when you and I are no longer here. And it's the
next Congress, 10, 20 years from now, and who knows what's
going on. What you're offering me is kind of a non-solution
solution. Saying we got to have 100 percent. We didn't have the
100-percent solution until, you know, fairly recently. So you
know, help me out here.
Admiral Michel. Sir, I'm just giving you my best advice.
And my best advice is to invest in the capability that provides
you with that ensured global access.
Mr. Hunter. But how do you fill that gap right now? Without
leasing multiple mediums, non-heavies, whatever you want to
call them. The non-superperfect one that you're talking about.
Admiral Michel. You've got the Polar Star, and you've got
the Polar Sea, are essentially what's in my tool kit now for
providing heavy icebreaking capability.
Mr. Hunter. The Polar Star is only kind of in your tool
kit, when it's, when it's working. Polar Sea.
Admiral Michel. No, Polar Sea is broken.
Mr. Hunter. Polar Sea is broken. Polar Star is kind of in
your tool kit?
Admiral Michel. Sir, it's a declared operational vessel for
the Coast Guard. It's got, it's got baggage because it's an old
vessel. But it is an operation vessel with the Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. OK. But you understand my reasoning here,
right? Does that, does it make sense to you?
Admiral Michel. It makes sense to me, sir, but I don't know
what the mission sets were in 1955 and 1960. I'm only dealing
with the present that I have now.
Mr. Hunter. I would guess it had to do with the Cold War
and being in the Arctic. That's my guess. Wouldn't you assume
that? Wouldn't you assume that it had to do with the Cold War
and the Soviet Union and breaking out subs or doing something
in the Arctic?
Admiral Michel. No, I would assume that. And my guess is
that there was probably more presence up there and maybe more--
--
Mr. Hunter. But then how were they able to do that without
a heavy icebreaker?
Admiral Michel. Sir, I don't know if this is going to be
productive, because I'm not sure what those mission sets were
back in those days. And there was a lot more, there was a lot
more just capability for self-rescue and other things that
don't exist, don't exist today. It was a different world back
then than it is today. All I can tell you is it's my best
advice as a sailor and a guy who's actually been in Antarctica
and been on Polar Star as it broke out that ice road, dealing
with these huge chunks of ice. I mean, these things are the
size of school buses. Trying to, trying to make, break its way
through there. And the fact that we tried Healy down in the
Antarctic. And Healy is a pretty capable vessel. It's 30,000
shaft horsepower, and it got stuck.
I don't want ships to get stuck. I want to buy capability
that's going to be enduring and lasting. We only get this
recapitalization opportunity once every--it's been a long, long
time. And I want to make sure that what we buy is good, because
you may not see another one of these icebreakers for 40, 50
years in the Coast Guard budget. The last time the Coast Guard
had money in its budget----
Mr. Hunter. That's what we're going at now. We're going to
see zero.
Admiral Michel [continuing]. For a heavy icebreaker was
Polar Sea and Polar Star. Even the Healy was in the Navy
shipbuilding budget. So we got to make sure that, all I can
tell you is it's my best advice, sir, that our best investment
at this point for heavy icebreaking capability is to figure out
what to do with Polar Sea and Polar Star to bridge out to the
new icebreaker that's in the President's budget request. And I
don't think that that's unreasonable. Do I wish this would have
been solved earlier? Absolutely I do. And but it's not. And you
know, I'm the Vice Commandant of the Coast Guard. I got to deal
with this problem now.
Mr. Hunter. Well, tell you what. We're going to back and
look and see how we were able to exist as a Nation that
operated in the Arctic without having a heavy icebreaker. And
then we'll come and inform the Coast Guard on how we do that,
OK?
So here's my second point here. I have a document. We asked
CBP, we asked CBP how many requests from the Coast Guard did
they receive for UAS, OK? Those requests come back here to the
CBPs. Their marine operations, joint program office, CBP
headquarters in DC, blah, blah, blah. Here's the CBP's answer:
``The CBP conducted a careful review, and despite a well-
established process, by which all Department of Homeland
Security components request UAS support, cannot locate any
prior requests from the U.S. Coast Guard.'' It was dated April
25th. So according to the CBP, the Coast Guard has never
requested UAS. And this is theirs. I just quoted them. OK. Can
you, can you just talk about that for a minute. What's--that's
kind of perplexing, right?
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, for our Coast Guard mission set,
it actually doesn't surprise me that we wouldn't make a request
to CBP. Most of those UAS hours that would be useful to us
would be done through JIATF South. And JIATF South is the one
who has lead responsibility. It's a DOD entity, as you know,
that has lead responsibility for detection and monitoring of
drug trafficking in the Western Hemisphere transit zone. They
provide us with the network. It doesn't surprise me, because
CBP is providing it to JIATF South. They're not providing it
directly to the Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. So we should rephrase our question: How many
requests has JIATF South requested from CBP for the Coast Guard
to use UAS?
Admiral Michel. Sir, we're not the only users of the JIATF
South network. Like I said, the CBP Guardian is my
understanding is down and working for JIATF right now, and
works for a whole range of different partners, including
international partners, who rely on those sensors that are
carried by that UAS. So when I say intelligence driven
operations, then the JIATF South AOR, the Coast Guard is a
participant in that, but we're not the only part of that
intelligence driving enterprise.
Mr. Hunter. But you are the main interdiction, especially
now that the Navy has left and gone west. You are the main
interdiction agency that operates there, correct?
Admiral Michel. For maritime interdiction, the Coast Guard
typically gets the lion's share of the interdictions. But the
entire intelligence network that backs that up doesn't,
actually most of it doesn't belong to the Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. But you're the operational agency that actually
interdicts. I mean, you have the platforms. You have the
cutters and the helicopters and the airplanes that interdict,
right? So you don't find it strange that not a single request
was logged by the CBP from the Coast Guard? Once again, that is
not strange to you in any way?
Admiral Michel. No, sir. No, sir, it is not. When CBP goes
down and works in that enterprise, they work for JIATF South,
which is a DOD entity. And they contribute their platforms.
Mr. Hunter. Does JIATF South have a----
Admiral Michel. The Coast Guard wouldn't make that request
directly.
Mr. Hunter. So the Coast Guard wouldn't request the asset
at all? It would JIATF South requesting it and telling the
Coast Guard where to go with it, or what to go look at or what?
Explain it to me.
Admiral Michel. JIATF South has tac-con of all the
resources that are provided JIATF South, including Coast Guard
cutters. And Coast Guard cutters have to actually chop back to
the Coast Guard in order to do the law enforcement mission that
they do down there. But the wider surveillance in the
intelligence network, that's not directly owned by the Coast
Guard. I don't know any other way to describe that.
Mr. Hunter. Do you think it would be a benefit to the Coast
Guard to own its own UAS? You obviously said you were intensely
interested.
Admiral Michel. I told you, sir, I'm intensely interested
in that, because I'd like to see the Coast Guard get an oar in
the water and have its own organic capability for its own uses,
as well as be able to contribute to these broader enterprises
like JIATF South. And I think the Coast Guard brings unique
experience within DHS and unique connections with the
Department of Defense and the intelligence community, to be
able to actually build out our own organic, systems capability.
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask you, if your requirements are being
met right now, by JIATF South and CBP, why would you need your
own organic capability?
Admiral Michel. Once again, sir, I can envision. That's not
the only thing that we would use these for. I can envision
these being used for remote areas of REEZ that are very
difficult to monitor. And we probably wouldn't want to you
know, request that, of CBP, to provide that capability. I don't
know. But there are a bunch of other mission sets that the
Coast Guard could use if we had capabilities like this. That's
why I'm very interested.
Mr. Hunter. But you wouldn't spend the money on a UAS
platform or system to go look at the far reaches of REEZ? I
mean, you would use them for your, your main priority missions,
I would guess, wouldn't you?
Admiral Michel. Sir, I think I and the rest of our
enterprise, we do risk calculations on a daily basis. I've got
11 missions.
Mr. Hunter. What I'm saying is, we're not going to allocate
money for you to get a UAS if the whole point of is to just go
look at the ocean in the corners of REEZ to make sure that,
that the coral is growing properly or something. Right? I mean,
that's not the point of getting the system. It would be used on
interdictions so you could raise your numbers of drugs and
ships that you interdict, coming up from South and Central
America, right?
Admiral Michel. That, that would be a priority mission.
There's actually infrastructure in place to do that. So you can
actually get a land-based system. But, but I don't want to--
sir, I'll give you an example. We get dozens upon dozens of
illegal fishing vessel and drug incursions along our southwest
border. On both the Texas side and near your district, we get
those panga boats that come zipping by. And we get a bunch of
illegal fishermen over on the Texas side. Both of those mission
sets could use some additional maritime domain awareness. Which
could be provided by long dwell sensors placed there by
unmanned aerial systems.
So there's a whole bunch of different mission sets that the
Coast Guard could use these on. For example, our Maritime
Boundary Line. With, with Russia. We patrol that all the time
to prevent Russian fishing vessel incursions. Perhaps you could
use that unmanned aerial system in order to do that. And you
know, we're probably not going to request that from CBP,
because I've got other fish I got to fry.
But if we had our own organic capability that we could use
to actually build on some expertise in our organization, we
could use it across a whole bunch of different mission sets. Of
which drug interdiction on the Western Hemisphere transit zone
I'd assume would be a priority mission. But it's not going to
be the only one. I wouldn't want to build it just for that
particular mission set. I would want to build it so hopefully
it's multimission platform, and I can use it in all the
different Coast Guard missions. Since even for, for
counterterrorism, you can imagine different maritime
counterterrorism scenarios where you might want to have
something like that.
Mr. Hunter. Absolutely. Let me tell you, what you guys are
saying down South. We have statements from multiple
coastguardsmen about their requests being denied by the CBP
when they asked for the assets. And I'll be happy to share that
with you later, off the record here. You--there have been Coast
Guard requests for unmanned surveillance aircraft that have
been denied by CBP. And I'll be happy to share those instances
with you at some other time.
Admiral Michel. Yes, sir. I look forward to seeing that.
I'm not sure exactly what happens all the way down at the
tactical level.
Mr. Hunter. OK. I yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm going to take
this a slightly different direction here. There's ongoing
questions and one of your tasks is the maintenance of
navigation. And specifically, does your plan call for
recapitalization of the tenders, the buoy tenders? And if so,
what's it take? How serious is that problem? There are those
who think that the buoy tenders are rusting out. Could you
speak to that?
Admiral Michel. Well, sir, again there's a couple different
classes of vessel. So there's kind of the coastal buoy tenders,
which are 225s and 125s. Those have, actually have an in-
service vessel sustainment program. And they're, they're
going--as a matter of fact, I think one up on the Coast Guard
yard right now, they're taking care of some of the--they had an
engine control system that had some problems. They're replacing
that whole system. Those are actually in pretty good shape, for
our coastal buoy tenders. But I think what you're alluding to
is our inland.
Mr. Garamendi. It is.
Admiral Michel. River tender fleet. A lot of that is really
actually quite old. The good part about is the environmentals
there are usually pretty benign. They're in freshwater. They're
not exposed to, you know, the dangers of the sea, because
they're in a river system. So they tend to, to last a little
bit longer. We did put some new engines in those craft. But
those do need recapitalization. They're not currently in our
capital investment plan. You know, how we include those, it's
another area that needs to be recapitalized. Currently it is
not in our organizational priorities to do that, but it's on my
radar, on my radar for sure. Because there are vessels in there
that are 50-plus years old and need to be recapitalized.
Mr. Garamendi. I'd like you to have a little more detail
about that in response to a written question we'll get you
about the recapitalization of the inland tenders, buoy tenders.
I want to spend more time on the UAVs, UASs and the like. It
seems to me that the technology, as you have said, is rapidly
advancing. And if we're able to move the Coast Guard more
quickly into the utilization of these multiple types of assets.
Some on the water, some in the air. The satellites. And
particularly the coordination with the other, with the
military. Some of which is operating--for example, the new
naval systems, called the Poseidon, the Trident. The Trident.
That they'll be operating out there, for example, in the San
Diego area. Part of it being their testing. And perhaps that
information would also be available to the Coast Guard and to
the multiple tasks. Some for the Coast Guard, some for the
Navy.
So I want to spend time with you on the future of this
entire aspect, and also where the money is for them. I think
that, you know, we said some of this earlier with the NSC, the
10th, half a billion dollars, how many UAS or UAV assets could
we purchase. The personnel to go with it and so forth. I don't
expect an answer right now, but just some general philosophy
from you. I think we've heard some of it. I want to go into it
in more detail. So if you could expand on that.
Admiral Michel. Well, it's, I think----
Mr. Garamendi. We got the book. We got the Mission Needs
Statement. And we got the President's budget.
Admiral Michel. Yes, sir. And the President's budget
layout, our organizational recapitalization priorities, this is
what I got to rack and stack. So I see great promises in
unmanned aerial systems. Like I said, I was JIATF South
Director. I'm a buyer. But I got to put this in rack and stack
against all my other priorities. And I've got sailors out there
on ships that are going to be 55 years old. And it's not a
river tender fleet that's on freshwater on a river somewhere.
These are people who are out exposed in real perils of the sea.
Putting out sailors out in 55- and 60-year-old ships, on that
210-foot class of cutters. Which by the way, got a big bust
today down operating off----
Mr. Garamendi. Excuse me, Admiral. I'm going to try to stay
within my allotted 5 minutes.
Admiral Michel. Yes, sir. It's just a priority.
Mr. Garamendi. Here's what I need in order to make
decisions. I see my task as basically choices. And it is not
clear to me what the Coast Guard would like to have. There's
this thing called need to and like to. I'm willing to, the need
to. I believe that we have to move towards these unmanned
vehicles, both marine as well as aerial. And the integration of
them into your operation. Presently, it is not, there's a
little bit of money in the budget. There's a little bit of
thinking about it. But it seems to me that it is not adequately
addressed. So for the Coast Guard, for you, what would be the
ideal situation, the integration of these types of assets into
the ongoing operations?
I understand that you've got men and women out there in the
ships. The ships are old and there's questions of safety as
well as viability. But it, how much additional money would be
necessary to ramp up and then integrate into the Coast Guard
operation these new types of assets? They're not really new,
but new to the Coast Guard. I understand you're doing some of
it today. What would it be? Is it another $100 million, $200
million, half a billion dollars? What are we talking about
here? So there's that question. There's one other. So I'm going
to come back at you in future hearings to dwell upon that
issue.
I do have a question that was raised by Ms. Grover, and
that has to do with the accounting. That it is not uniform
within the Service. That there are some who are keeping score.
And there are others that are not. And therefore the ability of
the Coast Guard management to understand the deployment of
assets is not as good as it should be. Is that right, Ms.
Grover?
Ms. Grover. We found that the Coast Guard data on how the
assets are deployed by mission is not reliable.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. So what are you doing about it, Admiral?
Admiral Michel. Oh, boy. Well, first of all, we're working
with GAO, and we appreciate them brining that to our attention.
This is part of the baggage of being a multimission
organization. So when you send any, any Coast Guard platform
out there, almost all of them are multimission in nature. And
how do you account for an hour spent on PWCS and search and
rescue and maritime law enforcement. And it goes all the way
down. I mean, and the people who are reporting here, this is
not captains or something. These are, you know, the coxswain of
the boat who reports how many hours he or she spent doing
something in a port.
And we can certainly tighten it up. I think the call by GAO
for additional input from the operational commanders will help
us get the accounting issue. But we, it's a difficult thing for
a multimission organization to just pin every single hour
accurately. But we got the challenge and we appreciate GAO's
highlighting in on that. We'll continue working with them and
see if we can close the gap here a little bit. Because I think
there's some money to be made here.
Mr. Garamendi. Yeah. And I think you should also keep in
mind what the chairman said at the outset in his opening
statement. You can become very bureaucratic and waste a lot of
time and energy. So there's got to be some way in which. But
the basic point here is the allocation of your resources.
You've got a ship out there that's, you know, just kind of
sailing around and not really employed in migration or drugs or
whatever. So I think that's what you're trying to get at.
Ms. Grover. Right. And there's no need to overdo it and to
make it excessively burdensome. The Coast Guard has data
collection systems in place already. But what we found is that
the districts are using different approaches, where in some
cases they allocate all of their hours to one mission. And in
other cases they make a concerted effort to do at least a rough
divvy up between where they started out and where they ended
up. And so I think it's just a matter of some consistent
direction about how that should be handled.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much. I yield.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Zeldin is recognized.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. For as long as he likes.
Mr. Zeldin. I don't even know if I'll use my 5 minutes,
Chairman. How's that. Admiral, thank you for being here. Ms.
Grover, thank you as well. Admiral, I had a question for you.
As we discussed the allocation of Coast Guard resources, one of
the concerns that I hear from Long Island boaters is with
regards to the 911 calls that takes place when there's an
emergency on water. The Coast Guard has the expertise to deal
with maritime search and rescue, yet in many cases 911
dispatchers aren't properly trained and don't know how to
handle a serious maritime emergency. Or on the other hand, how
to handle a non-emergency situation where a stranded boater
might have the maritime equivalent of a flat time.
We need to ensure that the Coast Guard resources are
deployed when and where they're most needed to save lives in
emergency situations, but not misallocated by the deployment
when not needed. I would like to commend the sector, Long
Island Sound, which has a great plan working with local law
enforcement, 9/11 call centers. My question for you is with
regards to this issue on a national level so that all 911
dispatchers know how to properly respond to maritime
emergencies.
Some of the people who speak to me on Long Island have
experience in other sectors. And there are different
experiences elsewhere. And obviously the most extreme example
is where a 911 dispatcher might be contacting local law
enforcement officials and you're not getting notified until
hours later, when it might be too late to successfully complete
the recovery.
Admiral Michel. Well, it's an important issue, and it has
to do with the way people communicate these days. First of all,
I have to encourage boaters to use their VHF, FM radio. Because
when they broadcast it out, it broadcasts out broadly to other
people, including other good Samaritans who may be in the
neighborhood and be able to render assistance to them. When
they make a 911 call, I'm not telling them not to, but when
they make a 911 it just goes to one person. And the other
people who may be in the vicinity and be able to best provide
assistance to them, if they don't know about that, then they,
they may be putting themselves at risk.
So I'd encourage boaters, use your VHF radio. I'm not
saying don't use your cell phone, but use your VHF radio,
because there may be people in the immediate vicinity who may
be able to come and help you. But we understand people
communicate in various different ways. They carry their cell
phones with them. It is a known gap. I'm glad you point out the
fact that at Long Island Sound--I know other sectors are
dealing with the exact same issue. And we got the message. And
I don't know where we stand on national direction on this,
because it's been left down to the districts and the sectors to
do this. I'm going to take a round turn on that, Mr. Zeldin,
and I will get back in touch with you with exactly what our
program is. But again, I encourage boaters, please use your VHF
radio, because your nearest help may actually be very close,
very close by.
Mr. Zeldin. And where you have a local law enforcement,
fire department, EMTs, they have a maritime asset that they
look forward to the opportunity to be able to utilize,
obviously preferring a training setting than real life, I think
that not only is there a need to better train that 911
dispatcher but also do more to encourage local law enforcement,
encouraging those first responders to contact you sooner.
Is this a real issue? Because I've heard these anecdotal
stories from people who are actually in the industry. We have
CTO is headquartered in my district. The First Congressional
District of New York is a district almost completely surrounded
by water, making it unique from that respect as well, and a
heavy Coast Guard presence. But it just, it seems like there
might be an issue where even that first responder, when they
get the phone call, they're not contacting you right away.
They're trying to go out and do it themselves.
Admiral Michel. It doesn't surprise me. And again, it's the
method of the communication. So sort of before the advent of
cell phones, you had your radio, and everybody would monitor
that frequency. You know, whether it's the fire department or
the Coast Guard or other boaters in the area. They'd be on
channel 16 and they'd listen to things. Everybody got all of
the information all at one time, and they could all sort of
respond as needed to that particular circumstance.
Now, you've got a point to point communication, where
you've got, you know, a boater in distress, and they're calling
somebody who's in some call center, in 911. And you've got a
point to point communication. Then how do you build off that
back end piece to get all of those people who under the old
regime would have had access to that information real time?
That's, that's a real challenge. And that's again why I
encourage boaters, please use your VHF-FM. But we need to build
in that back end piece, Mr. Zeldin. And I need to get you a
report on how we're going to deal with that nationally. I know
we've dealt with other similar issues in the past, like using
some of the Star features on cell phones and things like that.
But how do we really get that point to point communication to
get to all those as real time as possible? It doesn't surprise
me that you're getting anecdotal information that it's hard to
convert that point to point communication, get that to
everybody all at the same time. Because that, that network
probably does not exist where it does on something like VHF-FM.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Admiral. Thank you, Ms. Grover.
Thank you for the time. I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. I'm going to hit this
one, one more time. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
said that the biggest threat to the United States right now is
Russia. It's not ISIS. They don't have a Navy. They don't have
an Air Force. They have no nukes. They have nothing. It's, it's
Russia. The biggest threat arguably to the United States, post-
World War II, and to when the Soviet Union became Russia, was
Russia, right? So let's just call it Russia.
So it went on for 40 or 50 years. And now it again,
according to our chairman of the Joint Chiefs right now,
Dunford, Russia is the biggest threat that the U.S. has. If a
war is started with Russia, with our allies or with us, we
would be unable to traverse north of them at all right now.
Would you agree with that assessment? They would have--let's
put it this way. Would the Russians have free passage?
Admiral Michel. The Russians have a very capable
icebreaking fleet. I don't want to speak for the Russians, but
they, there are very few areas that I don't think the Russians
could go to. I will tell you this. And I testified to this
before. That with the current icebreaking fleet that we have,
we cannot as a Nation provide global ensured 7 by 24 by 365
access to ice-covered regions worldwide. We cannot do it with
today's fleet.
Mr. Hunter. OK, well, but I'm just trying to go down, why
is it so important that we provide 24 by 7 by 365 global
icebreaking capability?
Admiral Michel. Sir, as I said before, if you cannot
provide national presence, you cannot assert national
sovereignty and national sovereign rights, whatever they may
be. Whether they're resource related rights, whether they're
freedom of navigation rights, whether they are national defense
rights or otherwise. If you can't get there because you've been
area-denied by the environmentals, you cannot assert sovereign
rights. And the United States has sovereign interests in both
the Arctic ice-covered regions ads well as the Antarctic ice-
covered regions.
Mr. Hunter. So, so during, so let's go back to this. During
the Cold War, when the Russians and U.S. submariners were
chasing each other around the oceans, we had access to the
Arctic north of Russia during that entire time without having a
heavy icebreaker?
Admiral Michel. Sir, part--I can't go back and say why they
built the fleet that they did. They may not have even had the
capability of building a heavy icebreaker.
Mr. Hunter. They had the capability.
Admiral Michel. I don't know whether they had the
capability in the 1960s to build a vessel like the Polar Star.
As a matter of fact, to get the horsepower requirements
necessarily to do what they did with Polar Star they needed to
use gas turbines and controlled pitch propellers, which are
very, for that time of environment----
Mr. Hunter. I'm not saying that----
Admiral Michel [continuing]. Probably not what you would
want to choose. They may not have had global ensured access
both in those days, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Admiral, hang on. I'm not saying the capability
to build the ship. We had the capability to break the ice in
the Arctic above Russia during the Cold War without a heavy
icebreaker. How is that possible?
Admiral Michel. Sir, I don't whether that is possible. With
the fleet that exists in the 1960s, I do not know if they could
have provided global ensured access. There may have been ice
regions that they were incapable of getting to. I can tell you,
my job today, and the Commandant said in the cooperative
strategy that he signed with the CNO and the Commandant of the
Marine Corps, that we will provide global ensured access. And
the Coast Guard piece of that is icebreaking. Global ensured
access, 7 by 24 by 365, required heavy icebreaking capability
of which the Polar Sea and the Polar Star are capable of doing
that. And we've, we've gone through that.
So I don't know what the world was in 1960, where you could
get everywhere in ice-covered regions. I can tell you the
cooperative strategy lays that out as a task for the Coast
Guard. And that's the task that I have is to provide that
global ensured access. And it's our icebreaking fleet, heavy
icebreaking fleet that does that primarily. There are roles for
medium icebreakers, but they cannot operate on that type of a
basis.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Ms. Grover. I feel like I've ignored you. I
don't know, I don't even know how to phrase this question,
really. When you look at things beyond, beyond hours of service
and allocation of assets, when you look at Coast Guard mission
sets, and the prioritization of those missions, do you look at
those things? Do you look at how the Coast Guard prioritizes
its missions, and then how the assets are allocated to that
prioritization?
Ms. Grover. Well, we have information about what the Coast
Guard's plan is for its prioritization of asset hours by
mission. But I can't give you an analysis of the extent to
which that's carried out, because of the problems with the
data.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So you can't say whether the asset
allocation matches overall the mission or by mission, because
of the data?
Ms. Grover. That's right.
Mr. Hunter. OK. OK. Mr. Graves is recognized.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it. Admiral Michel, thank you for being here today.
And I know that the chairman covered icebreakers a little bit.
I had one question perhaps. And I apologize. I was missing for
a few minutes. I wanted to make sure we got an answer on. The
Healy at some point is going to be going through a SLEP, is
that, is that accurate? And I understand that in the
questioning earlier you discussed how a medium icebreaker
perhaps provides an 80-percent solution.
What happens when the Healy is in the SLEP? Because the
Healy is going to be put in a SLEP, as I understand, within the
10-year window that you indicated was possible to deliver a
heavy. So we then have some significant deficiencies in regard
to capabilities.
Admiral Michel. Now, that's spot on and that, we're going
to have to figure out the timing on that and when we're going
to have to do a SLEP. You know, we've had some money. I think
we had money in the 2016 budget and got some money in the 2017
budget to do this survey work. And we're going to have to time
that with the rest of the icebreaking fleet. It's a medium
icebreaker. It's not going to meet requirements for things like
Antarctica and stuff like that, but it's going to have to be
timed with the rest of the fleet. I think you're spot on,
Congressman Graves.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. And so, Admiral, I think, I think
along the lines of the chairman's questioning, I certainly
don't intend to put any words in his mouth. I think the concern
is on the part of many members of the committee is sort of the
interim strategy. So I don't think there's any question here
that we have need for additional icebreaking capabilities,
especially when you compare out capabilities to other Arctic
nations. We're getting blown away right now.
But for us to put all of our eggs in the basket of the
heavy in the long-term strategy, it does leave a gap,
particularly, that gap is exacerbated by the fact that the
Healy's going to have to go through a SLEP at some point during
that 10-year window. And I think that the interim strategy is
something that's a concern of many folks here. So can you
remind me, when is the survey or the report due back on the
Polar Sea?
Admiral Michel. So the, the--I had told the committee that
as the Commandant promised, on July the 24th, we'll have the
material assessment on the Polar Sea. That will not include the
entire alternatives analysis, which is kind of what we get, the
broader context. But the material assessment is due to the
committee on July the 24th. We had folks out there looking at
it when it was out of the water, and I anticipate we'll deliver
that report on time.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Great. Thank you, Admiral. I yield
back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Yeah, so we, we have a
hearing on July 12th, but July 24th is when we're going to get
the--and we're not going to be here. I'm not sure what, we come
back, till like September, after the--so we're not going to be
here to hear what the update is on the Polar Sea. But we can
get that out to everybody. When it comes in, we'll push it out.
So thanks. I'd like to yield to the ranking member.
Mr. Garamendi. Admiral Michel, thank you very much. We've
gone into icebreakers in great detail. We'll do that again on
July the 12th and we'll pick up the pieces of this. You've got
an extraordinarily complex world, and many, many missions in
which you have to deal. My fundamental concern is that we have
the information necessary to give you the money and the
resources necessary to carry out the tasks. I recognize those
tasks, the prioritization, that changes over time. There are
emergencies. There's Deepwater Horizon. And suddenly you're off
to a different task. Or there's a hurricane and whatever. So I
understand that. I want to make sure that you're positioned for
the future. The icebreaker is a 10-year project. I understand
that. Many of these other programs are also going to be long-
term projects.
I want to make sure that you're starting today or you're
underway today with the resources that you need for the future.
Personnel. And the assets that they will need. We've talked
some about unmanned aerial vehicles, or aerial as well as
surface and marine. We wanted to go into that in much more
detail.
Of specific interest to me is the integration of the total
American assets. So the Coast Guard is able to integrate with
the military. I know you do much of this already in
cybersecurity and in other areas, some of which are classified.
But there's much, much more that's available there. I know the
State Department is working on a program having to do with the
fish in the ocean or the fish that are no longer in the ocean.
And that's another task that the Coast Guard has.
So the integration across the whole of Government is of
great interest to me so that we can better utilize and
integrate the resources. So the next conversation we're going
to, that I would like to have with you, and the, some of this
is in the icebreaking area, is the integration across the whole
of Government. I don't expect an answer today. I am going to
have some questions if the chairman would allow that we could
get in written form and get some answers back. And David will
get those to you. Mr. Chairman, thank you for this hearing and
Admiral Michel, Ms. Grover, thank you.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Hey, thank you both for
being here. As Mr. Garamendi said, we're trying to, number one,
you have the responsibility of breaking ice north of Russia.
That's right now a Coast Guard responsibility. You know, Mr.
Garamendi and I are both on the Armed Services Committee. Maybe
that needs to be a Navy responsibility. Because right now
there's a giant gap where we're unable to break ice north of
Russia. From the Bering Sea, north and west. We can't do it
right now. You don't have the capability to do it for a
sustained amount of time at all. So the question is, number
one, should it even be a Coast Guard responsibility. If it's a
national strategic priority, should it be a Coast Guard
responsibility, or should we just go, ``Navy, do it. Build
them, do it, make sure we have the capability to be up there,
to break something out of the ice or to move to if we need to
or want to.''
We're just trying to help you get there. Wars don't come on
our acquisition timelines. Wars don't match our 12-year
outlook. Wars happen when they happen, and right now we're not
prepared for one. This is a big gap. This is why the Navy's
looking at this finally. This is why the Senate just put in $1
billion. This is why the House, the stingy house, just
appropriated $150 million. This, this is becoming more and
more, it's becoming clearer day by day that we have to be up
there. And people are finally starting to understand that,
right? So that's the good side, I guess, is that we've been
yelling loud enough and knocking on enough doors to where now
it is a priority. So no matter how it plays out, at least it's
going to be there at some point going forward.
When it comes to the unmanned aerial systems, any way that
we can help you leverage your current assets, that's what UAS
does. It helps you leverage what you have. It's not the be all
end all but it makes the rest of your assets that much better
at what they do. Because instead of having to use a helicopter
or a C-130, you can send that out there and you can do
reconnaissance. You can do all kinds of stuff. I mean, massive
leveraging of your assets, right? We just want to get there in
this lifetime. On budget and on time.
And anything that we can do to help you we will do, but we
need to know from you what you want. And I know you're doing
analysis, but it's not like unmanned aerial systems are new.
They aren't a new thing. Especially a land-based unmanned
system. You talked about Predator B. General Atomics has given
us a price sheet. Because we've asked them, ``What would it
cost the Coast Guard to maintain an organic fleet of two
Predators, land-based? What would it cost?'' Twenty million
dollars for one. That's what, with them operating, flying for
you, doing, putting it out wherever you want.
There's an actual cost for you. If you get two it goes
down. If you get three it goes down more. Right, that's how it
works. But these systems are out there and they're available
right now. It doesn't take a whole bunch of research or
analysis to go, ``Man, what, what do we have now? What can we
buy and put in our arsenal?'' We have them out there. They've
been tested, tried and true, right?
So those exist right now. And they're not super expensive.
Twenty million bucks for one. When it's operated by somebody
else, you're not going to incur any operation costs. No
maintenance costs, no parts costs. That's just General Atomics
operating a Predator B for you. That sounds like a good deal to
me.
We could probably find 20 million bucks for that. We're
just here to help. So we're going to keep pushing on these
things. But we can't help you unless we get the answers from
you of what you need. And it seems like it's always the
analysis is being done. The analysis is being done, the
analysis is being done. We're finally going to get an answer on
July 24th on one of these analysis. But we are here to help.
You let us know what we can do and what we can provide you to
make you better at your job. So thank you for your service.
I just saw the movie on, by the way, what was the movie
with the ``Star Trek'' guy, the guy who started ``Star Trek,''
what was--``The Finest Hours.'' Yeah, fantastic. Those, those
cutters looked pretty old too, right? I think you're always
operating with less than you should operate with, but that's,
that's what happens. That's how we got to war. That's how we
fight. That's how we go to sea. We just get the job done with
what we have. So thank you very much to you and your men and
women. And Ms. Grover, I'm sorry I didn't have more questions
for you. I got caught up in this whole national security thing
today. But I appreciate it. And with that, the hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:51 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
