- MARITIME TRANSPORTATION SAFETY AND STEWARDSHIP PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MARITIME TRANSPORTATION SAFETY AND STEWARDSHIP PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

(114-38)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2016

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-930 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                             Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN KATKO, New York                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JARED HUFFMAN, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada                JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
MIKE BOST, Illinois
------

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    JOHN GARAMENDI, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      CORRINE BROWN, Florida
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         JANICE HAHN, California
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York                  Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................     v

TESTIMONY
Panel 1

Rear Admiral Paul F. Thomas, Assistant Commandant for Prevention
Policy, U.S. Coast Guard.......................................     4
R. Keith Michel, NAE, Chair, Committee to Review Impediments to
United States-Flag Registry, Transportation Research Board,
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine......     4

Panel 2

Thomas A. Allegretti, President and Chief Executive Officer,
American Waterways Operators...................................    25
John W. Butler, President and Chief Executive Officer, World
Shipping Council...............................................    25
John Crowley, Executive Director, National Association of
Waterfront Employers...........................................    25
Donna Lemm, Chair, Container Weight Committee, Agriculture
Transportation Coalition, and Vice President of Global Sales,
Mallory Alexander International Logistics......................    25
Kendall Carver, Chairman, International Cruise Victims
Association, Inc...............................................    25

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Hon. John Garamendi of California................................    45
Hon. Doris O. Matsui of California...............................    47

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Rear Admiral Paul F. Thomas......................................    50
R. Keith Michel, NAE.............................................    59
Thomas A. Allegretti.............................................    65
John W. Butler...................................................    79
John Crowley.....................................................    90
Donna Lemm.......................................................    93
Kendall Carver...................................................    97

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Rear Admiral Paul F. Thomas, Assistant Commandant for Prevention
Policy, U.S. Coast Guard, responses to questions for the record
from the following Representatives:

Hon Duncan Hunter of California..............................    54
Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio.......................................    56
Hon. John Garamendi, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, request to submit the following:

Letter of April 6, 2016, from Chris Crutchfield, President
and Chief Executive Officer, American Commodity Company,
LLC, to Hon. Garamendi.....................................   121
Written statements from the U.S, Navy, U.S. Maritime
Administration, and U.S. Army witnesses who testified
during the House Subcommittee on Seapower and Projection
Forces hearing entitled ``Logistics and Sealift Force
Requirements'' on March 22, 2016...........................   122
Hon. Duncan Hunter, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, request to submit the following:

Letter of April 7, 2016, from James I. Newsome III, President
and Chief Executive Officer, South Carolina Ports
Authority, to Hon. Hunter..................................   147
Letter of April 13, 2016, from Teresa Craft, Head of
International Logistics, JBS USA Food Company, to Hon.
Hunter.....................................................   150
Written testimony of April 13, 2016, from Lynda D. Sanford,
survivor of a cruise ship accident.........................   151
Letter of April 12, 2016, from William R. Plourd, President
and Chief Executive Officer, El Toro Export, to Hon. Hunter   155

ADDITIONS TO THE RECORD

Comments of the Global Consolidators Working Group...............   156
Comments of the U.S. Clay Producers Traffic Association, Inc.....   167
Letter of April 6, 2016, from Greg Braun, President, Border
Valley Trading Ltd., to Hon. Duncan Hunter.....................   171
Letter of April 15, 2016, from Robyn Boerstling, Vice President,
Infrastructure, Innovation, and Human Resources Policy,
National Association of Manufacturers, to Hon. Duncan Hunter,
Chairman, and John Garamendi, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation........................   172

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

MARITIME TRANSPORTATION SAFETY AND STEWARDSHIP PROGRAMS

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 14, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m. in
room 2253, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Duncan Hunter
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Hunter. The subcommittee will come to order. The
subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on a variety of
maritime transportation safety and stewardship programs
implemented and enforced by the Coast Guard. Actually, this
hearing is going to cover everything.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. John was kind enough to just put everything
into this hearing.
The subcommittee has had--held periodic reviews of the
Coast Guard's regulatory regime to keep the committee updated
and to provide the regulated community an opportunity to relay
information on what effects, positive or negative, new program
or updates to regulations have on industry.
As we have done with previous regulatory hearings, we will
review pending and final rules impacting the safety and
security of our ports and waterways, as well as regulations
affecting business practices and the viability of the U.S.
flag. The continued reviews allow for oversight on
implementation and how the regulations are impacting vessel
safety, the flow of commerce through our ports, and the ability
to grow jobs in the maritime sector.
Maritime commerce is essential to the U.S. economy. That is
why we are all here, right? While regulations must address
concerns related to safety, security, and stewardship, they
must also balance the importance of maintaining the flow of
maritime commerce. Domestic shipping alone is responsible for
over 500,000 American jobs and $100 billion in annual economic
output. In addition, 90 percent of all global trade and over 25
percent of our GDP [gross domestic product] moves via the sea.
The Federal Government should foster an atmosphere where our
maritime industry can compete and expand.
And I have got to say--and that I didn't make up--but if
you control the ocean, you control the world. And that is why
we are here. If you control the ocean, you control the world.
The National Academies of Sciences Transportation Research
Board recently released a report on the impact of Coast Guard
regulations on the United States-flag registry. The good news
for the Service is the board reported that U.S. regulations are
not an impediment to the competitiveness of the U.S.-flag
fleet. The board provided recommendations on further
improvements that can be made by the Coast Guard to support the
U.S.-flag fleet. What is an ongoing frustration is the lack of
a unified approach within this administration to support
programs that support--that promote the U.S.-flag fleet.
In fact, we just had a--we had an issue yesterday where we
found out that there was a U.S.-flagged, U.S.-crewed MSP
[Maritime Security Program] vessel sitting outside of a port,
while a foreign-flagged vessel got the contract to carry goods.
And they are going to be late. So you had a U.S.-flagged, U.S.-
crewed vessel empty, an MSP vessel, which gets a U.S.-taxpayer-
dollar stipend, sat there while a U.S.--while a foreign-flagged
vessel is going to be late to pick up a full load, a military
load, to go from Jacksonville to Kuwait. That is a huge
screwup.
And you would think, as well as we are doing and what we
know now, that that kind of stuff wouldn't happen. But it
happens every day. And in fact, the head of TRANSCOM [United
States Transportation Command] didn't even know it was
happening until yesterday, until I talked to him. That is a sad
state of affairs.
The Coast Guard and the Environmental Protection Agency
have developed separate regulations under two different Federal
laws to govern ballast water discharges. Although the agencies
have worked together to try to reach uniformity, the programs
still differ in implementation dates, vessels covered,
geographic reach, enforcement, and penalties for noncompliance.
For instance, the Coast Guard rules allow for vessel owners
to seek an extension if treatment technologies do not exist or
cannot be installed by the deadline. The EPA provides no
mechanism for an extension, leaving a vessel owner liable for
civil and criminal penalties through no fault of their own.
This blows my mind. You have an 80-percent solution on
ballast water. You have an 80-percent solution that exists now.
You can make--you can do ballast water so you can drink it if
there was no salinity, but it is not good enough for the Coast
Guard. Blows my mind. So let's do extensions to dump dirty
water, instead of taking an 80-percent solution to kind of fix
things. It is--let's just keep going. We will talk later.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. The situation only becomes more confusing and
burdensome for vessel owners as each individual State adds its
own ballast water discharge requirements on top of the EPA's
program. Under the EPA's current program, numerous States and
tribes have added their own differing discharge standards.
Some States have laws in place for forcing vessel owners to
treat their ballast water to a standard for which no technology
has yet been invented. The situation is ridiculous. It is
completely unreasonable to ask vessel operators to comply with
two Federal standards and as many as 25 different,
contradictory, and unachievable State and tribal standards. I
hope my colleagues will join me in looking at ways to
rectifying this issue in any way possible.
Lastly, the International Convention for the Safety of Life
at Sea was amended by the International Maritime Organization
in 2014 to require verified gross weights of containers before
they are loaded on vessels. Implementation of the provision
goes into effect on July 1, 2016. I look forward to the
witnesses' views on how to implement this requirement in a
manner to ensure U.S. exports continue to move unimpeded,
because what we really want to see is more burdens placed on
small businesses that are shipping things. Not really. That was
a joke.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. We want to do fewer things that impede the flow
of commerce and the ability for the American people to keep
their jobs, maintain their livability in the United States and
make money.
If we want to grow our economy and remain a world power
capable of defending ourselves and our allies, we must work
together to strengthen and preserve our maritime industry. I
thank the witnesses for appearing today and look forward to
their testimony.
And with that I yield to the great ranking member, Mr.
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry about your
illness. And I expect I am going to separate myself from you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. Not in your testimony, which was--covers
most everything I have to say here--so I'm going to just
shorten this and put my comments into the record.
But welcome to the witnesses. Admiral and Mr. Michel, thank
you very much for being here. Mr. Michel, I am particularly
interested in hearing your testimony about how we might do the
regulations and the whole process a whole lot better. And so I
really want to focus on that.
It is obviously vital for the Coast Guard regulations to be
targeted, fair, and reasonable, and to get them done on time,
all of which seems to be a very difficult task for the Coast
Guard to achieve. Eventually, you do get it right, and we thank
you for that. Eventually it makes it tough when those years go
by.
I think I will just submit this for the record and get on
with the testimony. You covered all of it very well in your
statement, Mr. Chairman, so I will do that.
And with your permission, I would like to introduce in the
record a statement by Congresswoman Doris Matsui dealing with
passenger safety on cruise ships, and also a statement from the
American Commodity Company dealing with what seems to me to be
the current issue du jour, which has to do--who is responsible
for the weight of a container.
Mr. Hunter. Without objection.
[The written statements of Congressman Garamendi and
Congresswoman Matsui are on pages 45-49. The letter from the
American Commodity Company is on page 121.]
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. On our first panel we will hear from Rear
Admiral Paul Thomas, Assistant Commandant for Prevention Policy
for the United States Coast Guard, and Mr. Keith Michel, chair
of the Committee to Review Impediments to United States-Flag
Registry for the Transportation Research Board of the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine.
Admiral, thanks for being here. Keith, thanks for being
here. And, Admiral, you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF REAR ADMIRAL PAUL F. THOMAS, ASSISTANT COMMANDANT
FOR PREVENTION POLICY, U.S. COAST GUARD; AND R. KEITH MICHEL,
NAE, CHAIR, COMMITTEE TO REVIEW IMPEDIMENTS TO UNITED STATES-
FLAG REGISTRY, TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH BOARD, NATIONAL
ACADEMIES OF SCIENCES, ENGINEERING, AND MEDICINE

Admiral Thomas. Well, thank you. Good morning, Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member, distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for your continued strong support of our Coast Guard
and for the opportunity to talk with you today about our
maritime prevention program.
As you know and as you said, maintaining and sustaining a
robust maritime industry and maritime transportation system is
a national security imperative, and our Coast Guard prevention
program plays a key role. The Coast Guard concept of operations
for prevention brings to bear our unique authorities and
capabilities on the task of ensuring a safe, secure,
environmentally sound, productive, and efficient global
maritime transportation system, and on helping the maritime
industry meet the triple challenge over the coming decades of
growing capacity while reducing environmental footprint in the
face of ever-increasing complexity.
We do this by developing smart risk-based standards which
include both domestic and international regulations; by
providing a well-trained workforce in our ports that can ensure
compliance with those standards and provide the level playing
field the industry demands; and by conducting investigations
into accidents and violations of law so that both the standards
and the compliance procedures can be improved, as we are
currently doing in the case of the El Faro.
Thanks in large part to oversight provided by this
committee, we have made significant improvements in our
regulatory development program since 2009. We have added staff,
reduced backlogs, cut our average age of our projects, and
implemented process improvements. Most of the significant rules
that we develop are developed in response to congressional
mandates. In every case we work closely with all of our
stakeholders, including the public and the industry, to ensure
congressional intent is met, while providing maximum regulatory
flexibility and minimum burden.
A perfect example is the subchapter M towing vessel
regulation, which will apply to about 6,000 towing vessels, and
will effectively double the size of the U.S.-inspected fleet.
This will significantly challenge the Coast Guard in terms of
our resources. As a result, we will rely heavily on the use of
third parties to meet the inspection and audit demands and to
provide the industry the needed flexibility.
We have developed a robust implementation plan for
subchapter M, and we will bring industry into our
implementation team as soon as the rule publishes. We have
already developed a very comprehensive outreach plan that
engages both internal and external stakeholders.
But we know from experience that the publication of the
final rule is really just the end of the first phase, and we
are focused on smooth implementation. You mentioned our ballast
water regulation, for example, which was published 4 years ago,
and we are still in the implementation phase. Some of the
challenges associated with that rule are due to overlapping
jurisdictions between the Coast Guard and the EPA and between
the States and the Federal Government. We appreciate the
efforts of this committee to reduce those redundancies and to
embrace standards based on best available technology that is
both economically and operationally practical. We remain
focused on type approval of ballast water management systems.
You mentioned the TRB [Transportation Research Board]
report, sir, and we welcome that report as part of our constant
effort to improve our regulatory programs. As you mentioned,
the report concluded that compliance with Coast Guard
regulations is not an impediment to the competitiveness of the
U.S. flag, and I agree. But I also agree with the
recommendations that there is room for further improvement in
the Coast Guard regulatory programs, and I have already taken
steps in line with the committee's recommendations.
Of the three recommendations in the report that are
specific to the Maritime Security Program, two have already
been enacted. To address the remaining recommendations, I have
established a working group with industry operators to review
and prioritize and suggest courses of action for each, and that
group has its first meeting next week. We thank the TRB team
for their efforts on our behalf.
And finally, you mentioned the SOLAS [Safety of Life at
Sea] requirements, the SOLAS amendments that have become known
as the container weight or VGM [verified gross mass]
amendments. As these amendments were developed at the IMO
[International Maritime Organization], our delegation was
mindful of the existing regulatory structure in the U.S. which
already ensures that the weight of a container is known before
it is shipped over road or rail, is lifted out of the terminal,
or is loaded at a port on a ship. And it is precisely because
of this underlying regulatory framework that additional
regulations are not needed in the U.S.
The SOLAS amendments may, however, require a change in the
status quo in terms of how weights are verified and how that
information is transmitted. I have been in contact with the key
stakeholders, including those who will testify today, to ensure
they understand the amendments and understand the flexibility
that exists to achieve compliance. I will continue to
facilitate discussions with them as I finalize their compliance
strategies. There is no reason these amendments should cause
any delays in our supply chain.
Thank you again for your support, and I look forward to our
discussion.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Admiral.
Mr. Michel?
Mr. Michel. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Hunter, Mr.
Garamendi, and members of the committee. My name is Keith
Michel and I am president of Webb Institute, a college that
focuses on naval architecture and marine engineering. I spent
40 years designing ships and--but I am here representing a
National Academies' committee that was a committee mandated by
Congress and tasked by the U.S. Coast Guard with evaluating
whether Coast Guard regulations are an impediment to the
competitiveness of the U.S.-flag fleet.
The committee met once, heard from industry, and had many
discussions amongst committee members. And we came out with the
conclusion, as was mentioned earlier, that--or the finding that
Coast Guard is not an impediment to competitiveness. The
reasoning was that we found if you consider the increased costs
of U.S.-flagged ships over their international counterparts,
the percentage of that increased cost that we could attribute
to the Coast Guard was less than 1 percent.
Having said that, we found there were a number of areas
where Coast Guard could improve processes and further reduce
costs. So the report concentrates on that.
There are nine recommendations. The first three relate to
the Maritime Security Program. That program was put in place
quite a few years ago, with the intent that there be a seamless
transition from international flag to U.S. flag. And there has
been some challenges with the program, as we have heard from
industry. The cost of reflagging is in the range of $500,000 to
$1 million. It includes about $250,000 related to requirements
over and above the IMO related to engine room alarms and
systems. So there is a significant cost in that transition.
Once a ship is in MSP there are ongoing costs related to
the fact that--at least originally--the Coast Guard implemented
the CFR, rather than the alternative compliance program. So
there were issues with the cost of following the CFR, and
especially involving replacement of equipment when it was
required to be Coast Guard type approved equipment.
And finally, there were concerns with the MSP program.
Coast Guard initially required that ships run with a
watchstander in the engine room for up to 3,000 hours upon
transition. These are ships that were operating in the
international fleet without a watchstander. They had already
been approved for unattended engine room operation, and had
been operating that way. With the requirement that the
watchstanding occur for up to 3,000 hours, that is an
additional cost burden on the shipowner because that person
could have been doing other work, maintenance work.
The Coast Guard in May of 2015 made a number of changes.
They have softened the impact of the reliance on CFR by
allowing what they call MSP Select. After 3 years a ship can
largely follow the ACP [Alternative Compliance Program]
processes, which are more efficient. The committee recommends
that be the case immediately, rather than waiting 3 years.
The committee also recommends the Coast Guard look at,
rather than using Coast Guard-type approval for these vessels,
they consider allowing classification society approval for
equipment. Again, these ships are built under international
registry, the systems are all in place. And when you have to
replace it with a Coast Guard--due to maintenance, if you have
to replace equipment with Coast Guard-type approved, it can be
quite costly.
So those--and also the committee recommended that the
requirement for watchstanding be reduced to 1,000 hours, and
that consideration be given to eliminating it altogether if the
crew is familiar with that particular ship and its automation
systems.
So those were three recommendations related to MSP. There
were a series of other recommendations. The committee
recommends that Coast Guard, with assistance from industry,
look at the CFR regulations and do a risk-based assessment.
That is a very extensive effort. It is recognized that will
take time, so we recommended the Coast Guard prioritize and,
working with industry, determine which of the regulations are
most burdensome.
There is also a recommendation that, in general, Coast
Guard reconsider the equipment type approval, which can be
quite burdensome on shipowners because most equipment is not
U.S.-type-approved. The reason being the U.S. market is
relatively small. And so if construction could use more of the
internationally approved equipment, and if Coast Guard could
rely on the approval processes of classification societies, the
committee felt that would be more efficient without
compromising safety.
And finally, the committee recommends that Coast Guard rely
even more on classification society and have less redundant
inspections, but that it enhance its audit program over class.
Again, this has become an issue after the committee met more in
focus because of the El Faro accident. The Coast Guard is
evaluating how well its whole ACP process is working. So we
understand that this recommendation will have to be evaluated,
taking into consideration what the Coast Guard learns from its
El Faro evaluation.
And so, those are the key recommendations. There were a few
others in the report that--the report, again, is available on
the NAE [National Academy of Engineering] Web site. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Michel. I am going to start
recognizing Members for questions, starting with myself. So
let's just go really quickly to the U.S.-flag fleet.
So the Coast Guard, you said, is only responsible for 1
percent. You said there is a 1--1 percent of the cost of being
a U.S.-flag vessel----
Mr. Michel. Yes. What it is is we evaluated, for a typical
container ship, the increased cost of operation. And we
determined the dominant factor is crew cost. Crew cost--U.S.
crew cost is about five times international crew costs.
Mr. Hunter. Why is that? We are just better at it?
Mr. Michel. I think industry is better to answer it than
me----
Mr. Hunter. Go ahead. Give it a shot.
Mr. Michel. But, you know----
Mr. Hunter. But you are sitting there.
Mr. Michel. Yes, I----
Mr. Hunter. Give it a shot.
Mr. Michel [continuing]. I--you know, I think there is
probably a variety of reasons. You know, the higher standard of
living is obviously part of it. Maybe there is less
competitiveness with the unions and the shipping companies.
There is a number of reasons. But it is substantially higher.
And it is the dominant factor.
If--so again, we estimated if you look at the increased
cost alone versus total operating cost, crew costs were roughly
57 percent, whereas the next most significant item was, as I
remember, P&I [protection and indemnity] insurance is higher
because of the way the Jones Act treats accidents on ships. And
the drydocking costs are higher because there is a tax if you
do your drydockings overseas, and they are much more expensive
in the U.S.
Those three--and then Coast Guard was only 1 percent of the
additional cost that we attributed. So it----
Mr. Hunter. That is great to hear.
Mr. Michel. It is significantly reduced over time. Again,
the ACP----
Mr. Hunter. What was it?
Mr. Michel [continuing]. Program--what is that?
Mr. Hunter. What was the Coast Guard's influence 20 years
ago?
Mr. Michel. You know, I would guess it was 10 times higher
than that. It is significantly lower.
And likewise, we looked--we talked to shipyards in the U.S.
about the cost of construction and the Coast Guard impact on
that over and above if they were working towards an
international flag. And there, as I remember, it was about 1
percent of the cost of construction was related to the
increase--the requirements of the Coast Guard over and above
other international standards. So it is significantly reduced.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. The ranking member of the full
committee is here. If we knew he was coming, we would have
gotten a bigger room.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. That is why everybody is here.
Mr. Garamendi. He would have given us one.
Mr. Hunter. He would have given us one, that is right.
Admiral, I guess I have got about 2 minutes left, so let's
just talk ballast water. And I have talked to your staff and
understand you are fully prepared to talk about it.
Right now, is the Coast Guard giving waivers to ships to
dump ballast water, untreated totally?
Admiral Thomas. No, sir. And I am glad you asked that
question so I can clarify that issue.
Mr. Hunter. Yes.
Admiral Thomas. When we grant a waiver there has to be some
mitigating measures. Most of the vessels are mitigating the
risk associated with invasive species by doing mid-water
ballast water exchange, or mid-ocean ballast water exchange,
which means--which is the protective measure that we have had
in place for years.
So it is absolutely misleading to----
Mr. Hunter. Which is what? What does that mean?
Admiral Thomas. So you load ballast water in a port. There
are many, many more critters in a port environment than there
is in mid-ocean.
Mr. Hunter. Because there's people.
Admiral Thomas. Well, and--yes, and sewage and other
things.
Mr. Hunter. Stuff.
Admiral Thomas. So--but mid-ocean, as you exchange your
ballast water, you are bringing on water that has many fewer
critters. And in fact, you know, once we have type-approved
systems, that mid-ocean ballast water exchange won't be
required.
Mr. Hunter. So what you are saying is you will grant
waivers if you do a mid-ocean ballast water exchange----
Admiral Thomas. Or there are some other alternatives.
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. Or other mitigating----
Admiral Thomas. Right.
Mr. Hunter. And you--how long have ships been doing that?
Admiral Thomas. Well, ships have been doing ballast water
exchanges----
Mr. Hunter. For 30, 40, 50----
Admiral Thomas. Well, not quite that long, but a couple----
Mr. Hunter. Twelve years?
Admiral Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Hunter. What did they do before that?
Admiral Thomas. They did nothing, and that is one of the
problems--one of the reasons we have zebra mussels and other
invasive species in our ports.
Mr. Hunter. So up to the early 2000s they did nothing. And
then around the early 2000s they started doing ballast water
exchanges, right--1996?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, yes.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So 1996 you started doing mid-ocean ballast
water exchanges. And if you do that, then you get a waiver? Or
if you do something like that?
Admiral Thomas. Or--yes. There are other options, as well.
Mr. Hunter. OK, sure. So if you do one of those other
options--which are what?
Admiral Thomas. You can use public drinking water supply
for your ballast, which is not really practical, but it is one
of the options. You can use what we call alternative management
systems, which are systems that are approved to the SOLAS
standard----
Mr. Hunter. And if you do one of those things, and you show
the Coast Guard, hey, we are trying to mitigate, then what does
the Coast Guard do?
Admiral Thomas. So what the Coast Guard is saying is, hey,
we understand, Industry, that the systems that meet the
standard that is required by our law are not yet there, but
they are very close. And since they are not yet there, we will
grant a waiver to your compliance date that says you have to
have one of those systems that meets our standard.
Mr. Hunter. So what is required by law? What does the law
say?
Admiral Thomas. What the law, sir, specifies is a certain
discharge standard with regard to how many critters can be in
how much volume of water. And it also requires that we
determine that those critters are--we know that we have an
efficacy test that we know is reliable and repeatable. So the
efficacy test that we have now is one that is very reliable and
repeatable across a broad spectrum of ballast water that we
would seek from ships coming around the world, and that is the
one that says we can count how many things are alive versus how
many are dead.
And so, that is--we are focused on ensuring that we bring
to the market, to the world market, really--because it is the
U.S. that is leading the world in this aspect--systems that----
Mr. Hunter. How many U.S.-flag ships do we have in the
U.S.-flag fleet?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir, so that is a very----
Mr. Hunter. Total.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Very good point. We punch way
above our weight with regard----
Mr. Hunter. But how many ships do we have in the U.S.-flag
fleet? I am just asking.
Admiral Thomas. Internationally sailing?
Mr. Hunter. U.S.-flag, international-sailing vessels. How
many do we have?
Admiral Thomas. If you are talking about deep-draft trading
vessels, I have heard the Maritime Administrator use the number
somewhere around 80. That is----
Mr. Hunter. Eight zero?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. And how many are in the world?
Admiral Thomas. Thousands.
Mr. Hunter. Just guess.
Admiral Thomas. Yes, thousands.
Mr. Hunter. Tens of thousands?
Admiral Thomas. Thousands.
Mr. Hunter. 100,000?
Admiral Thomas. 12,000.
Mr. Hunter. 12,000, total? So 12,000 total ships, and we
have 8-0? OK.
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir, for many of the reasons that Mr.
Michel mentioned.
Mr. Hunter. So do any ships right now use any kind of
technology to mitigate their ballast water critters?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir. I am glad you asked the question.
There are a number of systems out there, and hundreds of them
on ships that have been approved under a scheme that was
developed by the IMO.
The IMO recently went back and reviewed the approval
process for all of those systems, and have determined that
there is great variance on how the standards were applied, and
great deviation, in terms of interpretation, so much so that
there really can be no confidence that the worldwide fleet has
systems that will work, that actually----
Mr. Hunter. The worldwide fleet or the U.S. fleet?
Admiral Thomas. Most U.S.-fleet vessels have not yet
installed ballast water systems. But those in the worldwide
fleet who have chosen to have installed systems that they
cannot have great confidence meet----
Mr. Hunter. Then why would they----
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. The standard----
Mr. Hunter. Then why would a private company install
something if they don't--why would they spend hundreds of
thousands of dollars for no reason?
Admiral Thomas. That is a good question, sir. I can't
answer the decisionmaking process there. But what I will say is
they bought a system that was certified to the international
standard. Not to the U.S. standard. But the international
standard is not robust enough to really drive the innovation
and technology for systems that will meet this challenge.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So again, let me ask you. What does the
U.S. law state? What does U.S. law state on ballast water?
Admiral Thomas. So the U.S. law and the SOLAS international
convention are----
Mr. Hunter. No, just----
Admiral Thomas. They are exactly the same----
Mr. Hunter. U.S. law, all right?
Admiral Thomas. They are exactly the same with regard to
the discharge standard, how many critters can come out at the
other end of the machine. They are exactly the same. The
difference comes with how do you prove to us that machine is
actually meeting the discharge standard. That is the
difference. And what I am telling you is our----
Mr. Hunter. But U.S. law doesn't give you a number.
Admiral Thomas. It does.
Mr. Hunter. It doesn't state an actual number. It allows
you to state the number.
Admiral Thomas. Right. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. There is no----
Admiral Thomas. Right, the standard. We set----
Mr. Hunter. So once again----
Admiral Thomas. And law----
Mr. Hunter. U.S. law, what does U.S. law say? What does the
United States law that Congress passed and the President
signed, what does that say when it comes to ballast water
critters?
Admiral Thomas. It requires us to set a standard based on
best available technology.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Requires you to set a standard based on
best available technology.
Admiral Thomas. And the standard we currently have is----
Mr. Hunter. What--so just----
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Synched with the international
standard.
Mr. Hunter. Let's go slow, let's just go slow. I am a slow
Marine, all right?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Let's just go slow. So that is what U.S. law
states. And you lay Coast Guard regulation on top of that, and
what does Coast Guard regulation say?
Admiral Thomas. So Coast Guard regulation sets a discharge
standard, which is the same as the standard in the
international convention. So it is a worldwide discharge
standard, which----
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Since this is a worldwide
global industry, seems to make sense. And you pointed out that
it doesn't make sense to have individual State standards, and
we would agree with that.
Mr. Hunter. So what is the best available technology, in
your opinion right now, for ballast water treatment?
Admiral Thomas. So, sir, we currently have 19 systems
actively testing to our standards. Nine of those systems are UV
[ultraviolet] systems. Those manufacturers are investing lots
of money to run their systems through our test battery. And
they are very confident that technology they currently are
working with will meet the U.S. standard.
Mr. Hunter. So let's get down--let's just really quickly--
because I was confused about this yesterday when we were
talking about this in our pre-hearing meetings. What is the
Coast Guard regulation for what happens to the actual critters?
Admiral Thomas. There is a number of critters per volume of
water over a certain size that have to--the maximum number that
can be----
Mr. Hunter. Do you want to murder those critters?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. Or do you want to just render them harmless?
Admiral Thomas. So the----
Mr. Hunter. And you have heard the term ``rendered
harmless,'' right?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir----
Mr. Hunter. And why is that? Why do you know the term
``rendered harmless''?
Admiral Thomas. Viable versus nonviable is how you hear it
in this context. But let me----
Mr. Hunter. But rendered harmless----
Admiral Thomas. What we want to do----
Mr. Hunter. But talk to me. Admiral, hang on.
Admiral Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Hunter. ``Rendered harmless,'' have you heard of that
term before?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, I have.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Why have you heard that? Is that in Coast
Guard regulation?
Admiral Thomas. Render harmless?
Mr. Hunter. Rendered harmless. Critters rendered harmless.
Admiral Thomas. I am not--I don't--I will have to go back
and see if ``render harmless'' is in Coast Guard regulations,
sir.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So here is the actual--this is their code,
right?
So here is your code. Let me tell you. ``Ballast water
management system means any system which processes ballast
water to kill, render harmless, or remove organisms.'' OK?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir. So----
Mr. Hunter. So those--any of those three. It doesn't say
``and, and, and.''
Admiral Thomas. Right.
Mr. Hunter. It is any of those.
Admiral Thomas. The trick, sir, comes in----
Mr. Hunter. Tell me.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Developing the test, the
efficacy test for the system to determine whether the system
has actually killed or rendered harmless. And what I am telling
you is there is a reliable, repeatable efficacy test to
determine if something is dead. There is not a reliable,
repeatable efficacy test to determine if they have been
rendered harmless.
Mr. Hunter. And by rendered harmless it means they can't
procreate.
Admiral Thomas. They can't procreate. But due to the wide
spectrum of species that we are talking about from ballast
water all around the world, the fact that you don't even know
which species you are trying to render harmless, it is
difficult to prove that you have cultured enough of them to
know whether or not they are able to reproduce. That is
essentially the problem.
So ballast water--so land-based water treatment systems,
for example, are designed and constructed and operated for a
known source of water that is to be treated. That water can be
very well understood. You can know specifically which creatures
you want to kill or render harmless----
Mr. Hunter. Colorado River. You know what State it is going
through, you know where it is going, right?
Admiral Thomas. And you know--so you can not only tailor
this treatment system to that specific water, you can tailor
the efficacy test to that water.
Ballast water comes from all over the world, so you can't
tailor the treatment system or the efficacy test, so you need a
test that is reliable and repeatable for water from anywhere.
And that test today is dead, not render harmless.
Mr. Hunter. OK. So I am going to ask you. So right now,
what you can do is simply dump the water and mix it in the
middle of the ocean.
Admiral Thomas. Which avoids bringing invasive species into
our ports.
Mr. Hunter. As opposed to using technology to get an 80-
percent solution.
Admiral Thomas. The 80-percent solution----
Mr. Hunter. Or even a possible 100 percent solution. But
the answer is you don't know, because you can't test it.
Admiral Thomas. Absolutely, sir. And in our interpretation
of congressional intent it wasn't put regulations that leave
some doubt in terms of whether or not the----
Mr. Hunter. I don't understand, so let's just get--I am
using too much time, because I really don't understand this,
right? This always blows my mind.
So we allow ships to simply dump and mix their ballast
water in the middle of the ocean, as opposed to setting
guidelines for saying, ``Hey, we hope--we think that this
works, we are pretty sure it works, but we are not going to
count that. We just want you to dump the water in the middle of
the ocean and mix it up.''
I don't understand. Why not get an 80-percent solution? Why
not say, ``Hey, we are pretty sure that these--we watched the
organisms for 2 years, and they haven't procreated yet, but
maybe they will last 10 years,'' and they may. And----
Admiral Thomas. So two points I should make.
Mr. Hunter. Yes.
Admiral Thomas. The first is the 80-percent solution that
you have referred to is still currently under review by the
Coast Guard. So it has not been eliminated.
Mr. Hunter. But do you understand what I am saying?
Admiral Thomas. I do, but----
Mr. Hunter. Right now they simply dump it in the ocean,
right? They take the ballast water and they mix it, right?
Admiral Thomas. But there is no evidence that dumping
ballast water in mid-ocean does environmental damage----
Mr. Hunter. Then why do we worry about it at all?
Admiral Thomas. Because when you dump it in a port
environment, sir, that is a very different story than in the
mid-ocean. That is how we move species from one port to
another. That is how you get zebra mussels and Asian carp in
waterways where we don't want them.
So there is a real difference. And we are not talking about
a pollutant like oil. We are talking about moving species
around the world.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Once again, there is not technological--
there is no technology right now that the Coast Guard says,
``Hey, guys, go with this. This is the best way that we know
how to do it. This is as close as we can get right now, in
2016.''
Admiral Thomas. So there are----
Mr. Hunter. There is----
Admiral Thomas. There are at least 19 systems currently
testing in----
Mr. Hunter. But not testing. There is nothing that the
Coast Guard has said, ``Hey, guys, go with this one.''
Admiral Thomas. We don't have a Coast Guard type approved
system.
Mr. Hunter. At all?
Admiral Thomas. We do not have a Coast Guard type approved
system at all, including the systems that provide the 80-
percent solution, and precisely because----
Mr. Hunter. Is the Coast Guard scared to back one of these?
I mean what is----
Admiral Thomas. Back one, sir?
Mr. Hunter. Yes, to support some technology. Why not
support the best technology----
Admiral Thomas. We are----
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. That is out there right now?
Admiral Thomas. We are committed to the proven process of
type approval. We are learning lessons from the less robust
process in--undertaken by other flags that have resulted in the
systems that IMO have identified as ineffective.
And so, we are committed to a solution that actually meets
the standard, and I am confident that we will very soon. And in
the meantime----
Mr. Hunter. What kind of solution are you thinking? If you
are confident, then tell me. What is that going to be?
Admiral Thomas. There are----
Mr. Hunter. What is your guess?
Admiral Thomas. There are 19 systems using various
technologies today that are testing, and I expect we will see
some data soon that indicates those systems meet the current
Coast Guard requirement. And then we will be at 100 percent
solution, sir.
Mr. Hunter. OK. And what system might that be?
Admiral Thomas. There are a number of them out there. Some
of them are the UV systems----
Mr. Hunter. No, don't--I am not asking what you are
testing. I am asking what you think the technology will be.
Admiral Thomas. Again, I think that this challenge is one
that requires way more than one system, because every ship is
different, every flow rate is different, every type of water
is--so there needs to be a robust pool of these systems that
use various types of technologies. And that is what is
currently being tested. No one system, even if we had one
system approved today, sir, it would not----
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Be effective on every ship.
Mr. Hunter. Then which technologies? Instead of one, which
one?
Admiral Thomas. Well, there are some that use UV only,
there are some that use UV with some other chemical processes.
There are some that use chlorine. There--you know, there are a
various number of different----
Mr. Hunter. And which ones do you think are the ones that
will do the job in the near future?
Admiral Thomas. Well, I think the UV systems--there are two
UV manufacturers who are already advertising that they can meet
the Coast Guard standard. Some have already sold systems with
guarantees that they will meet the Coast Guard standard. So,
you know, those systems are promising.
Mr. Hunter. All right. Sorry to--OK. Complicated issue.
Admiral Thomas. It is a very complicated--that is why I
appreciate the opportunity to have the discussion with you on
it.
Mr. Hunter. I yield to the ranking member.
Mr. DeFazio. I had a hearing downstairs. We should have
exchanged rooms, because we have fewer people for that hearing,
even though it is important.
In any case, Admiral, I--you know, the SOLAS requirements
on shipping, on containers, are of particular concern to
shippers in the Pacific Northwest of agricultural products. And
the Coast Guard has taken a position that you feel that the
U.S., with our current systems, is in compliance, and that it
won't require dramatic changes.
They have an opposite opinion, which is that this
potentially becomes disruptive because it involves coming to a
determination of both the weight of the content and the
container. The containers are beyond the control of the
agricultural producers, but they feel that, you know, they are
going to be essentially having to sign off on something over
which they don't have total control.
And there is a good deal of confusion out there. How is it
that you know or feel or can state that we are currently in
compliance with these new standards? And if we are in
compliance with these new standards, then I would assume that
there will not be the sort of disruptions that the--some in the
industry are anticipating.
Admiral Thomas. All right, thanks for that question,
because there is a lot of misunderstanding.
In my statement, sir, I mentioned that we have a number of
regulations in the U.S. already--not Coast Guard regulations--
that require the weight of a container be known before it is
moved by road or rail or moved at a terminal. So the
information required to be in compliance is already being
generated. There may be a need for some business practice
changes.
Part of the confusion, though, is being generated by a lack
of understanding of the flexibility that exists within the
SOLAS requirement, both in terms of how the regulation itself
is written, and in terms of the general provisions within the
convention for equivalencies. So I have seen a number of
documents floated by IMO, by the World Shipping Council, by
OCEMA [Ocean Carrier Equipment Management Association], and by
agricultural exporters, each of which defines a path to legal
compliance with the SOLAS requirements, each of which will
result in compliance with the SOLAS requirements.
So this is for exporters and carriers to work out, in terms
of which of those methods they are going to use with each
other. But there is no reason that the regulation--there is no
Government agency, no regulation, no international regulation
that will cause a disruption in our supply chain. If it is
disrupted it is because the shippers and the carriers haven't
been able to figure out which of those many methods meet the
SOLAS requirements they are going to employ.
Mr. DeFazio. So you are saying it is really a dispute
between different businesses involved in the supply chain over
what is--what they would feel would comply. I mean----
Admiral Thomas. I don't know that it is a dispute. Again, I
think that there has been a large amount of misunderstanding of
the flexibility that is already provided by the regulation. I
think that that misunderstanding is starting to be cleared up,
and maybe you will hear today from the panel that they are
beginning to have productive discussions on how they are going
to meet this challenge.
But again, there is no reason that a regulation should
cause a--this regulation should cause a disruption in our
supply chain.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Well then, I will have staff here, and I
will hear about that, and I may want to get back to you after
we hear from the witnesses, and after I clarify with some of
the Northwest shippers.
And just--Mr. Chairman, on the issue of ballast water, I
think we had hearings on this in the early 1990s, as I recall.
And you know, we had heat, we had chemical, we had, you know,
using the UV and the exchange, and none of them, I mean, have
ever proved to be 100 percent effective. But it seems to me
that a requirement both of a mid-ocean exchange and an
effective approved treatment system is going to get us closest
to the point. Because it doesn't take very many of these
things, like zebra mussels or other--quagga mussels, these
sorts of things, it takes very few to become essentially a
plague, you know, and a significant invasion. Isn't that true?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir, and that is why we are striving--
--
Mr. DeFazio. Right.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. For the 100-percent solution.
Mr. DeFazio. Right. And would 100 percent perhaps be a
combination between both the mid-ocean exchange, which does
help, to some extent, but isn't perfect, and a treatment
system?
Admiral Thomas. You know, I think once we have approved
systems out there, we will continue to monitor how well they
perform, and determine whether or not there needs to be that
second step.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. All right. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member for being here.
Mr. Gibbs? You are recognized.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral, not to beat the ballast water to death--the
chairman did a pretty good job--that is more of where my
questions are going to, since I am from Ohio and represent the
Great Lakes region. And start with my understanding on the EPA,
they can--States can add additional requirements onto the--
wherever the rules might be. Is that true?
Admiral Thomas. So, as you know, there's two Federal
statutes that govern this. One, Coast Guard, Invasive Species
Act, and the EPA. And neither of those Federal statutes provide
for preemption of the States.
Mr. Gibbs. OK.
Admiral Thomas. So, yes, absolutely, it is true, the States
can tack on additional requirements.
Mr. Gibbs. States can, OK.
Admiral Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Gibbs. Because that is a real concern if you look at
how the Great Lakes region works with the Saint Lawrence Seaway
and--you know, so it makes sense that--I know the Coast Guard
and EPA is trying to harmonize some of these separate laws and
regulations.
I think from your earlier comment you are a supporter of
doing that to a single regulatory policy. And if that is the
case, would the Coast Guard be the agency to perform that,
then?
Admiral Thomas. Well, I would say the Coast Guard and the
EPA can't harmonize the requirements. Congress has to do that.
Our objective is one, single Federal standard that does preempt
the States, because----
Mr. Gibbs. That is good clarification, and I meant to say
it that way, yes.
Admiral Thomas. Right.
Mr. Gibbs. But you are--support that Congress does that,
because it makes for smooth interstate commerce. And especially
in the Great Lakes region, it makes sense, right?
Admiral Thomas. It makes sense, given the nature of this
industry.
But--so we appreciate the opportunity we have had to work
with this committee staff on drafting some language that might
get to that problem.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Back on the technology, my understanding,
that the International Maritime Organization, IMO, has approved
UV technology, but the Coast Guard hasn't. Is that correct?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, and that is correct. So that goes back
to the difference between the Coast Guard and the IMO standard
lies in the robustness of the type approval process. In other
words, how do you actually prove that that box really does kill
those critters? And what we found--and IMO themselves have gone
back and found that the guidelines they have for type approval
are probably not robust enough. In fact, they are in the
process of revamping them to make them look a lot more like the
U.S.
And one of the reasons that we haven't approved all the
systems--or any of the systems--that the IMO has is because our
process is more robust.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. So right now our shippers, vessel owners,
are kind of just hanging in limbo because they--if they want to
put in some newer technology, they don't know if it is going to
get approved or not. So we are just--so we have all these
extensions----
Admiral Thomas. I would say yes, they are hanging in limbo,
but they are hanging in limbo because of the pending
ratification of the international convention to which we are
not signatory. They are not hanging in limbo because of the
U.S. regulations, because we are granting the waivers until the
technology is available.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Has any other country established vessel
ballast water treatment standards that--you know, that
specifically require ballast water management systems that kill
these organisms? Has any country done that, or not?
Admiral Thomas. So again, if you look at the IMO guidelines
on type approval of international systems, the standard is
dead. The fact of the matter is that a number of
administrations, because those guidelines are not mandatory,
have approved systems that don't kill things. They apparently
are satisfied with the efficacy test. We have not yet been able
to determine that efficacy tests are reliable and repeatable.
We continue to look at that. There is an appeal that is
currently under review by the Coast Guard. We have got some new
data. If we can determine that those tests are reliable and
repeatable across the broad spectrum of species that you see in
ballast water, then we will be in a better position to type
approve those systems.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. I know, Admiral Thomas, this ballast water
thing is going round and round here, and I appreciate your
attempt to try to clarify and to inform us. You said something
here a moment ago in exchange with the chairman, that there
were three different standards: dead, not viable, and the third
one. And then you just said dead, the international standard,
dead.
I assume dead means not viable as in dead. Is that correct?
Admiral Thomas. Not alive, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Not alive.
Admiral Thomas. As opposed to alive but not viable.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. It is the nonviable that seems to be
questionable here. Is that the case?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir. I think, intuitively, you say,
``If I can render this organism so it can never reproduce,''
that is effectively dead for the attempt of the regulation.
And, quite honestly, I would agree with that.
The problem is demonstrating that you have, in fact, done
that for every one of the organisms that might be in that
ballast water. It is easier to demonstrate that they are dead
than it is that they are nonviable.
Mr. Garamendi. Now that is where I want to go. Is part of
this problem the fact that we have at least two--and I think
there was a third--was there a third standard, also, or just
the two? Dead and not viable, is that correct?
Admiral Thomas. Oh. Well, yes, he--the congressman--the
chairman said render harmless, which I have come to know as
viable versus nonviable.
Mr. Garamendi. OK, so that is--we will stipulate that
nonviable and----
Admiral Thomas. Is harmless?
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. Rendered harmless are the same,
and that is the second standard.
If the standard was simply dead, would it be more likely
and more feasible that the test and the replication of the test
would be better achieved?
Admiral Thomas. It is better. I mean, so that--efficacy
tests for dead are reliable and repeatable. And if the standard
were simply dead, then the industry that both needs to operate
these things and needs to manufacture these things would have a
larger degree of certainty.
Mr. Garamendi. So why----
Admiral Thomas. And we would have the technology on board
those vessels----
Mr. Garamendi. Why, then, do we even consider rendered
harmless or not viable?
Admiral Thomas. I think because the regulation is intended
to be enduring. And there is a very good chance that in the
future we will develop an efficacy test that may actually be
effective to determine viability across the full subset. But
today it doesn't exist. At least have not been able to--the
data that we have been submitted--that has been submitted to us
to substantiate this, we have run it through independent
experts----
Mr. Garamendi. Who then----
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. And we haven't been able to
get to that same conclusion.
Mr. Garamendi. But we seem to be hung up on a shoal here
called viable or nonviable.
Admiral Thomas. The viability shoal.
Mr. Garamendi. The viability shoal. So why don't we just
dredge this thing out and say dead?
Admiral Thomas. Well, sir, you know, effectively, we have,
but we are still open to innovators who----
Mr. Garamendi. Who created----
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Can come in and show us that
they have been able to achieve the same standard through
nonviability.
Mr. Garamendi. Who created the option? Is it the Coast
Guard that created the option, or are----
Admiral Thomas. It is a----
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. We the responsible party here?
Admiral Thomas. We--in our regulation I will tell you--and
I wasn't involved in that, but the--there was a lot of
discussion in the course of public comment about this very
issue, of whether it has to be dead, or whether you should
leave the option of nonviability----
Mr. Garamendi. How many years have we been wrestling with
this question of nonviable or rendered harmless?
Admiral Thomas. It has been a part of the debate for
ballast water as long as we have been talking about ballast
water.
Mr. Garamendi. Which is 1990s?
Admiral Thomas. 1996 or so, yes.
Mr. Garamendi. It seems to me there may be a solution. Dead
is dead. That we can agree with. On all of these critters, is
that correct?
Admiral Thomas. We can agree that dead is dead.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. And we can agree that it is going to be dead
for all the critters.
Admiral Thomas. And for the rest of their lives.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. And so, the industry, whoever they may be--
and so the industry basically has been hung up on trying to
wrestle with this not viable or rendered harmless?
Admiral Thomas. Well again, I would tell you, the ballast
water treatment industry is working hard to get to the dead,
and there are 19 systems currently on--that those manufacturers
are confident they are there, or else they would not have
invested in the rigorous course of testing protocols.
Mr. Garamendi. And the industry is hung up----
Admiral Thomas. And the----
Mr. Garamendi. It just seems to me that--I will just make a
statement and then we will try to wrestle with this. It seems
to me as though we are--I mean I understand dead. You are able
to replicate tests that a system kills it, they are dead.
Admiral Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi. You are not able to replicate the question
of viable, nonviable, rendered harmless. That is where the
hangup is. Is that correct?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir. The efficacy test for
nonviability is not----
Mr. Garamendi. And we have more than a dozen different
systems that will kill.
Admiral Thomas. Under testing today.
Mr. Garamendi. Period.
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, it seems to me that the solution lies
in eliminating the question of whether something is viable or
not, and simply say if we are going to install this system, it
is going to require that all the creatures, critters, are dead.
Correct? And then we don't have any question.
Admiral Thomas. I think you will get a different opinion
when you hear from the industry panel on that, because they
would like to retain the flexibility for future innovation.
Mr. Garamendi. And therefore, the entire industry is hung
up, and we are left with mid-ocean exchange.
Admiral Thomas. Right. That is why we are working hard on
systems that we know will actually meet the standard.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, I will be interested to hear the
witnesses. I think I will let it go at that. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Sanford is recognized.
Mr. Sanford. I thank the chairman. I guess the first
question is are we making the perfect the enemy of the good
with regard to the ballast water discharge issue? I mean we
have had different iterations of the same question.
I have been approached by a number of different users in
the Port of Charleston on this issue. It seems to be important.
They brought up the UVA--the UV technology, and suggested that,
you know, if it is good enough for the international standard,
why isn't it good enough--a little bit--would you just flesh
that just a little bit as to why we couldn't go with something
that would give them certainty, or a greater degree of
certainty? It may not be the perfect, but it would be the good,
and it would allow them to move forward, particularly on the UV
front, given some of the comments that they have offered in my
direction.
Admiral Thomas. All right. So just to reiterate, there
are--UV systems are still viable with regard to being able to
meet our standard. There are at least eight or nine of them
currently being tested to the ``dead'' standard.
Mr. Sanford. Right.
Admiral Thomas. The question about why don't we just use
the systems that have already been proven or international
regime is answered really by the study that the IMO did on
those systems, and they--when they looked at how those systems
were approved, and what data was used, and how that data was
interpreted, they found a wide variance in what--great
deviation from even their own guidelines. And they concluded
that we really have no certainty that these systems will work
reliably and consistently.
And, in fact, that particular issue is what has thrown such
a great deal of uncertainty into the international shipping
industry. There are a number----
Mr. Sanford. But the net consequence is you extend over
5,000 waivers, as I understand it. You continue to extend
waivers. So the net effect is the same. In other words, you
would still continue to move ahead with uncertain technology. I
mean----
Admiral Thomas. Well, again, I will remind you that it is
not as if we are extending waivers with no mitigating actions
in place. We are still requiring an action to mitigate the
threat associated with invasive species. And while we do that,
we are focused on a long-term solution that will really meet
this challenge for the long term, and we are very close to
getting there.
Mr. Sanford. OK, which would bring me to my second
question. My colleague, Congressman DeFazio, had raised the
SOLAS question. That too has come up back home in Charleston.
And I think one of the questions with regard to--particularly
on the shipper side--is to what extent is Coast Guard going to
enforce the new regulations, which I think are--I guess a July
date, if I am not mistaken. It is this summer some time. I
thought it was July, but--and they want, you know, some degree
of clarity, one on enforcement and, two, on penalties.
Admiral Thomas. Right, and thanks for that question. The
first key point is that this is not a new regulation. This
particular regulation has been in place since 1994. And so--but
there are amendments to the regulations that are going into
place, and those amendments will not cause any changes in the
Coast Guard's current enforcement stance for that particular
regulation.
Mr. Sanford. But it is July 1st, if I am not mistaken, that
the new regulations or the new amendments to the regulation go
into effect. Is that the case?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir, but you asked about our
enforcement stance on that.
Mr. Sanford. Right.
Admiral Thomas. What I am saying is that the enforcement
stance after 1 July will be the same as it is prior to 1 July.
That is a SOLAS regulation. So we enforce that as a flag state
on U.S.-flag vessels, and we are confident that U.S.-flag
vessels already have the guidance they need to be in compliance
with that standard. We enforce that as a port state on foreign-
flag vessels that come to U.S. ports, and our primary role
there is to ensure that those vessels are operating in
compliance with the requirements from their flag state.
Mr. Sanford. So your point to the maritime community in
Charleston would be there would be no big delta with regard to
what they have seen----
Admiral Thomas. So our----
Mr. Sanford [continuing]. Past versus present.
Admiral Thomas. Our authority, for example, on the port
terminal is not derived from SOLAS. It is derived from Congress
and from----
Mr. Sanford. Right.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. CFR. So the enforcement that
we do on deck at a terminal will be--will remain the same,
because nothing has changed. Nothing has been amended, nothing
has changed.
Mr. Sanford. Sure, OK. Last question. I see I have 48
seconds. If you were to pick out the two most wasteful
regulations that you are forced to enforce from the Coast Guard
standpoint that probably have little in the way of effect, what
would they be?
Admiral Thomas. You would have to give me more time on
that. But your point is well----
Mr. Sanford. Well, what would come off just the top of your
head? What would you say, you know, ``That is kind of a waste
of time, we''----
Admiral Thomas. In our last----
Mr. Sanford. [continuing]. ``Spend X number of man-hours
doing it, but, you know, it probably provides little in the way
of utility or real difference in terms of environment, or real
difference in terms of''----
Admiral Thomas. We have been seeking legislative relief
from the requirement in the Maritime Transportation Security
Act, sir, that we have to go to every MTSA facility twice a
year, regardless of risk. We would prefer to be able to target
our resources to the highest risk facilities so that a rock
facility, for example, doesn't necessarily need to get visited
twice a year, whereas a bulk liquid terminal, we would like to
have the freedom to do it more often.
Mr. Sanford. That would be one.
[Laughter.]
Admiral Thomas. I thought it was good enough to come up
with----
[Laughter.]
Mr. Sanford. I will come back to you on that. Thank you,
sir. I see my time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Graves is
recognized.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Mr. Michel, Admiral, thank you for
being here.
Mr. Michel, in all the meetings we have had with industry
in the last year and a half I have heard a lot of concerns
expressed about the cost of compliance by U.S. shippers as
compared to some of their foreign competitors. The report that
you provided and some of the summary information in your
testimony doesn't seem to be consistent with a lot of the
feedback or a lot of the information we are receiving from
stakeholders.
Could you speak to that disconnect? I mean do you think
this evaluation was robust? Do you think that there were some
deficiencies? Could you help connect the dots here?
Mr. Michel. No, I feel the numbers are good in our report.
The--it is not insignificant. The cost of reflagging at $1
million, taking 3 days, when if you were reflagging the other
direction it would be 1 day and a fraction of the cost. It is
not insignificant. But compared to the total increased cost of
a U.S.-flag operation, it is not a major part. And so we didn't
consider it an impediment to U.S.-flag competitiveness.
We have nine recommendations because we feel there is a lot
of room for the Coast Guard to make further improvements and
reduce costs. But it is not what we would call an impediment,
because it is a very small percentage of overall increased
costs.
So industry has a--you know, again, a strong position
that--we have to be very careful about redundant inspections,
about CFR requirements that require type approval and keep them
from using current best available technologies and the most
cost-effective way--Coast Guard needs to look at those type of
issues. But when we add it all up, the numbers in the report
are robust. That is a good estimate of the cost. It varies ship
by ship, of course.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Yes, sure, thank you. And I just
want to highlight the point that perhaps some of the estimates
pertain to relative costs. And I am anxious to hear from AWO
[American Waterways Operators] and others in the next panel to
understand that disconnect.
Admiral, the Academies' report notes that significant
improvements have been made in regard to efficiency,
environmental improvements, and I think helping reduce costs of
regulatory compliance. Does the Coast Guard meet on a regular
basis with stakeholders to discuss with them their perspective
in regard to compliance and ways to comply with regulations and
ways to perhaps update existing regulations?
Admiral Thomas. We do. [Microphone off.]
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. I want to change gears
a little bit, but similar questioning. I would like to talk
about Coast Guard requirements for systems to be used aboard
vessels navigating inland waterways, which is very different
than oceangoing. I am not sure if it is legal or not, so I will
just say that I may or may not have driven any tow barge
configuration through some Mississippi River bridges and other
places.
Admiral Thomas. I haven't done it, either.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. And--but industry, again, it is
very different than oceangoing. Even when I go out fishing,
just fundamentally different navigation situation in those two
scenarios.
There has not been a standard for electronic charting
systems for the past 15 years. And, as you know, the industry
has been working on their own to develop a standard. And you
may recall that Congressman Abraham and our office and a few
others sent you a letter last year on this topic.
I understand that you may be coming to the point where you
are going to finalize some type of recommendation or some type
of standard. But I would like to understand, if you are
approaching a decision, how is that going to comply with or
sync up with the efforts of the inland navigation community in
what they have been doing over the last 15 years? As you know,
compliance costs could be pretty hefty. I have seen numbers
anywhere from $20,000 to $50,000 per vessel. And I just wanted
to understand sort of how--what they have been doing so far on
their own to ensure safety is going to comply, or the
consistency with what you believe your final recommendation
could be.
Admiral Thomas. Well, I--thanks for that question, because
this is really a good-news story here.
I want to be clear, though. You mentioned the term
``compliance costs.'' We have issued a NVIC [Navigation and
Vessel Inspection Circular] on this topic, but it is not a
regulation and it does not require anyone do anything. So there
is no compliance to be added, and no associated compliance
cost. The NVIC was issued in response to the demand signaled
from the industry that they wanted the Coast Guard to provide a
pathway to remove paper charts that are currently required by
regulation. And, as you said, the existing standards for
electronic systems were just not appropriate for that part of
the industry. They work for large, oceangoing vessels.
So we work hard with our FACAs [Federal Advisory Committee
Act] and with other organizations that develop these types of
standards internationally, and we finally developed a good
standard for this type of system. And that is the standard that
is in the NVIC that says if you have systems that meet this
standard and you employ them in certain ways with certain
redundancies you can legally remove your paper charts.
The problem is that the existing standards on the vessels
that are out there already operating aren't built to this
standard, which is not a surprise, since it is a new standard.
Right? So the market hasn't built things to meet this standard
because this standard is just now out there. The fact of the
matter is, though, that many of the systems that are already
out there, if the manufacturers test them, they will meet the
standard. And working with AWO and others, the big-time
operators who buy lots of these systems are putting the
pressure on the manufacturers to test their systems.
And so, this is a case where the market will drive the
solution. Eventually, it may become a regulation. But if it
does, it is a market--an industry-driven regulation, as opposed
to implementing a regulation that then causes the market
industry to catch up.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just
want to urge, Admiral, as you finalize this, I will say it
again, compliance with what they have been doing for the last
15 years, I think, is pretty critical. They are the ones who
have really been the leaders in regard to establishing
technology and standards in this case.
Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. I think that is all we
have. I think what we established today is it is not Descartes,
``I think; therefore I am,'' it is, ``I procreate, therefore I
am.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. That is what we have figured out today. It is
very philosophical, and hopefully that will make some news.
Right? Yes, right? Or you are considered dead, yes.
So, hey, thank you both very much. Thanks for being here,
Admiral, and thanks for what you guys do.
Admiral Thomas. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. The witnesses for the second panel include Mr.
Thomas Allegretti, president and CEO for American Waterways
Operators; Mr. John Butler, president and CEO for the World
Shipping Council; Mr. John Crowley, executive director for the
National Association of Waterfront Employers; Ms. Donna Lemm,
Agriculture Transportation Coalition SOLAS committee chair and
vice president of global sales for Mallory Alexander
International Logistics; and Mr. Kendall Carver, chairman for
the International Cruise Victims Association, Incorporated.
[Pause.]
Mr. Hunter. We don't have to restart up, because we have
already started. And I introduced everybody while you were
getting seated. So thank you all for being here and taking
time. And I am going to go ahead and just start from left to
right.
Mr. Allegretti, you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS A. ALLEGRETTI, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, AMERICAN WATERWAYS OPERATORS; JOHN W.
BUTLER, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, WORLD SHIPPING
COUNCIL; JOHN CROWLEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF WATERFRONT EMPLOYERS; DONNA LEMM, CHAIR, CONTAINER WEIGHT
COMMITTEE, AGRICULTURE TRANSPORTATION COALITION, AND VICE
PRESIDENT OF GLOBAL SALES, MALLORY ALEXANDER INTERNATIONAL
LOGISTICS; AND KENDALL CARVER, CHAIRMAN, INTERNATIONAL CRUISE
VICTIMS ASSOCIATION, INC.

Mr. Allegretti. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Garamendi. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. This hearing comes at a very consequential time, both
for the towboat and barge industry and for our country. We face
a year of great challenge and extraordinary opportunity, and we
need the bipartisan leadership of this subcommittee to
successfully confront these challenges and take maximum
advantage of these opportunities that are before us.
I come before you today with four requests. First and
foremost, please continue to lead and vocally and actively
support the Jones Act, and please strongly oppose the inclusion
of measures to weaken the law in legislation that may originate
in other committees.
The Jones Act is critical to our Nation's economic,
homeland, and national security, and to the hundreds of
thousands of good, family-wage American jobs and the billions
of dollars of investments made by American companies in
American-built vessels.
Those few but vocal critics who assert that the Jones Act
raises the price of gasoline at the pump, or that repeal of the
Jones Act will solve Puerto Rico's economic woes are, quite
simply, wrong. Repealing or weakening the Jones Act won't make
it a penny cheaper to fill up your car, and it will have no
effect on Puerto Rican Government debt. What it will certainly
do is destroy the domestic maritime industry, it will kill
American jobs, and it will undermine U.S. homeland security: a
bad deal, if ever there was one.
Second, please exercise your oversight responsibility and
pay careful attention to the Coast Guard's implementation of
the towing vessel inspection rule slated for publication this
spring. This subcommittee's leadership was instrumental in the
passage of the 2004 law that required this rulemaking and
enjoyed AWO's strong support. We look forward to working with
the Coast Guard to implement this rule that will raise the
regulatory floor and take safety and environmental protection
in our industry to a new and historic level without disrupting
the efficient flow of maritime commerce. Please stay close to
the implementation of this rule to ensure that it achieves both
of those goals.
Third, please reaffirm by your words and your actions the
Coast Guard's preeminent role in the regulation of navigation
and vessel operations. The safe and efficient flow of
interstate commerce depends upon clear Federal statutes and
regulations consistently and uniformly applied nationwide. When
States or localities muddy the waters by establishing their own
requirements for vessels and interstate commerce, it not only
does violence to the U.S. Constitution, but it places mariners,
vessels, and the environment at risk. We urge you to support
the Coast Guard in finalizing its proposed preemption
statement, and speaking out in opposition when States attempt
to usurp the Coast Guard's regulatory authority.
Fourth and finally, please pass the Vessel Incidental
Discharge Act this year, and put an end to the dysfunctional
regulatory system in which two Federal agencies and more than
two dozen States regulate ballast water and other vessel
discharges in overlapping and inconsistent ways. We have a real
window of opportunity for the 114th Congress to accomplish what
previous Congresses have not: to establish a uniform, science-
based Federal framework for the regulation of vessel discharges
that is good for the environment, good for the economy, and
good for the American taxpayer.
Chairman Hunter, thank you for sponsoring this much-needed
legislation, and we urge every member of the subcommittee to
cosponsor H.R. 980 and to communicate to Chairman Shuster and
Ranking Member DeFazio your support for passage this year.
Our industry very much appreciates this subcommittee's
effective oversight of and your long record of support for the
American maritime industry, and thank you for holding this
hearing today and for the opportunity to appear before you.
Mr. Hunter. For America.
Mr. Butler, you are recognized.
Mr. Butler. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
invitation to testify today. I would ask that my full statement
be included in the record.
The World Shipping Council represents the liner shipping
industry, and our members operate about 90 percent of global
container ship capacity. Today I would like to address an
amendment to the Safety of Life at Sea, or SOLAS, convention,
that becomes effective on July 1 of this year. You have heard a
bit about this already today.
That SOLAS amendment addresses a very serious safety
problem that has affected the container shipping industry for
many years. That safety problem is the fact that in far too
many cases the packed container weight provided to the carrier
by the shipper is inaccurate.
In response to this problem of misdeclared container
weights, industry and Governments began a discussion at the
International Maritime Organization about how to fix the
problem. That discussion at the IMO began in earnest in 2010,
and continued over the next 4 years. Governments, shippers,
labor, insurance providers, terminal operators, and carriers
all participated. The United States Government, through the
U.S. Coast Guard, actively participated in that process.
In 2014 the IMO member countries unanimously adopted a
revised regulation under SOLAS that requires the shipper to
provide an accurate gross weight for each packed container
before that container can be loaded on to a ship for
international transportation. The regulation provides two
methods that the shipper can use to establish an accurate
weight. Under method one the container is weighed after it is
packed. Under method two the shipper weighs the cargo and the
packing material and then adds that weight to the empty or tare
weight of the container. And the tare weight of the container
is conspicuously painted on the door of every container.
The amended SOLAS regulation requires two things that the
existing SOLAS regulation does not. First, the amended
regulation explicitly requires that the loaded container must
be weighed. Estimating weights is no longer allowed. Second,
the amended regulation now explicitly states that the carrier
and the marine terminal operator may not load a packed
container unless the shipper has provided a verified weight.
Without a verified weight, the carrier and the marine terminal
cannot put the container on the ship.
Compliance date is 2\1/2\ months away. A tremendous amount
of work has been done around the world to make sure that the
new regulation can be implemented smoothly. Carriers, shippers,
and terminal operators are in the process of adjusting their
procedures and their communication channels in order to be able
to share the verified gross weight information that needs to be
provided before the container goes on the ship.
Although companies worldwide are preparing for compliance
and making very good progress, there is disagreement from a
group of U.S. exporters that you will hear from today. I
address that situation in length in my written testimony. But
to summarize, there are some shippers that would prefer to
provide only part of the required weight information, and to
have the carrier then provide the other part.
The problem with that approach is that it will not work
with the information technology solutions the carriers have
built to implement the SOLAS amendment. Those IT systems are
designed to receive and process a complete verified gross mass
number, a number that includes both the content of the
container and the container weight itself. That is what the
regulation says. And because that is what the regulation says,
that is the way carriers have built their systems.
So, if shippers only provide the cargo weight, as a few
wish to do, that would trigger a manual data handling process
by the carriers. Such a manual process would not be able to
efficiently handle the documentation flow. And that scenario,
if it comes to pass, could lead to disruptions in cargo flow,
and that is something everybody wants to avoid.
Obtaining and using accurate weights to stow ships is a
shared safety responsibility of carriers, shippers, and
terminal operators. The amended SOLAS regulation spells out
what each party in the chain needs to do. Those tasks are
reasonable and necessary. And if everyone does their part, the
system will work and will make international shipping safer and
more efficient for everyone. I hope that we can use the time
that we have now--between now and July 1 to work together
toward that goal. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Butler. We will just go all the
way through.
Mr. Crowley, you are recognized.
Mr. Crowley. Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking
Member. I appreciate the invitation to be here today and your
recognition of the importance of marine safety throughout our
maritime transportation chain. I represent the marine terminal
operator and stevedoring industry. I, from a visual standpoint,
look at them as that engine within the fence in our ports that
make the economy work, that make the intermodal transfer work
safely, productively for our businesses, exports and imports.
Despite being a volume-based, cycle-time industry, safety
is always job one for industry members. Safety, it comes in
many forms. But for today's purpose we are looking at container
weights. Containers originate from all over the world. They are
carried by multiple flag vessels. They arrive at marine
terminals, both here and abroad. The importance of having a
consistent safety standard is almost without question. Those
safety standards the National Association of Waterfront
Employers look forward to.
We look forward to the amendments to ensure that that is
continued, and that the condition, the contents, and the weight
processes that are available and the records provided to us are
dependable for marine terminal--those inconsistencies, if they
are wrong, show up immediately and have the potential of
grinding operations literally to a halt.
And we look forward to increased productivity. Toward that
end, our members have worked hard to reengineer their
processes, including technology solutions in concordance with
our customers, those that Mr. Butler represents, and provide
systems that are more agile, that provide a faster, better,
safer system towards the improvement of our marine cargo
transportation system.
Thank you for your attention, and look forward to questions
from you today.
Mr. Hunter. You win the shortest testimony yet. You get a
prize after this.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Hunter. Ms. Lemm, you are recognized.
Ms. Lemm. I am here today representing many of your
constituents that are moving thousands and thousands of ocean
container goods, specifically agricultural goods and forest
products. These exports are critical to our economy, and they
are critical to our Nation. I am the vice president at Mallory
Alexander, based in Memphis, Tennessee. And our responsibility
is to prepare the export documentation for exporters, as well
as provide ocean services.
I am also the chair of the SOLAS--Safety of Life at Sea--
Agriculture Transportation Coalition's Container Weight
Committee. Today our coalition is very strong. We come here
with one voice for both your small farmer in your district, as
well as your largest exporter in your district. The voice is
one in unison for one reason: we are very, very concerned about
these new regulations the World Shipping Council has announced,
because there are only two methods that they have announced
that are, in their minds, regulatory. And they are asking the
shipper to abide.
My goal today is, first and foremost, to share with you
that the U.S. exporter is committed to safety. We also have in
place today, as the admiral said, a compliant method in which
we report our weights to the ships. And we report both gross
weights and net weights every day on our bill of ladings. This
has been approved and with the SOLAS regulation for decades.
The problem, in a nutshell, is that there is flexibility,
as the admiral said, in the regulation. This is not a change in
regulation. These are modifications. This is the heart of the
disagreement. The guidelines that have been presented by the
World Shipping Council are mandatory in tone. They are required
in tone. They are not flexible, they are not commercial in
setting, ``Let's go discuss this.''
And I am here to tell you that the two methods proposed--
the first one, scaling, is nearly impossible for most of your
ag and forest product shippers. Why? Where are the scales? Just
last week, we saw the southern ports of the west coast announce
that they were not ready or capable to weigh our containers. I
live in New Orleans. There are no scales in New Orleans. Where
are the scales? You know how expensive it is? Two hundred to
two hundred and fifty dollars to weigh a container. Remember,
they are asking us to certify. It is redundant. We are
certifying today.
The admiral made reference to laws that exist today. We
have the Intermodal Safety Act, which mandates that we certify
the weights that we produce. We produce a bill of lading.
Shipper load and count, certified.
Second method that has been proposed is that we not only
submit our gross weights, but we are also asked to submit the
tare weight of a container we don't own or lease. We have
members that their legal departments are saying, ``There is no
way we are going to allow you to certify or report on a weight
on a piece of equipment you don't own or lease.'' The
ramifications for port disruption are huge.
We are at total opposite ends. Many exporters--I was just
at a conference last week--don't even have a field for tare
weight. These IT systems that we talked about today honestly
just started getting developed November, December. They have
not been rolled out. There is no EDI [Electronic Data
Interchange] standard. There are multiple portals, multiple
carriers, multiple, multiple IT elements that the average
exporter hasn't even begun to understand.
So, I am outlining one cost. I am outlining two--this
window, VGM, is going to require a new cutoff, a totally new
cutoff. We have one member that--they move 10,000 containers.
They believe they will only be able to move half that number of
containers because of this new window, this tighter window.
These are huge ramifications.
We believe that, first and foremost, the solution is to
recognize that the United States is not the problem. These
incidents that they talk about did not happen off of our
shores.
In the spirit of working together with the carriers we have
tried for months now to find best practices. We have said that
we will certify yet again in some kind of business
arrangement--perhaps in contract--that our weights are true and
correct. We have been met with the answer ``no'' each and every
time.
In summary, I ask this committee please to help us, even if
it is through legislative processes, to acknowledge that the
processes that exist today are indeed compliant, that there is
flexibility in this regulation. And if, in fact, the ocean
carriers refuse to cooperate, we ask you to please seek the
opinion of the Federal Maritime Commission for this collective
activity.
In summary, I do ask, please, that you ask the Coast Guard
for written statement about the many methods in which we can
report and verify gross mass. I think there is some ambiguous
discussion and confusion because it has only been in dialogue.
We thank you very much for the opportunity to talk to you
today.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Ms. Lemm.
Mr. Carver, you are recognized.
Mr. Carver. I would like to thank Chairman Hunter and
Ranking Chairman Garamendi and members of the committee for the
opportunity to be here. I serve as chairman of a group called
International Cruise Victims. Prior to that I spent 18 years in
New York City as CEO of an insurance company, which--we were in
a similar business at that time.
It was just 10 years ago that I sat here for the first
time, one of five testimonies that I have given, and it
resulted--the testimony--the hearing was called because Chris
Shays, a Republican, had had a hearing in December of 2005,
raising questions about safety on cruise ships. At the hearing
at which we testified, we had six victims tell their sad story,
but we did something nobody suspected. We gave a 10-point
program to improve safety, a simple program that anybody should
accept.
After several more congressional hearings, the cruise lines
failed to accept any of these points. As a result, the Congress
shifted from the Republicans to the Democrats, so Senator Kerry
and Representative Matsui picked up the cause, and the Cruise
Vessel Security and Safety Act was passed.
For the first time a law was passed that mandated basic
safety and security measures, some which were as fundamental as
have been in hotels forever. Man overboard systems, rights to
victims to contact the FBI directly, and other such provisions.
In addition, victims on a cruise ship, U.S. citizens, are
subject to the rights of the Crime Victims Rights Act, which is
a separate legislation which gives U.S. victims rights.
I would like to say that these major steps to improve
safety have improved safety, but it hasn't really worked.
Generally speaking, the bill is not being enforced. We are
hoping, however, that the final regulations will correct the
deficiencies that we are concerned with. As an example, in 2006
there were 19 convictions of crimes on a cruise ship. In 2013,
after the law took effect, there were three convictions of
crimes on a cruise ship. We are moving backwards instead of
forwards.
There are several--most of the major items in the bill are
not being enforced, and we ask the support of the committee
with the regulations that have been developed, to make sure
that they are issued in line with the goal of the passage of a
bill that was passed with only four votes against it, first
started by the Republicans for the first two hearings, and then
taken over by the Democrats.
In addition, new legislation has been introduced. House
bill 3142 needs to be passed to correct some of the
deficiencies of the first bill and improve safety that includes
the prompt reporting of crimes to the FBI, improved video
surveillance, man overboard systems be installed on cruise
ships, and improved medical standards.
It was 10 years ago that ICV [International Cruise Victims]
turned to our Republican Representative, Chris Shays, for help.
Again, as I said, when the Democrats took over, the Democrats
picked up the ball and ran with it. Chairman Hunter recently
had several mothers in his office in Temecula with their sad
story. These women were from your district. One was a woman
whose daughter was raped by a crewmember, and it has been
covered by ``60 Minutes'' in Australia, the Anderson Cooper
show.
Another mother was there who, on a family trip with 13
members of the family, lost a son. And he was a twin. His twin
came to your office and said the impact that this has had on
him. Two other mothers from California were there that lost
their children. These stories just continue on and on and on.
My point is this. It all started with Republicans and the
Democrats continued the effort. And now it has shifted back to
the Republicans. The many victims in the United States and
around the world are hoping that with the current leadership
this effort to protect passengers will be seen as a bipartisan
issue and move forward like the original legislation passed in
2010.
How will the cruise lines respond to this request that we
have for more legislation? They will say that they are already
highly regulated is their standard phrase. Well, in March of
2014, the National Transportation Safety Board had a meeting.
The IMO came to that meeting and made a presentation. I can
give you that presentation, if you like, but I am going to
quote from one of the slides that said, ``Role and function of
the IMO. IMO is not a policeman. IMO does not implement
anything, develop standards for strength or determine design
requirements, approve equipment and systems, have (m)any
sanctions.'' That is from a direct quote from their PowerPoint
presentation. Therefore, it is up to the United States to
protect our citizens.
Since flag states have taken no action for victims of
crimes on cruise ships, we ask your support in working with the
preliminary regulations that have been issued, and we ask for
your support in the passage of the additional legislation that
has been submitted. Thank you.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, sir. Before we start, I ask
unanimous consent from us that the following materials be
included in the record of today's hearing: a letter from the
South Carolina Ports Authority; a letter from JBS USA Food
Company; a written statement for the record from Ms. Lynda D.
Sanford; a letter from Mr. William Plourd, president and CEO of
El Toro Export.
[No response.]
Mr. Hunter. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information is on pages 147-155.]
Mr. Hunter. And with that I am going to yield to Mr.
Garamendi, and go have a coughing fit outside, and I will be
right back.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. Mr. Allegretti, you spoke of the
Jones Act and potential legislation in--from other committees.
Could you be more direct as to what you fear going on in other
committees?
Mr. Allegretti. Today the Natural Resources Committee is
holding a markup of various provisions that may find their way
into the Puerto Rico relief bill. And reports last night were
that an amendment dealing with the Jones Act was poised to be
offered.
Mr. Garamendi. In the Natural Resources Committee.
Mr. Allegretti. Natural Resources Committee.
Mr. Garamendi. Seems to be beyond their jurisdiction.
Mr. Allegretti. You would think so. And I will say that
your subcommittee, Mr. Ranking Member, and the full committee
have been clear and resolute and we very much appreciate your
vocal support for the law and your clarity with the other
committees that you intend to maintain your jurisdiction over
this vital law.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you for that. I understand that the
provisions of the Jones Act do not apply to the Virgin Islands,
is that correct?
Mr. Allegretti. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. And the cost of fuel on the Virgin Islands
is, therefore, cheaper than the cost of fuel at Puerto Rico? I
have been told by the Representative from the Virgin Islands
that that is not the case, that in fact the cost of fuel in the
Virgin Islands is substantially higher than the cost of fuel in
Puerto Rico. Do you have--know if that is true or not?
Mr. Allegretti. I don't know specifically if that is true,
but I will tell you this. This is exactly the kind of debate
that takes place with respect to the Jones Act, that someone
takes a particular data point and then tries to make that a
larger point about the effect of the Jones Act on a particular
territory or locality when, in fact, oftentimes the
transportation costs have absolutely nothing to do with the
delivered price of the cargo. It has to do with supply, demand,
and all kinds of other things unrelated to waterborne
transportation.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, if the Representative is correct--and
apparently, she is, since she lives there and buys fuel on the
Virgin Islands--that it is not the Jones Act issue----
Mr. Allegretti. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. That raises the cost, but other
matters.
Yes, I represent a big agricultural district. For the life
of me I am not quite sure I understand why we are in such a
quandary about this business of tare weights. It appears as
though it might be the liability issue. Is that correct, Ms.
Lemm?
Ms. Lemm. We believe that.
Mr. Garamendi. So the liability issue revolves around the
question of the tare weight written on the side of the
container.
Ms. Lemm. Correct.
Mr. Garamendi. So if we want to solve this problem, we
could--are there other issues besides that?
Ms. Lemm. There are issues. I mean for--let's take the
issue of the tare weight, itself. The carriers have said
themselves that the tare weights are often inaccurate. We have
members who have run their own tests to prove that the tare
weights that are stenciled on the side of the container are not
accurate, based on their data.
Mr. Garamendi. Within what range of accuracy or lack of
accuracy? Five percent? Ten percent? One hundred percent off?
Ms. Lemm. Roughly 10 to 12 percent. But here is the issue--
--
Mr. Garamendi. And the container weighs how much?
Ms. Lemm. The container--let's take a 40-foot standard,
generally around 8,000 pounds.
Mr. Garamendi. And 10 percent?
Ms. Lemm. 800 pounds. But here is the deal. What is
bothering the shipper, the ag shipper, is that we have never
been responsible for this tare weight before. The--OK.
Mr. Garamendi. I get it, and I don't have that much time,
but----
Ms. Lemm. OK.
Mr. Garamendi. But it--your principal concern has to do
with the liability. OK. So there is something printed on the
side that gives you the tare weight. And if it is not--if the
gross weight is not accurate, then you fear that you are going
to be held liable if there is some accident or something
happens along the line. Is that correct?
Ms. Lemm. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. So, really, it has to do with not being
liable. Well, we could deal with that, but I suppose a court
case could also deal with it.
OK. Are there any other issues beyond this liability issue?
Ms. Lemm. It is the administrative task of having to report
equipment we don't own or lease. The----
Mr. Garamendi. That takes us back to the liability.
Ms. Lemm. OK.
Mr. Garamendi. So we are really stuck on the----
Ms. Lemm. Well, and it is cost. We talked too about IT, IT
programming. Please remember, for decades we have only reported
the gross weight of our cargo.
Mr. Garamendi. Well----
Ms. Lemm. And now we are being asked to report the weight,
the tare weight of that empty container.
Mr. Garamendi. That would involve--I think my granddaughter
now does that kind of mathematics in kindergarten.
Ms. Lemm. Well, we move thousands and thousands of
containers that are transloaded every day. And so we have a
timing issue. For us to sit and look to the side of the
container and actually record the side of the container and
that tare weight and then have to report it and certify it,
time and energy.
I think it boils down to we are told that the practice that
we are doing today is compliant. It is compliant. And if it is
in compliance with the regulation, then we are asking why can't
we continue to do what we are doing----
Mr. Garamendi. So you are essentially asking this committee
to somehow sort out this issue of who is responsible for the
tare weight.
Ms. Lemm. Actually, no. What we are asking the committee
is--the changes are so drastic, so drastic in reporting in
either, A, scaling or, B, in the way we report VGM--it is also
a timing issue. There is a new cutoff. Please remember that the
verified gross mass now will require certification. They are
programming for a whole new certificate for a database.
And so, if, in fact, there is a new cutoff that is given to
the U.S. ag shipper, that cutoff must be before that container
rolls into the gate for that terminal operator. We are
transloading constantly at a minute's notice. The fear is that
the cutoff will be moved up another day, losing a whole other
day to transload export goods--time and money. And so, we
believe that it is an administrative function. The carrier
already knows the weight of their container.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. Mr. Butler, what have we got going here?
Mr. Butler. Mr. Garamendi, let me address a couple of
things in order, if I may.
First of all, Ms. Lemm started by saying that this was a
regulation that was announced by the World Shipping Council. We
are a trade association. This regulation was adopted by the
International Maritime Organization with the participation of
all the Governments of that organization, including the United
States. So it is the law. So we have to follow it. We need
cooperation from our customers so that we can all be in
compliance.
Secondly, on this issue of tare weight, on the legal issue
I do address that in my written testimony. We think this is a
nonissue. I have said it in public, many of our members have
said it in public. No one is going to hold a shipper liable for
any inaccuracy of the tare weight of the container. It is our
equipment. We put that number there, and if there is a problem
associated with it, that is for us.
The other thing I would say about the method number two,
where the tare weight----
Mr. Garamendi. Excuse me. At that point can we make sure
that is in the testimony? Because some trial lawyer is going to
want to come back and look at that----
Mr. Butler. And they are welcome to, yes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. Butler. The other thing I would just mention about the
tare weight, it only comes up in this method number two, where
you put the two pieces together, you don't weigh the whole
container. That was put in at the request of shippers. It
wasn't this set of shippers, but it was a shippers group at the
IMO that asked for that additional way of complying with the
regulation. So it was an accommodation. You don't have to use
it.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. We can go around and around. I just
wanted to get this little piece on the record. I see the
chairman is back, and--you want to take it from here?
Mr. Hunter. I am going to yield to Mr. Sanford.
Mr. Sanford. I thank the chairman. I guess I want to go
back to your comment earlier on the Jones Act with questions on
that front.
I think it is interesting that--I actually pulled the
numbers here. I guess my query would be this. If it is good
enough for the United States military to trust change on that
front, why shouldn't it be good enough for the rest of the
country, from the standpoint of looking at security?
What I mean by that is this. If you look at the Maritime
Administration's Ready Reserve Fleet, a full 30 of their 46 RRF
ships are foreign built. In other words, they don't comply with
the Jones Act. Yet they have exemption at the Federal level,
based on DOD [Department of Defense] needs. And yet oftentimes
the argument is used, ``Well, we need the Jones Act from the
standpoint of national security.'' But the national security
entity of our country, the DOD, has said, ``No, we really don't
need that. We trust foreign-flag ships to transport war
materials from the United States to the Middle East.'' Why, if
it is good enough for the DOD, is it not good enough for the
United States, from the standpoint of national security?
Mr. Allegretti. From the perspective of the view of the
American military as it applies to the Jones Act, they have
been actually quite clear that they do not want to entrust the
movement of domestic commerce on foreign-flagged vessels.
Mr. Sanford. But they do the opposite. I mean, again, I
look at the numbers here. Thirty of the forty-six ships in the
RRF fleet don't comply with Jones Act.
Mr. Allegretti. In respect to the movement of domestic
commerce, they want to preserve that and the military leaders,
the Commandant of the Coast Guard, the Vice Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, the head of the U.S. Department of
Transportation, have all spoken on--sorry, have all spoken
recently and vocally on this matter, that it is--it will
denigrate the national security of the United States to allow
foreign vessels to move our domestic commerce.
Mr. Sanford. I hear you. But again, their actions speak
otherwise.
Let me try a different bite at the apple. So I pulled the
numbers. I don't know that we would view GAO as a biased
source. I mean everybody has their bias, but the Government
Accountability Office, I think, would be a fairly reliable
source. And their numbers indicate, based on a report that I
have here in front of me, that it, in essence, cost double to
send a 20-foot container from the east coast of the United
States to San Juan, Puerto Rico, than it would to Santo Domingo
in the Dominican Republic, literally just a few sea miles away,
if you look at the transit distance, whether you are going out
of New Jersey or Charleston or, for that matter, Miami.
And so you are actually looking at a doubling of cost. So
you could look at security within the confines of DOD
perspective, and whether or not foreign flagged is acceptable
from the standpoint of their security concerns or not, but you
could also look at security from the standpoint of the economy.
And if you look at that kind of impact, for instance, in
that one quadrant as it impacts San Juan--I am looking here
and, for instance, their Farm Bureau in Puerto Rico, the rate
of deference to the Jones Act carrier and foreign carriers has
led farmers and ranchers on the island to more often source
animal feed and crop fertilizer from foreign sources than U.S.
sources because of, again, the difference in cost.
I look at here a report I saw just a moment ago from a
State senator in Hawaii, talking about the difference in
shipping cost. A 40-foot container from L.A. to Shanghai costs
around $790 at the time of this report, which was May 22, 2014,
versus the cost to ship that same container from Los Angeles to
Honolulu, $8,700. Again, basically, a tenfold increase.
And so, you look at those kind of increases, whether it is
in Puerto Rico, which is in the news, or Honolulu, which is not
in the news, you are looking at multiples of cost from the
standpoint of shipping cost, which then does, at an economic
level, begin to factor in national security. What would be your
thoughts there?
Mr. Allegretti. I would tell you, sir, that I think that is
a very narrow reading of the Jones Act benefits and the costs.
And while I am not familiar with the particular numbers that
you are citing, I am familiar with the most recent report done
by GAO, which was designed to look specifically at the cost of
moving cargo to Puerto Rico, and the essential result of that
report was they were not able to reach a firm conclusion about
the cost differential, and here is why.
The difference that you look at when you look at those two
numbers, is you are comparing apples to oranges, you are
looking at an American vessel crewed with American mariners
operating under the laws of the United States, and that is the
cost basis for that vessel. You compare that to a foreign
vessel that is not in compliance with any of those laws, any of
our societal norms. And so their cost basis is lower.
So, if you were to allow them into the U.S. domestic trade,
would you allow them to transport domestic cargo outside of our
laws, or would you apply our laws to them? And so, if you are
going to apply our laws to them, I would argue to you that
their cost basis goes up, and thus so does their transportation
rate.
Mr. Sanford. I hear you. I see my time has expired. But I
would simply, I guess, make this point, which is the question
is how many of those different laws--in other words, whether it
is from the standpoint of a fully unionized labor force--many
of the companies in the Northeast or the Upper Midwest have
come to a place like South Carolina because of a different type
workforce. I don't know that that is absolutely essential to
the creation of any product in the domestic United States.
I would also, I guess, make this point, which is I suspect
you have traveled on foreign-flagged air carriers, and done so
quite comfortably. They may not have all of the same standards
that we do have in America, but the fact is, if you have been
in Germany or you have been in the Far East, or you have been
in Asia, and you have traveled on a Boeing jet that happens to
be, you know, running in a different part of the world with a
different standard, you feel relatively comfortable doing that
or you don't take the flight.
I don't know that I would completely agree with your
reasoning, but I see I am out of time, and to be continued.
With that I would yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. And if anybody wants to
really look at the national security implications of a defense
industrial base and a shipping industrial base, we have tons of
testimony that Mr. Forbes, who is chairman of the Seapower and
Projection Forces Subcommittee on the Armed Services Committee,
we go through this all the time.
And just for the record, the RRF, the Ready Reserve Fleet,
and the MSP fleet are all U.S.-flagged, U.S.-crewed. They are
not--Jones Act--they are not built in the U.S., but they are
U.S.-flagged, U.S.-crewed vessels. And DOD is also subject to
use 100 percent of their movement of cargo on U.S.-flagged,
U.S.-crewed vessels. They get waivers, unfortunately, every now
and then when they shouldn't----
Mr. Sanford. But they get lots of waivers, if I am not
mistaken.
Mr. Hunter. They do, but they screw up all the time. Like
we had an incident yesterday, truly. We had a U.S.-flagged,
U.S.-crewed vessel sitting off the port, waiting for cargo that
went to--they got subcontracted to a foreign vessel that is
going to be late because TRANSCOM screwed up. So just for the
record, in the end, I would like to say this. It is not
necessarily about the Jones Act and the requirements.
The cargo preference laws that we have are not--it is not
an economic thing. It truly isn't. It is about national
security because when you have to start making ships and
crewing those ships in times of war, when we go to war, you
have to have U.S. crews to do that. If you don't have U.S.-
flagged vessels, you don't have U.S. crews to crew them. And
once you lose that ability, it is gone. It is gone forever.
Mr. Sanford. Agreed. And I would always defer to you on
military issues.
But having said that, I think the question is do we have to
have the same standard of security in shipping a container, a
20-foot container carrying fertilizer from the east coast in
Charleston down to Puerto Rico?
Mr. Hunter. I yield to the gentleman. Go ahead, Mr.
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, I would ask that we place into
the record here the testimony from a recent hearing that the
Seapower and Projection Forces Subcommittee of the Armed
Services Committee had on this issue of the Jones Act. I will
paraphrase very, very briefly a piece of it--all of it. And
this came from TRANSCOM and from MarAd [Maritime
Administration].
The testimony was, the Jones Act is absolutely essential
for national security. And without the Jones Act, the military
cannot have a reliable and available sea--shipment by sea. That
testimony was extensive. Mr. Forbes asked a series of
questions, as did I. Those questions completely--would be of
most interest to you, to my--to the gentleman from South
Carolina with regard to the Jones Act. I will make that
available to you, and I would ask that that testimony be placed
in the record here.
[The information is on pages 122-146.]
Mr. Hunter. I would yield to the gentleman if you have any
more talk about it.
I actually don't know what to think about the container
weight issue. I don't think this is a congressional issue. I
don't think you are going to--there is not going to be
legislation. I think this is a deal that needs to be worked out
between the shippers and the shippees. Right?
I don't think there is a legislative answer for this
because, according to the U.S. Coast Guard, which would be the
ones who would regulate this, correct? In a legal battle, who
would be the overseers of people--of the farmers and shippers
and the carriers? I mean who would administer it? Who would
have oversight?
Mr. Butler. Mr. Chairman, the U.S. Coast Guard--excuse me--
is the sole U.S. agency with that authority.
Mr. Hunter. And the U.S. Coast Guard has not taken a
position on this yet, correct?
Mr. Butler. I don't want to speak--pardon me--I don't want
to----
Mr. Hunter. Well, how about I tell you? The U.S. Coast
Guard has not taken a position on this yet.
Mr. Butler. Correct. What they----
Ms. Lemm. May I----
Mr. Butler. What they have said is that there are many
different ways to do this. And, frankly, the discussion that
has been going on back and forth between the carriers and the
shippers, it is not really so much about, you know, what is
legally required. It is about how do we do this in a way that
we can keep commerce moving.
And there are certain ways of doing this, if we have a
uniform process, that is going to make it--particularly with a
deadline coming up July 1, it is going to make it a lot more
likely that we have a smooth process if we all do it the same
way. If everybody comes in and wants----
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask you this, though. Here is what I
don't understand. What has been--what happens until now? I mean
everybody--when you get on an airplane the luggage gets
weighed, they have to know how much stuff weighs. Same with
ships, right? You got to know what stuff weighs, so you can
load the ship properly, right?
So what has been happening until now in the United States?
Forget the world.
Mr. Butler. It is a bit of a mix. Today carriers use
various sources of weights in order to stow the ship. Sometimes
they use the weight from the shipper, sometimes experience says
that the weight from the shipper is, unfortunately, inaccurate
and they have to disregard that. In that case they may use the
in-gate weight when a truck comes across through the gate into
the port.
In some cases, frankly, carriers have--excuse me--default
weights for certain commodities. They know essentially what it
is going to weigh, and they will use that. But too many times--
and there is--I have talked to lots of our carriers, they are
involved in this. And over the years, far too many times the
weights are simply inaccurate.
Mr. Hunter. Do--are containers not standard? Do they
differ?
Mr. Butler. Well, containers--sure, there are standard
sizes, but they differ--any given run of manufacturing of
containers there is going to be some differences between the
container weights. They will fall within a range.
Mr. Hunter. A range, I mean, I would guess--pretty close,
right?
Mr. Butler. Generally, yes.
Mr. Hunter. So what does the Coast Guard say now, a 5
percent variance is fine?
Mr. Butler. The Coast Guard hasn't announced a numeric
variance.
Mr. Hunter. All right. What is the international standard
for variance?
Mr. Butler. There is not an international standard. The
U.K., for example----
Mr. Hunter. All right. Where did 5 percent come from, then?
Mr. Butler. Five percent came from the United Kingdom.
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Mr. Butler. And that is being discussed in Europe, it is
being discussed in other places. And that is an enforcement
variance----
Mr. Hunter. What is their deadline?
Mr. Butler. Everybody's deadline is the same, July----
Mr. Hunter. For the----
Mr. Butler. July 1----
Ms. Lemm. Chairman Hunter, I would just like to say that--
--
Mr. Hunter. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Lemm [continuing]. Only 10, 10 countries, have even
taken a position, 10 of 171 countries that are affiliated with
the IMO, have taken a position on this.
I would also like to say that the Coast Guard has been very
clear that this is not a new regulation. I meant to say that
the World Shipping Council has issued guidelines without
flexibility. The Coast Guard has also been clear that there is
flexibility and there are multiple ways in which we can report
gross mass. Historically, gross mass has been reported by the
shipper to the carrier.
The responsibility has been the carrier to the master to
report accurate weights. This VGM is a new term. Never before
heard it before until a few months ago. Verified gross mass now
replaces the term gross mass. And in its replacement of gross
mass, it totally replaces the way we have for decades reported
weights. The shipper has forever reported the gross weight of
their cargo, and never had to report also the tare weight of an
empty container that they don't own or lease.
One thing that I failed to say in my final summary, that if
in fact these changes are mandated, and they are regulatory
changes, then we have to follow and ask the Coast Guard for a
rulemaking, an official rulemaking. Now, I believe the Coast
Guard, in good faith, really thought we could just work it out,
that in a commercial setting we could dialogue. But
unfortunately, the margins are so thin on our agricultural
commodities we can't afford a $250 scale.
One shipper believes it is going to cost to his bottom line
$4 million if we are forced to scale. This is a major U.S.
shipper.
Mr. Hunter. When you say scale you mean $250 every time you
weigh----
Ms. Lemm. A container.
Mr. Hunter. Got you.
Ms. Lemm. A lot of money on super thin margins for our
exports. And we feel that that is burdensome. And the option,
frankly, for most is a no-go.
Mr. Hunter. Let me ask you this, Mr. Butler. Why--I mean
this is the U.S. Congress. We have 80 U.S.-flag vessels that
sail internationally. Sixty of them are MSP so they get
stipend, right? So we have got about 20, is that about right?
We have about 20 vessels that aren't MSP that are
internationally--that are U.S.-flag international cargo
vessels?
So why should we here put a burden on our shippers when it
is more of an international issue than it is our issue? Meaning
why should we worry about the international carriers, as
opposed to the U.S. fleet?
Mr. Butler. The cargo----
Mr. Hunter. And the U.S. economy, the U.S. businesses, and
the people that are actually making things and exporting them,
which is very--that is very few. We don't export a whole bunch
of stuff. A lot of ag stuff. We aren't China, obviously, and we
are not a lot of other countries that export a bunch of stuff.
So why is this an issue for Congress?
Mr. Butler. Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't think it is an
issue for Congress.
Mr. Hunter. Then why are you here?
Mr. Butler. I think this--because I was invited to come.
Mr. Hunter. I mean but what I am--I mean why are we talking
about this, then, if it--you are saying that you might want
legislative action----
Ms. Lemm. I am saying please----
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. If things aren't solved.
Ms. Lemm. Well, what we would like to do is continue the
practice that we are doing today. We would like to meet the
carrier halfway by saying we will certify again--yet again--the
gross weights of our cargo under contract, or perhaps when we
send our shippers instructions for that master bill of lading,
a check box and a signature that we verify our weights to be
true and accurate.
Mr. Hunter. Yes. I am missing something, then. What is
wrong--how is that different than what you are asking for?
Mr. Butler. It is not what we are asking for, sir, it is
what is in the regulation.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Well, how----
Mr. Butler. And the question----
Mr. Hunter. How is it different than what the regulations
are asking for, and what she just said?
Mr. Butler. It depends on what the shipper is doing today.
If the shipper today is weighing the cargo and providing us a
full weight of the loaded container, then they are already in
compliance.
Mr. Hunter. Then that is it.
Mr. Butler. Right? Ms. Lemm has talked about the added cost
of weighing things. Well, if you are not weighing things today,
how do you know how much it weighs?
Mr. Hunter. I think she--what she is saying is they have--
they don't weigh the container that is full, right? They weigh
their stuff----
Mr. Butler. Right, which----
Mr. Hunter. They know what that----
Mr. Butler. Which takes us back to this method two, which
we discussed a little bit while you were outside of the room.
And the concern that has been raised there by shippers--a small
number of shippers, but some shippers--is legal liability, or
taking the weight that is painted on the door of the container,
and adding that to the contents. And what I said at that time
is we have been very clear. The carriers aren't looking to hold
shippers liable for a weight that we wrote on the door of the
container. That is on us.
But it was put in the regulation as an accommodation to
shippers so that they could use method number two and not have
to go find a scale to weigh----
Mr. Hunter. And method two, again, is weighing your
products outside of the container, right? And then adding
that----
Mr. Butler. Tare weight.
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. That is on the----
Ms. Lemm. And we contend----
Mr. Butler. Correct.
Ms. Lemm. We contend that if, in fact, we have to certify
``C,'' which is VGM--``A'' being gross weight of our cargo plus
``B,'' tare weight of their cargo, ``Don't worry about it, Mr.
Shipper, you are not liable, but sign here,'' ``C,'' verified
gross mass--that any part of that equation then ties us to that
certification.
We are also asking about the administrative function. Why
would we be asked--we have heard the carriers say, one, tare
weight is insignificant. Anybody--yes, a second grader can
read, you know, the sides of the container. We are asking why
would you burden the U.S. exporter who is already at an all-
time low with U.S. exports, why would you burden them with
another administrative function that is not necessary? Why
would you ask them to report on the tare weight of a container?
When you own it, you already know. It is in your database.
They are--the World Shipping Council, several members, have
suggested we go to their Web site to pull the container weight
if we don't want to look at the sides of the containers. We are
contending, ``Come on, guys, why are we making this harder than
it is?'' You have already said it is insignificant. You have
already said what you really want to look at is that gross
weight. We agree, it should be reported accurately, and that is
the only thing we, as U.S. shippers, have control over.
Mr. Hunter. I am still--I am trying to get my hands around
this. If the Coast Guard is not going to enforce the new
regulation, what do you contend with that, then? If they are
going to say, ``The way things are, it complies, the way things
are now, it complies with this regulation,'' that is basically
what they are saying. The Coast Guard is not demanding that
anybody do anything differently, correct?
Mr. Butler. I think actually, Mr. Chairman, that is not
correct. What I heard today from Admiral Thomas is there are
lots of ways of complying with this regulation in terms of your
processes and so forth.
But he did say that because of the amendments to the
regulation there will be changes in business processes. And
there will be. And carriers have spent millions of dollars
around the world, reconfiguring their systems so that we can
efficiently process this information in conformance with the
regulation. And the hope is that, in setting up these new
processes and getting more accurate weight, we will have safer
vessels to carry the commerce of the world and also the United
States, to your original point.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. I don't know that this is the correct panel,
but I am back to viable and dead.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Garamendi. And I don't know anybody that wants to
comment on it, but it seems to me that the problem we are
having with this discharge--and I guess there are the shippers
here, so--Mr. Butler, you are going to be on here in a moment--
the problem is that we can verify dead, and we can replicate
that test that it is dead, but we can't get down to viable or
whatever, inherently----
Mr. Hunter. Rendered harmless?
Mr. Garamendi. Rendered harmless, whatever. Why don't we
just say dead and be done with it? And apparently the systems
are out there that can kill it.
Mr. Butler. Well, a couple of things. The systems may be
out there. The problem is we don't know. No systems--and the
admiral spoke to this earlier--no systems have yet been type
approved by the United States. What that means is nobody has
yet come in with test data that shows dead all the time.
Mr. Garamendi. I didn't hear it that way, and I think we
need to go back and go back over this again. And I will, after
the hearing.
I heard it that it is the viable or nonviable issue that
they are not able to replicate, but that they can replicate and
have high level of certainty that it is dead.
Mr. Butler. I think I can clear that up. I think he was
talking about two things. One is how many systems today have
been type approved by the U.S. Coast Guard. The answer is zero.
Mr. Garamendi. Correct.
Mr. Butler. With respect to the test, you are correct, sir.
He said we can tell when something is dead, we are not so sure
we can tell when it is viable.
From a carrier standpoint operating globally, what we want
to know is when we put a system on a ship--and these things are
not cheap--when we put a system on a ship, we want it to work
and be recognized every place in the world, and we want to know
that we have investment certainty that if we spend that $1
million, $2 million per ship to do this, it is going to have
some environmental benefit, and we can count on being in
compliance.
Ms. Lemm. And what we are saying is that at--the issue is
what is compliance, what is compliant. What the admiral said
was that our method, our current method, is compliant. And what
we are suggesting is the problem is that the World Shipping
Council and its members are telling us dogmatically, ``We can't
accept your current compliant method. You have to do one of
these two other methods.'' These----
Mr. Garamendi. We are talking two different things here.
Mr. Butler. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi. I have moved over to----
Mr. Hunter. It is analogous, maybe.
[Laughter.]
Ms. Lemm. It is analogous, in my mind. It is a circle.
Mr. Garamendi. Well then, just--I am into creatures of the
sea.
Ms. Lemm. No, I understand.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. Then just hold it for a second, because
we are going to be out of time here in a few moments.
Yes, I need to go back, and I will talk to the admiral
about the tests themselves. And we don't have the companies
that manufacture or purport to manufacture the equipment, but I
think we need to--I need to get into it in more detail. I think
at this moment I am headed down the line that it is the viable
issue or nonviable issue that is hanging everything up here,
and that the technologies may be available to kill, as in dead,
creatures that might be in the ballast water.
Mr. Butler, final comment on that. Then I have got----
Mr. Butler. The final comment is that would provide
certainty to everybody, and on this issue certainty would be
most welcome.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Man overboard surveillance. This
issue is an issue requiring a requirement for cruise ships to
install a system to monitor and detect incidents where a person
falls overboard.
Mr. Carver, you said there were a couple of technologies
that seem to be available for this?
Mr. Carver. There may be more than two, but I listed in my
written testimony two companies that have systems that have
been tested. In 2011 the Coast Guard asked for proposals on man
overboard systems. They got them. But to the best of my
knowledge, they never contacted the companies that issued the
proposals to validate their proposal.
And so, I have often asked them----
Mr. Garamendi. In your written testimony, which I must have
missed, did you name the companies?
Mr. Carver. Yes, I did.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Well, David is going to contact
them and we are going to see what those systems are and whether
they really do work. And then, if they do, or at least they
purport to do, we will do that. I assume the witnesses here are
not into man overboard issues.
OK. Thank you. That is it.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you all for being here, and thanks for
staying a little bit extra time. We talked about a lot of
things today. And I am not even going to rehash everything.
There are no further questions. There are no--any--there is
nobody else here but me and John. So, with that, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:15 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
