- THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST FOR COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST FOR COAST GUARD AND
MARITIME TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

(114-37)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 15, 2016

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

99-435 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                             Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               DINA TITUS, Nevada
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JOHN KATKO, New York                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JARED HUFFMAN, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada                JULIA BROWNLEY, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
MIKE BOST, Illinois
------

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman
DON YOUNG, Alaska                    JOHN GARAMENDI, California
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      CORRINE BROWN, Florida
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         JANICE HAHN, California
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York                  Officio)
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................    iv

TESTIMONY

Admiral Paul F. Zukunft, Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard,
accompanied by Master Chief Steven W. Cantrell, Master Chief
Petty Officer of the Coast Guard, U.S. Coast Guard.............     4
Hon. Paul N. Jaenichen, Administrator, Maritime Administration...     4
Hon. Mario Cordero, Chairman, Federal Maritime Commission........     4

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED BY WITNESSES

Admiral Paul F. Zukunft..........................................    37
Hon. Paul N. Jaenichen...........................................    55
Hon. Mario Cordero...............................................    62

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Admiral Paul F. Zukunft, Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard, responses
to questions for the record from the following Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio.......................................    44
Hon. Don Young of Alaska.....................................    50
Hon. Duncan Hunter, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, submittal of statement of Kathryn Sullivan,
Ph.D., Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration................    69
Hon. Mario Cordero, Chairman, Federal Maritime Commission,
response to request for information from Hon. John Garamendi, a
Representative in Congress from the State of California........    80
Hon. Garret Graves, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Louisiana, submittal of report entitled ``The Economic
Importance of the U.S. Shipbuilding and Repairing Industry'' by
the Maritime Administration, November 2015; Web link to report
provided.......................................................    33
Hon. John Garamendi, a Representative in Congress from the State
of California, submittal of statement of General Darren W.
McDew, U.S. Air Force, Commander, U.S. Transportation Command,
before the House Subcommittee on Readiness.....................    90

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2017 BUDGET REQUEST FOR COAST GUARD AND
MARITIME TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 15, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m. in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Duncan Hunter
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Hunter. The subcommittee will come to order. The
subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on the
President's fiscal year 2017 budget request from the leaders of
the Coast Guard, Maritime Administration, and the Federal
Maritime Commission.
For the fifth year in a row the Coast Guard is seeing
funding cuts in the President's budget request sent to
Congress. The request would slash the Coast Guard's acquisition
budget by 42 percent from fiscal year 2016 enacted level. The
proposed fiscal year 2017 request is roughly $1 billion short
of what is required to sustain the acquisition program of
record. The underfunding of Coast Guard programs will continue
to severely undermine efforts to recapitalize the Service's
aging and failing legacy assets, increase acquisition costs for
taxpayers, and seriously degrade mission effectiveness.
The administration is playing a reckless game. Annual
budget requests cut funding for the Coast Guard to pay for
increases at other agencies, betting that Congress will not
ignore the needs of the Coast Guard and restore the hundreds of
millions of dollars needed to sustain its acquisitions and
frontline operations.
This yearly game of chicken is not conducive to
recapitalizing the Coast Guard's fleet or in sustaining its
missions. What is perceived as the administration's lack of
support for Coast Guard programs makes it difficult to
continually fight for funding increases during the
appropriations process. If the President is going to continue
to propose these cuts year after year, he needs to tell us how
he intends to rescope the missions of the Coast Guard to
reflect his reduced budgets.
Admiral Zukunft and Master Chief Cantrell are here before
us today. I want to commend you both for your leadership and
tremendous service to our Nation. Admiral, I fully understand
the situation you have been put in with this budget and
previous year budget requests, and I appreciate your candor in
describing what these cuts will mean for the ability of the
Service to successfully conduct its missions.
The budget request for the Maritime Administration is a
slight increase of 1 percent over the current level. Operations
and training and the ship disposal program receive increases in
fiscal year 2017. The administration is again requesting a one-
time payoff to the maritime industry in exchange for a
permanent reduction in the number of U.S. mariner jobs carrying
cargo under the hugely successful Food for Peace program.
Since 1954, the Food for Peace program has provided
agricultural commodities grown by U.S. farmers and transported
by U.S. mariners on U.S.-flagged vessels to those threatened by
starvation throughout the world. Unfortunately, since fiscal
year 2014 the administration has proposed restructuring the
Food for Peace program. This misguided proposal will eliminate
a vital program for our farmers, put mariners out of work, and
undermine our national security by reducing the domestic
sealift capacity on which our Nation's military depends.
Members of Congress have repeatedly, in a bipartisan
manner, come together to vote down this flawed proposal. I hope
my colleagues will join me once again in rejecting the
President's proposal and work with me on efforts to strengthen
our merchant marine. I look forward to hearing from the
Administrator on how he intends to move forward with his
efforts to revitalize the U.S.-flag fleet.
Finally, for a second year in a row the budget request for
the Federal Maritime Commission proposes a 7-percent increase
in funding over current levels. While this budget increase
amounts to less than $2 million, it is hard to reconcile with a
42-percent cut in Coast Guard acquisition. Nonetheless, I look
forward to receiving from the Commission the explanation that I
have requested from the Chairman of the uncontrollable cost
increases imposed on the FMC [Federal Maritime Commission] over
the last several years.
Our Nation is facing a very tough budget climate, and the
President's unrealistic request only makes things harder.
I look forward to working with my colleagues to enact a
responsible budget.
And with that I yield to Ranking Member Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and Admiral,
Chief, Mr. Jaenichen, Mr. Cordero. Thank you very much for
being here.
Mr. Chairman, you pretty much laid it out. We got a problem
here. Our national economic strength and vitality remains
closely tethered to the global supply chain, a supply chain
that is dependent on safe, efficient, and reliable marine
transportation. Consequently, few things could be any more
important than to ensure that we invest wisely and sufficient
funding in agencies that serve to protect, secure, and
facilitate the maritime commerce of the United States.
Yet, after reviewing the fiscal year 2017 budget request
for the United States Coast Guard, the Maritime Administration,
and the Federal Maritime Commission, there is only one
conclusion that I can make, and that is these are not going to
be the best of times. We are headed for a problem here.
Certainly it is the best of times when you have a Coast
Guard and a budget that requests substantial funding to
maintain progress on the vital recapitalization of the offshore
cutter fleets, especially new funding to procure long lead-time
materials for the Offshore Patrol Cutter, and to begin the
recapitalization of the polar icebreakers.
But the Coast Guard budget that cuts over $800 million from
its acquisitions and construction account, which also neglects
the requested adequate funding to address the significant
backlogs in both unmet shoreside infrastructure and Coast Guard
housing needs is shortsighted and disappointing.
Similarly, the great success that we all shared last year
when we pushed through the increased authorization funding
levels for the Maritime Security Program, it has been dampened
by MarAd's [Maritime Administration's] request seeking to fund
the MSP at the 2015 funding level, while also perpetrating the
administration's ill-advised food aid reform policies. I must
tell you it is disappointing to see this come back again and
again and again.
The chairman spoke very clearly about the lack of wisdom of
that program, and what it means to our mariners and, more
important, what it means to starving people around the world. I
note Ethiopia and the crisis that they are having there, and
the need for food. Purchased locally? Are you kidding me? So,
maybe we can put an end to the ill-advised reform that is
inherent in this proposal.
Mr. Jaenichen, on top of all this disappointment we also
find that the administration has not requested funding for
Title XI, loan guarantees for the small shipyards. Everybody
wants to talk about making it in America, about manufacturing,
about jobs. And one of the most important programs we have
available to us on the cheap, Title XI. So we are going to
starve it.
In closing, we want to have a reliable marine supply chain
and a vibrant maritime and shipbuilding industry and a safe and
secure marine environment and to deter drugs and, and, and.
Better fund the Coast Guard, folks, and the merchant marines.
This budget doesn't do it.
So, let's get in a brawl with the administration, and let's
make some choices. I just left a meeting this morning with the
Air Force that wants to rebuild their entire nuclear arsenal at
a cost of several billion dollars a year. So let's make some
choices. The Coast Guard comes out on top, the merchant marine
comes out on top of that equation.
All right. Enough said. Let's get on into it. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Our panel of witnesses
today is Admiral Paul Zukunft, Commandant of the U.S. Coast
Guard; Master Chief Petty Officer of the Coast Guard, Steven
Cantrell; the Honorable Paul Jaenichen, Administrator of the
Maritime Administration; and the Honorable Mario Cordero,
Chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission.
Admiral, you are recognized.

TESTIMONY OF ADMIRAL PAUL F. ZUKUNFT, COMMANDANT, U.S. COAST
GUARD, ACCOMPANIED BY MASTER CHIEF STEVEN W. CANTRELL, MASTER
CHIEF PETTY OFFICER OF THE COAST GUARD, U.S. COAST GUARD; HON.
PAUL N. JAENICHEN, ADMINISTRATOR, MARITIME ADMINISTRATION; AND
HON. MARIO CORDERO, CHAIRMAN, FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION

Admiral Zukunft. Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Garamendi,
members of the subcommittee, let me first express my profound
thanks to this subcommittee for the largest appropriation in
Coast Guard history in fiscal year 2016. It literally got us
out of debt.
But we are here to talk about the President's budget in
fiscal year 2017. I first ask that my written statement be
accepted as part of the official record.
Mr. Hunter. Without objection.
Admiral Zukunft. OK. The fiscal year 2016 appropriation
significantly advances our long-term acquisition strategy, and
it provides stable operating funds for new assets. You are
helping us build a 21st-century Coast Guard postured for
mission success around the globe.
Notably, our increased efforts and our approaches in
transit zones netted 700 smugglers' arrests and seized over 190
metric tons of pure cocaine destined for the United States this
past year. You can be assured that we are leveraging the full
scope of the intelligence community to drive our operations and
disrupt transnational criminal networks attempting to move
illegal goods and people by sea. Last year two of our National
Security Cutters returned to port and offloaded more than $1
billion worth of pure cocaine.
But it is not just about the drugs. These cartels also
undermine rule of law, good governance--as we see in Central
America, where 8 out of the 10 most violent countries in the
world exist south of the border, which also gives rise to human
trafficking and unaccompanied minors arriving on our southwest
border. Our interdictions at sea are making a significant
difference, but we are doing so with very finite resources.
The appropriation you provided in 2016 and the President's
budget request in 2017 will allow us to move forward with the
most important acquisition we have undertaken since 1790, and
that is the recapitalization of our 50-year-old Medium
Endurance Cutters with the Offshore Patrol Cutter. Now, I
remain confident we will down-select to a single shipbuilder
and award the Offshore Patrol Cutter detail design by the end
of this fiscal year.
The budget also provides funding to continue our efforts to
complete our program of record for the Fast Response Cutter. We
are in negotiations to award phase 2 of the Fast Response
Cutter contract, and I remain committed to attaining a fair and
reasonable price for the American public.
The recapitalization of our cutter fleet is the Coast
Guard's top priority, and I am open to all acquisition
strategies, including multiyear and block-buy options. These
new ships increase our operational capability, best leverage
intelligence, and most importantly they keep our men and women
safe on an often unforgiving sea.
Moving to the polar regions, the cutter Healy reached the
North Pole this past summer in support of the United States
Arctic interest and sovereignty. Today, cutter Polar Star is
homeward bound after completing a successful breakout and
resupply of McMurdo Sound in Antarctica. She is the only heavy
icebreaker in the United States inventory capable of completing
that mission, and she has less than 7 years of service
remaining.
I am grateful for the President's request for $150 million
that demonstrates our commitment to building heavy icebreakers,
and takes this project through the critical design phase, and
avoids the uncertainty that often plagues shipbuilding
projects. I look forward to continuing to work with you to
accelerate heavy icebreaker acquisition.
In closing, investing in a 21st-century Coast Guard is as
much about people as it is about platforms. Our 2017 budget
request allows us to continue to build the workforce of the
future. Now, this is not without challenges, but we have the
best workforce in Coast Guard history.
I am seeing the impact of decreased retention and slowed
accessions. Our increasingly uncertain and complex world
requires high-end skill sets from an in-demand talent pool such
as cyber, intelligence, marine inspections, and technically
trained professionals have many options today besides serving
in the military service. To that end, we are crafting the Coast
Guard manpower requirements plan to baseline our 21st-century
workforce as this committee has mandated.
As I said in my State of the Coast Guard Address--and I am
an optimist--these are the finest hours to serve in the United
States Coast Guard. I thank you for your support in making that
a reality. I look forward to working with the subcommittee as
we make prudent investments in the 21st-century Coast Guard.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Commandant.
Master Chief, I understand you have comments for the
record. Do you want to make a statement?
Mr. Cantrell. No, sir, I will just forgo to limit the time,
and then I will be ready to answer questions when you guys are.
Mr. Hunter. Roger, OK.
The Honorable Chip Jaenichen is recognized.
Mr. Jaenichen. Good morning, Chairman Hunter and Ranking
Member Garamendi, and members of the subcommittee. I appreciate
the opportunity to discuss the President's fiscal year 2017
budget priorities and initiatives for the Maritime
Administration.
The fiscal year 2017 budget request is $428.1 million,
which funds activities supporting national security, strategic
mobility, ships and shipping, port operations, ship disposal,
environmental sustainability, and mariner training and
education. The President's budget request continues to support
funding readiness for programs that support the Department of
Defense sealift requirements.
For fiscal year 2017, $186 million is requested for the
Maritime Security Program, or MSP, to fund $3.1 million for
each of the 60 ships enrolled in the program. That funding
amount was based on the program of record prior to the
increased authorization amount that was included in the
Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2016. The timing of that
authorization did not allow sufficient time for us to analyze
the new funding levels to support submission with the
President's fiscal year 2017 request.
The MSP provides direct annual stipends for up to 60
active, commercially viable, militarily useful, privately owned
U.S.-flag vessels and crews operating in international trade.
The MSP fleet ensures access to U.S.-flag ships in oceanborne
commerce with the necessary intermobile logistics capability to
move military equipment and supplies during armed conflict or
national emergency.
Funding provided from the U.S. Navy will allow the Maritime
Administration to continue to provide surge sealift support in
2017 through our Ready Reserve Force program. This is a fleet
of 46 vessels whose primary purpose is to provide for rapid
surge movement of defense equipment and supplies and support of
global projection of our armed forces, and to respond to
national and humanitarian emergencies globally.
It takes many years of training to develop the necessary
merchant mariner competencies to operate these ships. The U.S.
Merchant Marine Academy and the six State maritime academies
graduate the majority of the U.S. Coast Guard credential
merchant marine officers needed to crew these vessels.
To support the necessary training, the President's fiscal
year 2017 budget request includes $99.9 million for the U.S.
Merchant Marine Academy. This request will enable the academy
to achieve its core responsibility of providing the highest
caliber of academic study with state-of-the-art learning
facilities for the Nation's future merchant marine officers.
The budget request also includes $29.6 million for the
State maritime academy program. This request includes $22
million to fund maintenance and repair costs for the federally
owned training ships that are on loan from the Maritime
Administration to the six State maritime academies. The
training ship fleet is aging, with an average age of 37 years.
And the oldest, the Empire State, at the State University
of New York Maritime College, is 55. Through the fiscal year
2017 budget request, the Maritime Administration is requesting
priority maintenance for the six training vessels, to ensure
they all meet safety and functional requirements to stay in
service as long as possible.
Additionally, the Maritime Administration will be
validating the next appropriate steps to ensure adequate
shipboard training capacity remains available in order to
produce sufficient quantity and quality of mariners to support
our sealift needs into the future.
The fiscal year 2017 budget request also reflects a
continuing commitment to reducing and mitigating maritime
transportation-related impacts on the environment. This
includes a request for the ship disposal program of $9 million
to support disposal of nonretention National Defense Reserve
Fleet vessels that are in the worst condition, with priority
emphasis on the removal of the three remaining obsolete vessels
in the Suisun Bay Reserve Fleet that were identified in the
April 2010 California court consent decree.
The President's fiscal year 2017 budget request also
includes $11 million for the inactive former nuclear ship
Savannah. This includes $8 million to begin the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission required decommissioning process,
including the dismantlement and decontamination of the defueled
nuclear propulsion plant on board the vessel.
In addition, the budget request includes $3 million for
energy and environmental technology initiatives designed to
enhance maritime sustainability and affordability through our
maritime environmental technical assistance program.
Finally, the fiscal year 2017 budget requests $3 million
for a pilot program to support port infrastructure improvements
through our StrongPorts program. This funding will provide port
planning grants to enable ports to create investment-grade
infrastructure development plans that comply with Federal
planning requirements and satisfy private lending institutions,
and also promote public and private partnerships.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for your opportunity to present and
discuss the President's fiscal year 2017 budget request for the
Maritime Administration. I will be happy to respond to any
questions that you or members of the subcommittee may have.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Administrator.
Chairman Cordero, you are recognized.
Mr. Cordero. Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi,
members of the subcommittee, good morning and thank you for
providing me the opportunity to testify in support of our
fiscal year 2017 budget.
With your permission, I will summarize my prepared remarks,
which I kindly request to be entered into the record.
Please allow me to begin by reporting our response to two
congressional mandates we were given last year by way of the
Howard Coble Coast Guard Act of 2014. The Commission issued a
rule that became effective on March 1, 2016, that implements
term limits on our Commissioners and changes how attorney fees
are awarded in cases brought before FMC.
Mr. Chairman, in 2015 the United States saw a level of
international container traffic that was a record-breaking 31.5
million TEUs [twenty-foot equivalent units]. The commodities
inside these containers carried on ships, transiting marine
terminals all move on top of a regulatory system that seeks to
facilitate trade while protecting the American shipper from
unlawful anticompetitive behavior. That regulatory system is
the jurisdiction and responsibility of the Federal Maritime
Commission. And through our work, we facilitate and safeguard
fair, efficient, and reliable transportation for oceanborne
international cargo.
International container trade is growing significantly.
Based on conservative estimates of a 5-percent annual growth,
box volumes will double by the end of the next decade. That is
tens of millions of containers above and beyond the 30 million
TEUs that arrived here last year and are already overwhelming
our marine terminal infrastructure, leading to port congestion
and inefficiencies in the supply chain. If left unaddressed,
congestion at our maritime gateways will result in gridlock,
and that is an outcome that none of us can afford to see come
to pass.
We have directly tackled the issue of congestion. The
latest development is the unanimous vote that was taken in
February by the Commission to establish the Supply Chain
Innovation Team project. That effort will be led by
Commissioner Rebecca Dye, and will culminate in a report to be
issued to the Commission.
At the same time, as container volumes are growing, the
container shipping industry is going through a period of major
change. As a result of merger and acquisition activity, we
anticipate considerable consolidation among container carriers,
the net effect of which will likely be game-changing impacts on
the marketplace.
Additionally, we are noting a marked increase in the number
of agreement filings made at the Commission by VOCCs [vessel-
operating common carriers] and MTOs [marine terminal
operators]. These agreements reflect a trend in which carriers
and terminal operators have increased working in cooperation
with each other, sharing resources and assets.
In short, we are projecting the future where millions and
millions more containers are going to be entering the United
States. The ships calling to the United States are ever going
to be larger. The increased influence of foreign-controlled
vessels via vessel-sharing alliances. There is a substantial
consolidation in the industry among those overseas-based
entities. Those very same companies are increasingly working
cooperatively to share resources and assets.
Chairman Hunter, the future has arrived. It is happening
now. And it is fraught with challenges. Indeed, the Journal of
Commerce noted in a recent issue--and I will quote--``Global
changes in container shipping are confronting the U.S. Maritime
Commission with some of the most difficult decisions in its 55-
year history.''
As trade grows and the shipping industry consolidates, the
Commission will need to increase its monitoring and analysis of
the industry in order to ensure that the American shipping
public and, ultimately the American consumer, does not become a
victim of decreased ocean transportation options or unlawful
anticompetitive behavior. This will be accomplished through
ongoing, thorough, and careful review of service contracts and
the VOCCs and MTO agreements filed with the FMC.
Just as container volumes are hitting record levels, so are
the number of filings received by the agency. It is
significant, resource-intensive, and time-consuming work to
assess what these documents reflect in terms of business
trends. There is a significant strain to our agency's resources
as our employees endeavor to stay on top of this amount of
work. Simply put, we need additional specialized personnel in
order to help meet the FMC mandate.
In previous years this subcommittee has encouraged us to be
efficient in how we spend our appropriated funds, and I assure
each and every one of you, even without this directive, the FMC
is diligent in maximizing its dollars. Recent steps have been
taken to save money: one, looking for opportunities to share
services with other agencies; two, reducing the amount of space
we have in our headquarter building to save on our lease cost;
three, delaying hiring of new personnel so as to create funds
that we can use to address pressing requirements, such as
conducting our information technology refresh; four, bringing
whatever human resource services we can in-house in order to
save money and payments that we must make to OPM [Office of
Personnel Management].
That said, only 2 percent of our budget may be
characterized as discretionary spending. Furthermore, even
though we are a small agency, we must comply with each and
every obligation that other Federal agencies are required to
meet.
For example, the Commission responded to at least 75
different annually mandated reporting requirements. When we are
unexpectedly tasked to do something, the cost associated with
satisfying that directive must come out of a budget that is
already spoken for in its entirety.
The Federal Maritime Commission budget request will
alleviate some of the stressors that are challenging our
ability to continue to operate effectively and responsibly. We
hope our request will be supported by the subcommittee at the
full amount.
Thank you for your time, attention, and consideration. I am
pleased to answer any questions you have regarding our budget
request or any issues over which the Federal Maritime
Commission has jurisdiction and can share our valuable insight.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Chairman. Before we get into the
question portion of the hearing, I would like to submit for the
record the statement of Dr. Kathryn Sullivan, Under Secretary
of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, and Administrator for
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA.
[No response.]
Mr. Hunter. Without objection, so ordered.

[The information can be found on page 69.]

Mr. Hunter. The NOAA Office of Response and Restoration has
oil and chemical spills and marine debris programs which fall
under this subcommittee. Some of us also take a parochial
interest in other NOAA programs within the Office of Coast
Survey, since all nautical charts and surveys are critical for
safe navigation.
So we are now going to move on to questions. But before I
do that, Chairman Cordero, you have three Federal Maritime
Commissioners here with you today: Rebecca Dye, right behind
you; Michael Khouri; and Bill Doyle. Just want to say welcome,
and thanks for being here.
And with that, I am going to yield to Mr. Garamendi to
start with the questions so I can call my kids before they go
to school really quickly.
Mr. Garamendi. They must start very late, or else they are
in San Diego.
Mr. Hunter. They are in San Diego.
Mr. Garamendi. They are in San Diego, OK.
Admiral Zukunft, a series of questions about the Fast
Response Cutter, the contract. Where are we with it? Phase 2.
Brief us.
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, right now we are continuing
negotiations for a fair and reasonable price, and we are making
great progress. I know there may be consternation among some of
what is in the next block buy, the final 26 of these ships. The
one change is we are modernizing the command and control
systems, because the ones on the first 32 will have reached
obsolescence by the time these next 26 are delivered. But
basically, it is the same hull form, and so we are in
negotiations right now.
We will need to reach closure on these negotiations by mid-
May so we do not have a disruption in the build-out of this
very critical asset.
Mr. Garamendi. So we can look forward to fiscal year 2017
moving these contracts underway and expenditures being made?
Admiral Zukunft. Absolutely. We have got to come with a
fair and reasonable agreed-upon price with the vendor----
Mr. Garamendi. And you say the control systems on the
previous set are going to be obsolete?
Admiral Zukunft. These are command and control systems. It
is computers, it is surveillance systems. And as we find, these
normally have a shelf life of 10 years, maybe, at most. By the
time these are built out, those will be obsolete. So that is
the one modification that will be made.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. The Offshore Patrol Cutter, can you
assure us that you will be awarding the contract by the end of
this year?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, we have three very
incentivized vendors, and those requirements are coming
forward, as I speak. And by the fourth quarter of this fiscal
year we absolutely will down-select to one vendor to move this
forward.
And again, I am very thankful for this subcommittee for
putting in our appropriation the final design work, which is
going to be a huge lift for us and the Department, but that was
put into our appropriation, so we can move this major
acquisition forward.
Mr. Garamendi. So you were able to get one icebreaker to
the North Pole. Let's talk about the Polar Sea. Where are you
with that? And then also the $140 million for some sort of new
icebreaker.
Admiral Zukunft. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
So we have pulled the Polar Sea out of the water to do a
materiel assessment on the ship. A third party will validate
and provide us that assessment by this summer. And within that
should be a threshold of what it would take to reactivate the
Polar Sea. Recognizing that would be a reactivation, probably
measured in less than 10 years.
And so it really becomes a business decision. Is it a
prudent investment to put that much money in a ship that has
been laid up for 6 years? And some of those parts were
cannibalized in order to bring the Polar Star into service, as
well. What this $147 million set-aside does, it has already
incentivized industry. We can build a polar icebreaker here, in
the United States. Maybe we look at parent craft designs. It
provides us certainty that we will need to go forward as we
have seen through funding lapses and continuing resolutions
that have disrupted some of our major acquisitions. But this is
not one that time can wait upon; we need to move this project
forward.
Mr. Garamendi. So we are really looking at two ships here,
maybe, the Polar Sea being recommissioned--rebuilt,
recommissioned, and then this new heavy polar icebreaker?
Admiral Zukunft. So we are really looking at a variety of
options. One, we have Polar Star, and we project she has
roughly 7 years of service life remaining. A catastrophic
casualty could change that. We have the potential reactivation
of the Polar Sea.
We have looked at leasing options, but, quite honestly, we
have looked across the inventory here in the United States, and
there are no ships that meet the requirements of either a
medium or a heavy icebreaker for leasing. You may know we have
looked--I have a 13-page matrix--side-by-side--and that vessel
will not meet Coast Guard requirements.
We put an operation requirement document together, cross-
walked that with the Arctic Research Council, National Science
Foundation, Defense, Interior, Commerce, Coast Guard, and all
came to agreement that this is what we need an icebreaker to do
for the United States of America. So that requirement is out
there. And so that leaves us with the final alternative of
reacquiring--buying new--a heavy icebreaker.
Mr. Garamendi. If the Polar Sea is to be rebuilt,
repurposed, you will need money in the 2017 budget to carry
that forward.
Admiral Zukunft. We will, and we have this $147 million
that is currently in the President's budget. So that is an
option.
And, fortunately, we will have this summer to make that
final decision and fully brief members of this subcommittee of
what it would take to reactivate a nearly 40-year-old ship and
be honest of how many more years do you get out of a 40-year-
old ship, and how much money do you put into it.
Mr. Garamendi. It sounds like you may have made a decision
already.
Admiral Zukunft. We have not. So we will see what it will
cost. But that would provide us a floor, and maybe not a
ceiling, of what it would take to reactivate a ship of that
age.
Mr. Garamendi. So if the Polar Sea is to be rebuilt,
repurposed, there will only be money for the Polar Sea, and not
for the second or third heavy icebreaker.
Admiral Zukunft. Either way, Congressman, it would require
further top-line relief in our budget. So this $147 million is
a top-line relief. There was some back-and-forth whether it
would come at the expense of some of our other, more mature
acquisition programs, such as the Fast Response Cutter.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, you are aware of the interest of the
chair and the ranking member in icebreakers. So when is the
next time you are going to report back to us about the Polar
Sea?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, the next report will be when we get
the materiel assessment back on the Polar Sea, which will be--
--
Mr. Garamendi. Summer is a 3-month or 4-month period. Could
you be more precise?
Admiral Zukunft. I asked the same question of my staff
yesterday, because I knew you were going to ask me that
question.
Mr. Garamendi. And the answer was?
Admiral Zukunft. I am going to say July 31st.
Mr. Garamendi. July 31st?
Admiral Zukunft. Thirty-first.
Mr. Garamendi. I think we are leaving before that. So why
don't you push that up a week, while we are still here?
Admiral Zukunft. Will do.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. I called my kids. Nobody
answered. Now they are all calling me back right now. Right.
That is just how it works.
My first question is--let's talk about nukes really quick.
We had a hearing here, we talked about--if you can get coke on
U.S. soil you can get nuclear weapons on U.S. soil. And with
the Iranian deal, let's just say that 10 or 15 years from now,
nuclear weapons are not ubiquitous, but they are more prevalent
throughout the world. You will have North Korea, you will have
Iran at that point. They will have maybe sold them off.
And what we are looking at, for the first time ever, is
nonstate actors with nuclear weapons, where there is--where we
can't attribute a strike to anybody, there is no way to
retaliate, there is no deterrent in retaliation because you are
not going to--because they are nonstate actors, right?
So my question is what is the Coast Guard doing 10 years
out from now--I mean that would be numero uno priority, right?
What are you doing to face the nuclear threat that we could be
facing? Not getting shot at by an ICBM [intercontinental
ballistic missile], but simply having something either come
across the border, come into a port, come in with the same
routes that they use coke, or they bring up coke.
Admiral Zukunft. Chairman, we have a number of actions in
place, as I speak right now. One is being a member of the
national intelligence community. Intelligence drives
operations. So when I look at counterdrug as an example, 2
years ago, right before I came into this job, we had awareness
of about 80 percent of the maritime drug flow destined for
Central America, but ultimately destined for the United States.
But on any given day we had enough resources--and back then we
had the Navy's Perry-class frigates in our inventory--to target
maybe 15 percent of that 80 percent. So, we knowingly let 65
percent get through.
Since then, the Coast Guard has nearly doubled its presence
at the expense of other missions. And so we have closed some of
that gap. But now we no longer have the Navy Perry-class
frigates in our inventory. So it is pretty much a Coast Guard
mission.
But when you look at the nuclear threat, we use that same
maritime domain awareness. We have a special force team. We
have two in the United States Coast Guard, one in San Diego,
one in Chesapeake, Virginia. We have over a dozen bilateral
agreements with flags of convenience that authorize the Coast
Guard to board those ships anywhere on the high seas if we
expect that there is a weapon of mass destruction aboard that
ship.
We don't ask permission. And we come in covertly. But we
use it leveraging our Title XIV authorities. And so, it is a
unique set of authorities, bilateral agreements, but it is the
platforms that we have invested in, as well.
The National Security Cutter can operate in a marine
environment. Our people that fast-rope hook and climb operate
in marine environments. And if they have to compel compliance
using Title X authorities, they squeeze off about 40,000 rounds
a year. These are the----
Mr. Hunter. What about nukes coming in just in cargo
containers?
Admiral Zukunft. With cargo containers we work closely with
Customs and Border Protection at the National Targeting Center
in Reston, Virginia, where every cargo manifest, every
crewmember is screened, from consignee to the packer, to
discriminate if there is a new shipper, you know, in--you know,
that has put something in a container that may profile that
particular container as a potential threat. So we have
increased our domain awareness just through the National
Targeting Center, as well.
Mr. Hunter. Does it make sense, in your point of view, to
test every cargo box on a ship prior to it being loaded, or
when it is offloaded?
Admiral Zukunft. If we were to do that we would literally
gridlock our----
Mr. Hunter. Not necessarily. I mean based on the technology
that exists today you can drive stuff through those quick-
scanners at certain ports. They have those now, right?
In fact, didn't--it is not Kuwait. Is it Dubai that has--
that scans every single cargo container that comes into their
country?
Admiral Zukunft. I am not certain about Dubai. The
technology may get there. But if you have to open and inspect,
you know, each container before it is destined for the global
market, the time that it would take would literally disrupt
our----
Mr. Hunter. We had a hearing here. There is technology
right now where you can see through it. You don't have to open
it and inspect it. Right?
Admiral Zukunft. At a much higher level, if I were to try
to conceal, you know, a weapon of mass destruction with the
appropriate shielding, that may not be detectable. So the
intelligence----
Mr. Hunter. But the shielding is now detectable, too,
because you can see a shield. You can see the lack of the----
Admiral Zukunft. Right.
Mr. Hunter [continuing]. Moving around if it is shielded,
right?
Admiral Zukunft. Right. So--but that would cause you to
open and inspect a given container. Maybe you don't open each
and every one of those. But right now we have that technology
today to make those informed decisions. And we do actually
carry out that work, working hand in hand with the Customs and
Border Protection.
Mr. Hunter. So that is more CBP?
Admiral Zukunft. CBP and Coast Guard. I would say it is
probably 70 percent CBP, 30 percent Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. OK. All right, thank you. So let's get into,
really quick, to acquisitions. You talked about block-buy
options, you talked about multiyear procurement. So we have
been talking about this. Tell me why it hasn't been done yet if
you are amenable to doing it.
Admiral Zukunft. Yes----
Mr. Hunter. I mean because you are going to be building
cutters for the next decade.
Admiral Zukunft. So let me turn the hands of time back to
when we first acquired the National Security Cutter. We did it
under--through a third party known as Deepwater. We finally
moved that acquisition program in-house under the United States
Coast Guard. So, we were not able to do that with the National
Security Cutter.
We have also gone through variations as much as 35, 40
percent in over a 3- to 4-year period in our AC&I [acquisition,
construction, and improvements] budget. When we do a block buy
we almost put that block buy into a nondiscretionary element of
our budget. And so we have to make difficult trade-off
decisions. But if we are making this block buy, we will incur a
penalty if we can't deliver on that block-buy purchase. And
maybe it comes at the expense of other operations. And that is
where having a stable----
Mr. Hunter. Wait, explain that. Explain that. Why would you
incur a penalty if you do a block buy?
Admiral Zukunft. So if I--say I want to do a block buy of
two Offshore Patrol Cutters in 2021. But then my appropriation
for that year is something less than what I needed to build out
those two OPCs [Offshore Patrol Cutters]. Well, I have got to
commit to that block buy, or I will pay a penalty to that
vendor. So I lose the flexibility, if you will, to make other
appropriations under a block buy. And that is why----
Mr. Hunter. But you wouldn't do a block buy unless you had
the money appropriated to do it.
Admiral Zukunft. Right. And so it is the certainty of that
appropriation, going forward. But certainly it makes all the
good business sense, going forward. It is an area that we will
look at with the Offshore Patrol Cutter.
Mr. Hunter. So--OK. How about multiyear procurement, then?
Because you know you are going to be buying years and years
out. Why not do multiyear procurement?
If you can save--I think it was 5 percent on the FRCs [Fast
Response Cutters], right, 5 percent, $500 million, on the OPC
program, you can save $1 billion--or 10 percent. And on an
icebreaker you could save $1 billion. So the $1 billion you
could save on the OPC is, according to CRS [Congressional
Research Service]--that is a lot of money. Why not do that? And
why hasn't it been done yet?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. So let me use the OPC, as I----
Mr. Hunter. Because the Navy has been doing this. I mean
the Navy buys ships, the Coast Guard buys ships. Much less
complex systems, too, than the U.S. Navy buys. You don't build
complex Navy ships, right? So you would--theoretically be
easier for the Coast Guard to do this than it is for the Navy,
who does this all the time, right?
Admiral Zukunft. So, with the Offshore Patrol Cutter, it
will take the first three. One is we hold our requirements
steady. When you change requirements, that is where you see
growth in any acquisition program, where you are building large
ships or airplanes or the like.
So you hold the requirements steady, but the underlying
criteria for the Offshore Patrol Cutter, besides meeting our
requirements, is affordability. And by the time you get to the
first three, by that time we should be able to lock in what an
affordable price is for the Offshore Patrol Cutter, which will
be the time to negotiate for the remaining 23--22, forgive me--
to do a multiyear buy, a block buy, for those remaining 22.
What the underlying criteria is, we have locked in an
affordable price for the remainder of those ships.
But right out of the starting block, taking a new ship off
an assembly line, and as we run it through its paces, we don't
know what we don't know yet with that first ship coming off the
line----
Mr. Hunter. So you are saying you can't do a block buy
until you get through the first three OPCs.
Admiral Zukunft. I feel like I owe it to the taxpayer to
make an informed decision, rather than one that hopes for the
best. So by the time we get through the first three, and as the
contractor goes through those learning curves to build those
first three ships----
Mr. Hunter. That is what happened with the NSC.
Admiral Zukunft. Right.
Mr. Hunter. Right? It didn't--no one knew what they wanted
until ship 3 came out.
Admiral Zukunft. Number three met all of our requirements.
Mr. Hunter. Sean Stackley, who--do you know who Sean
Stackley is? U.S. Navy. So when Secretary Stackley talks about
acquisition, buying ships up, it is like Moses coming down from
on high with the word of God. And Stackley said that there is
no reason whatsoever why the Coast Guard should not be doing
multiyear procurement of block buys. I mean it should almost be
mandatory.
So, I guess my question is you said you like it. It sounds
good. The Coast Guard wants to save money. So what would stop
you from doing that, going forward? If anything.
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. For us it is always the uncertainty
of what is in our acquisition budget. I would love to have Sean
Stackley's acquisition budget----
Mr. Hunter. But if we give you the money and the authority,
what would stop you from doing a multiyear----
Admiral Zukunft. Absolutely nothing, Chairman. As I have
said before, a floor of a recurring $1.5 billion AC&I budget--
put that next to the Navy budget. You know, if we had that
reliability, repeatability, then we could certainly move
forward with a block buy.
If you look across our 5-year capital investment plan, as
we mature that out we get to that threshold level that will
allow us to make block-buy decisions.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you very much. And we will keep going
later, but I would like to yield to Mr. Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Admiral, for
your service and all your work on the drug interdiction,
protecting our shores.
I do just want to emphasize what the chairman was talking
about with Iran and North Korea and their State-sponsored
terrorism, and the tremendous growth of the terrorist
organizations out there. And we know what they are, you know,
hell bent to do. And that should be a top priority, and a
growing priority. So I just want to emphasize that.
But I do want to talk a little bit about--since I am from
Ohio--concern about the Great Lakes. My first question,
Admiral, is I see that the Coast Guard is conducting a mission
analysis of the Great Lakes icebreaking needs. And, as you
know, the Great Lakes, it has lost--loses millions of dollars
when we have severe winters like we did not this current
winter, but the last two winters, especially.
I want to make sure that you ensure that the analysis that
you are--the Coast Guard is doing will hit those domestic
icebreaking targets, which I believe are 95 percent of keeping
it open during icebreaking season. But hopefully, that is based
on the worst winters, and not this past winter. And can--you
want to address that?
Admiral Zukunft. Thank you, Congressman. We are storing our
140-foot icebreaking fleet. And certainly this year has given
us a bit of a reprieve. There is an authorization for us to
look at another Great Lakes icebreaker.
We also have a series of memorandums of agreement with
Canada. So if we require their assistance to do icebreaking to
support our port infrastructure in the U.S., they will provide
that to us, and we will do so, vice versa, as well.
The real challenge with moving forward with the Great Lakes
icebreaker is what is in my AC&I budget. And it concerns me
that, for the next 4 to 5 years, we will make no investment
whatsoever in our military housing. We underfund some of our
shore infrastructure that currently has over a $1 billion
shortfall. So we are paying interest on an existing debt, but
we are not making any principal payment into that shore
infrastructure. So it really comes down to an appropriation.
But can I assume that the winter of 2016 will be repeated
in years following? That would be a flawed decision for a
Service that prides itself on being semper paratus to make.
Positive news, those 140's are being refurbished. And
again, we rely heavily on our relationship with Canada, as
well, to address these very concerns that you address with
commerce on the Great Lakes.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, I think the one that concerns us, the
situation with the Mackinaw--that is the main icebreaker on the
Great Lakes, right?
Admiral Zukunft. It is.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Cordero, speaking of Canada, in 2014 the
Canadian Government was proposing the implementation of a
transit standard for ballast water regulation. And I guess that
would mean Canada would apply most of the onerous ballast water
requirements on vessels that are not actually discharging in
Canadian waters, but merely transiting through.
My concerns with the proposal include the effect the
standard would have on our U.S. carriers and shippers. Did the
Commission hear from industry regarding the Canadian transit
standard? And I got three here. Did the Commission investigate
what Canada was proposing and comment on it and engage with the
Canadian officials? And then, finally, what is the status of
the proposal, the Canadian proposal?
Mr. Cordero. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Number one, yes, the Commission did hear concerns of some
stakeholders in the Great Lakes area. And with that, we have
partnered with the State Department and gone to relevant
meetings. In addition, Commissioner Doyle represented the FMC
in meetings on this issue that he held in Canada with some of
the officials to discuss this issue.
In terms of the status, my understanding is there has been
no further movement by Canada with regard to the implementation
of those standards. So at this point my understanding is there
is no further movement on that application. But, of course, our
office will follow up with you to absolutely confirm that, and
give you more detail on that. But thank you for your question.
Mr. Gibbs. Well, that is good news, because we certainly
don't want the Canadians making it tough on our side. We have
got to work together.
Mr. Cordero. Absolutely.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Garamendi is
recognized again. He likes this, because we go back to him
every time.
Mr. Garamendi. We are a little short on our side over here.
Admiral Zukunft, if you were told to do a block buy, the
onus is really on us, that year after year we would have to
meet that commitment, whatever it was. Could you do a little
mathematical calculation for us, the amount that could be saved
by a block buy versus the penalty of us failing to adequately
fund at some future year the requirements? I suspect that that
equation would work out that it is still cheaper to do a block
buy, even though there may be a penalty because of our failure
to fund the program.
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, Congressman. I will be happy to
provide that information to you. I will get my stubby pencil to
work, but probably not an answer I could give you, you know,
here, at this committee hearing.
But I know you look out for the best interests of the Coast
Guard, and we owe that so we can both go in and make informed
decisions on block buys, going forward----
Mr. Garamendi. I think----
Admiral Zukunft [continuing]. The OPC.
Mr. Garamendi. I know I, and I believe the chairman, would
like to see a block-buy requirement in this year's
appropriation. And we need to have some sense of the savings
that would be achieved by a block buy, let's say, over the next
5 years. If you would do that, it would be helpful to us, as we
move that forward.
Coast Guard housing, you are short $1.1 billion. Is there
some way we can find at least $100 to buy a couple of gallons
of paint? It would seem to us in this budget that, as we move
this appropriation forward, that we find at least some money
for the repair of the housing to go--just to zero it out is
just, frankly, not acceptable.
I will move to some other questions. Mind if I go to
Jaenichen? You want--OK.
Mr. Jaenichen, how long are we going to have to fight this
food aid program before--I guess until we get a new
administration. Is that a fair----
Mr. Jaenichen. What is in the 2017 budget request,
Congressman, is the administration proposal.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, we will eventually have a new
administration, which I hope has more sense about how to do
this.
If we move--if the administration's proposal were to move
forward, what would be the effect on the American maritime
industry?
Mr. Jaenichen. Well, I can tell you, Congressman--thank you
for the question--we have seen a--since 2011--a 40-percent drop
in the total amount of food aid cargo and agricultural cargo
that has been carried on ocean shipping. And, as a result of
that, we have seen a decrease since 2012, in combination with
the DOD [Department of Defense] cargoes, which have also
dropped to about 75 percent in the same period.
We have seen a reduction from 106 ships at the end of 2011,
the first of January of 2012, to the current number of 77
today. That is a 26-percent drop in the fleet, so we know that
there has been an effect. But it is a combination of not just
the amount of food aid cargo, it is a combination of all the
cargoes that are being carried. Predominantly, that used to be
DOD cargo, roughly 80 percent.
But now, with the smaller footprint that we have overseas
in basing, but also the number of troops that are stationed
overseas, we are seeing much less DOD cargo movement. And, as a
result, the agriculture----
Mr. Garamendi. I want to focus----
Mr. Jaenichen [continuing]. Larger contribution to the
total carriage----
Mr. Garamendi. I appreciate the DOD. Focus specifically on
the food aid. How many ships have been lost as a result of the
change in the food aid. And, more importantly, how many ships
would be lost if we were to accept the administration's
proposal on the food aid?
Mr. Jaenichen. We estimate 6 to 12 have been lost as a
result of some of the changes that have occurred since 2012. I
can't give you an exact number, but we do know that the fleet
that has had the most challenge is our bulkier fleet,
especially dry bulk. And many of those ships are being laid up
right now. So I think those ships would be at risk, though it
is at least four to six.
Mr. Garamendi. Four to six more ships?
Mr. Jaenichen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. And the number of mariners that would be
losing their jobs as a result of that?
Mr. Jaenichen. Each ship carries a combination--it is about
20 to 25 billets, so you are looking at 40 to 50 per vessel,
total.
Mr. Garamendi. And the risk to the United States national
security of not having another six ships available?
Mr. Jaenichen. If we lose additional ships--I am putting
it--from a mariner availability standpoint today, I put us in
the amber range, and I have probably a delta of about four
ships before I go to the red. So I am concerned about the
number of mariners that are available to fully man the
Government reserve sealift fleet in a time of either conflict
or in humanitarian crisis if we fully had to active that.
Mr. Garamendi. So if the food aid program were to go
forward, we would lose four to six more ships. And that puts
the Nation's security with regard to the availability of ships
into the red zone, as into very dangerous----
Mr. Jaenichen. As part of the administration's proposal,
there is $25 million that is intended to compensate for that
loss. And so the $24 million would be used for non-MSP ships,
specifically, and then $1 million for the mariners themselves.
So that should offset the loss. That is the administration's
proposal.
Mr. Garamendi. So--but the mariners are not working. And
therefore, they may not be licensed.
Mr. Jaenichen. That is part of the challenge, yes,
Congressman.
Mr. Garamendi. So, instead of spending $25 million in
basically what is a subsidy, a welfare check, we could just
maintain the food program as it is today and ship food, keeping
the ships busy, keeping the mariners busy, and actually doing
something, rather than a welfare check.
Mr. Jaenichen. The idea of the subsidy, or the $24 million,
it would actually keep those ships in operation. So we do not
see that the mariners would be lost. But your analysis is not
flawed.
Mr. Garamendi. My analysis is not what?
Mr. Jaenichen. Flawed.
Mr. Garamendi. In other words, correct?
Mr. Jaenichen. Correct.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Graves is recognized.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral,
welcome. I appreciate you being back again today.
In the budget proposal you include an increase of 325
personnel. You also have a decrease of 400 personnel, including
the elimination of high-value escorts and other support
services. Can you talk about how this sort of adapting--or how
this change of the Coast Guard is occurring, and sort of the
motivation behind the increase and the decrease?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, we have--actually, it is a
net gain at the end of the day of 325 personnel. But when you
ask, ``Well, how did we arrive where we are today?'' and it
goes back into some of these other questions about acquisition,
repeatability, you know, what that floor needs to be.
And in order to keep the National Security Cutter program
alive without the support of this administration, we had to
make force structure reductions in order to keep that program
viable.
And so, now that we have the best acquisition in Coast
Guard history, we need to make sure that we are investing in
the talent that is going to operate and maintain these
platforms into the future, as well.
So, when we talk about--and as mandated in the
authorization bill, we owe you a force planning construct of
what does the Coast Guard need to meet mission in the 21st
century when it comes to people? We have made that argument
when it comes to platforms. But without people, you know, those
platforms really will not get the job done.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Sure, OK. So, I mean, in summary,
adapting to the evolving mission of the Coast Guard, evolving
threat and new equipment?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, sir.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. All right, thanks. Another
question for you. Two years ago you said--I think at the end of
the day, changing the Jones Act would put our entire fleet in
jeopardy. Can you talk briefly about the current status of the
defense industrial base and--as we are working on this
recapitalization effort for the Coast Guard?
Admiral Zukunft. I can provide you a couple of data points.
One, when I look at our acquisition program itself, holding
steady requirements, on-time delivery, and platforms that will
be serving our Nation 40 years from now. When I meet my
counterparts from other coast guards, including the commandant
of Japan Coast Guard, he is under scrutiny because at the end
of 20 years many of their ships reached the end of their
service life. And they say, ``Well, why can't you be like the
United States Coast Guard?'' And I think that is a testimony to
the quality of product that we are building here.
Another data point, when I was at NASSCO [National Steel
and Shipbuilding Company] shipyard, where they are building one
of two ships for--this is an LNG [liquefied natural gas] and
conventionally fueled U.S.-flag container carrier that will run
between Jacksonville and Puerto Rico. State of the art.
Absolutely state of the art. You take Jones Act away, the first
thing that goes away are these shipyards. And what goes behind
that is the mariners.
And as we talk about what is the world going to look like
10 years from now, and if we have a peer competitor, if we
don't have a U.S. fleet, and if we don't have a U.S. shipyard
to constitute that fleet, as we look at how did the United
States prevail in wars past, it really began with our
industrial base. And the Jones Act, I am concerned, you know,
any repeal of that would cut at the heart of that industrial
base.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. And how would the repeal or
changes to it affect from a security, from a safety, from a
pollution perspective, having foreign vessels running inland
waterways of the United States?
Admiral Zukunft. We do what is called port state control
boardings. These are foreign-flag ships that do trade with the
United States, and we inspect them for their port security code
compliance under IMO, and for their Safety of Life at Sea
compliance, also under the International Maritime Organization.
On any given day we detain two or three ships that arrive
in the United States because they are not in compliance, even
though that flag state upholds that they are. We are dealing
with an oil spill in Long Beach today. A foreign-flag carrier.
We don't know why, but it had an oil spill.
So, yes, the United States does hold a higher standard when
it comes to safety and security. No one does it better than the
United States.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Chief, thanks for being
here, and good to see you again, as well. At the State of the
Coast Guard Address that the Commandant gave, he really focused
on the people of the Coast Guard. That was a big part of his--
theme of his message. If you deviate, or you have different
thoughts than the Commandant, then I assure you your secret is
safe with me. But I wanted to ask you. What are your greatest
concerns for the Coast Guard workforce?
Mr. Cantrell. Well, thanks, Congressman. I will tell you,
our folks are the very best at what they do, despite budget or
resource deficits. They will find a way to get the job done.
And it is often at a cost of a work-life balance.
So what concerns me is when we steer away from programs
that make them more resilient: family, child-care programs,
housing, tuition assistance, all those tangible programs that
keep them focused on getting the job done.
It also is a retention tool for us, because they need to
know that we got them covered. But again, I think we have got
the very finest workforce we have ever had in my 33 years of
service. And I would just like to protect those programs that
support them so that, one, we have got a new retirement system
that comes online in 2018 that we don't know yet how that is
going to affect our workforce.
But we need to focus on those things, because there could
be opportunity for people to leave service before they serve a
20-year career after that plan goes into effect. And I believe
that these programs that directly support them and their
families are things that our budget process has to pay
attention to.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. We are now honored to
have the ranking member of the full committee here, who
understands that it is not all about just trains and trucks and
planes, but the importance of the maritime industry and the
Coast Guard. Mr. DeFazio is recognized.
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am honored to be
here before the subcommittee today. Admiral, good to see you.
Master Chief, good to see you.
You might remember last year I made a bit of a point
regarding the unfunded projects and/or backlog. And I see we
have a somewhat more comprehensive list that--although it is--
and it is focused on very important things, so I will go over
that first, and then I will talk a little bit about the total
deficiencies.
I am concerned that we are looking at less--you know, fewer
dollars this year to deal with the, you know, shoreside
infrastructure backlog than last year. And it seems to me
that--and I am not an expert on housing, although I have my own
home repair projects all the time. But it seems to me that some
of these things you are dealing with, whether it is docks,
hangars, housing, stations, you know, that there is probably a
point at which they are deteriorating more quickly, they are
impeding, to some extent, the mission because the facilities
aren't adequate. And you know, this causes me concern.
Now, I know that you are in a chain of command, you know,
under the President, and you submit some requests to them and
the trolls at OMB [Office of Management and Budget], you know,
cut a lot of things out, and then we end up with whatever your
proposal is, which is less than you originally proposed, which
is what we see. And then we get this.
But at least this is more comprehensive. I mean can you
just address this a little bit? I mean it seems to me that
this--you know, even if we move ahead with all due dispatch
with a new class of cutters and do all the other things we are
doing, this is going to impede the mission to some extent. Is
it not, sir?
Admiral Zukunft. It will. And I--first, Ranking Member, I
will reflect on this year's omnibus appropriation in 2016. As I
said at the very beginning, it did get us out of debtor's
prison, somewhat. It bought down some of the principal of our
shore AC&I debt that we carry, going forward. But you can see,
you know, right now we will find on that unfunded priority list
to be able to address some of our military housing, but not all
of it.
Some of those costs are actually hidden in our major
acquisition shore infrastructure, which is as we move new ships
into new home ports and piers and the like, there is
infrastructure that comes in with that for people, as well.
But, at the end of the day, what missions matter the most
across our 11 statutory missions? First of all, mariners in
distress on the high seas. And you and I have talked about this
at length, and we have had several heroic rescues in your
district here of late. I am very mindful of that. And as the
chairman and others have brought up, the security of the
homeland, which begins at sea. And so those will continue to be
our areas of focus. And we cannot dismiss what is happening in
the high latitudes in the Arctic and Antarctica, as well.
So, as we look at building heavy icebreakers, we look at
some top-line relief to bring that program of record. As we are
building National Security Cutters, Fast Response Cutters, and
offshore patrol craft, we are modernizing the C-27J, and now we
are bringing in an icebreaker. So we have a lot going on right
now in our acquisition budget.
But we can't take our eye off this other ball. And it talks
to some of these quality of life investments that Master Chief
mentions, as well. The health of the workforce for the 21st
century across all the armed services is a concern for me, as
it is for all of the Service Chiefs in uniform today.
Mr. DeFazio. Well, thank you. Master Chief, since you are
the representative of the troops, you want to give us a little
more perspective on that? Just fill out a little bit what it
means, in terms of problems with housing and/or facilities.
Mr. Cantrell. Well, thanks to this year's budget, we were
able to make some pretty modest investments in some our
housing, new housing in Astoria, Oregon; Kodiak, Alaska. We
have been able to bump up some of the renovations that are done
on some of the older housing.
But most of our units, as you well know, are outside of a
base-centered DOD or Coast Guard base area. They are in very
rural, very coastal communities. Sometimes very high cost. And
it is not just the Coast Guard-owned housing that concerns me.
When we talk about basic allowance for housing, that is
proposed to be reduced over the next 5 years. That can really
hit home for some of our folks that are in those high-cost
areas that don't really have a choice when, you know, they are
competing with tourists and other high-cost competitors there
to find adequate housing, and often have to drive an awful long
way to get to work.
And with medical care, as well, and in some of these very
remote areas that don't have access to a military treatment
facility, and they could be 2 hours away from the nearest
doctor that accepts Tricare. And that burden is on the member,
to get them and their families there. So those things concern
me, and we need to continue to stay focused on that, because I
don't want people making career decisions based on those types
of services that are either hard to get or they are just too
expensive and then they decide that they don't want to be in
the Coast Guard any more.
But the folks are not complaining, they are out there doing
the very best that they can. And, you know, they are not shy
about it. As you know, visiting some of our units, they are not
shy about showing off their talent and what they are really,
really good at.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes. We had a good example of that on the bar.
That was great. The Astoria Bar, not the bar-bar.
Mr. Cantrell. Yes, sir. That was fun.
Mr. DeFazio. Admiral, I was pleased that you mentioned the
icebreakers. I assume we are now in the evaluation phase on the
mothball--I always mix them up, the Polar Star and the Polar
Sea. Which one? The Polar Sea. In terms of the feasibility of
the, you know, rehabilitation versus new. Are we moving along
with that analysis?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes, we are, Ranking Member. And it was
Ranking Member Garamendi who gave me the homework assignment
that I will provide, you know, the materiel assessment, which
is being done by a third party, by the way, of what would it
take to reactivate the Polar Sea.
Mr. DeFazio. All right.
Admiral Zukunft. And that will really be a business
decision, going forward, recognizing how many years do we buy
forward with that reactivation? But does it get us out of the
proposition of at what point do we build new, as well?
But we will provide that by July 31st, and I believe
Congressman Garamendi backed me up a week, so that would make
it July 24th.
Mr. DeFazio. Oh, yes. Before we depart for the longest
summer break ever, since--and I have been here a long time.
Sorry, excuse me.
No, that is excellent, and I will look forward to that
analysis.
One other thing, quickly. You mentioned the--having to, you
know, sometimes build new port infrastructure to accommodate
new cutters, you know, and I know you are evaluating where we
are going to base cutters. But I would say you are ready-made
to go in Coos Bay, North Bend, for those--two of those ships.
So just to put in my plug, locally. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the ranking member. Really quickly,
before I go to Mr. Rouzer, we talked about the block buy and
the multiyear procurement stuff. So you have CRS, you have
Stackley. I would like you, if you could, to do your own study,
and not take a long time. But see how much the Coast Guard
thinks it will save if you wait until ship 3 for the phase 2 of
the OPCs--excuse me, phase 2 of the FRC or the entire OPC
program, if you wait until ship 3 and you do multiyear buys,
how much money you think you will save. OK?
Admiral Zukunft. Absolutely, Chairman. And it was my
understanding as--you know, I wouldn't wait until year number
three, because I will be long retired. No, we need to provide,
you know, this Congress, you know, that diligence. And so we
will work with your staff to run those numbers----
Mr. Hunter. OK.
Admiral Zukunft [continuing]. In terms of what are the
savings, if there is a penalty involved as well, so we can look
at this holistically.
Mr. Hunter. OK, thank you. With that, the gentleman from
North Carolina is recognized.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Admiral, first let me
say how much I appreciate the work of the Coast Guard,
everything that you do in such a professional manner, and what
a great service and commitment you have to this country.
I have several questions here, and I am just trying to get
some clarification. And this is an issue that has come to my
attention over the past couple days, and it deals with
implementation of the Safety of Life at Sea International
Maritime Organization guidelines regarding the verified gross
mass of a container carrying cargo, something that I understand
you are more familiar with than I am.
Obviously, exports of cargo from the United States are
crucial to economic prosperity in this country. Steel and
agriculture, in particular. My district, in southeastern North
Carolina, is predominantly agriculture. We have the port right
there at Wilmington, so I have a vested interest in this matter
for a variety of reasons. But that one, specifically.
Is it correct that the Coast Guard does not intend to
enforce the SOLAS [Safety of Life at Sea] guidelines? Walk me
through this, and what has transpired here.
Admiral Zukunft. So the Coast Guard does enforce SOLAS
guidelines. As I mentioned to Congressman Graves, we inspect
ships for SOLAS compliance, and also for security compliance,
and we will detain those ships if they are not in compliance.
Now, for an exporter--and let's use grain as an example--
maybe that grain goes in a railcar. And so that exporter has no
direct involvement with the container. But when that grain goes
into a container, it then goes to the carrier, and it arrives
in a manifest that will say what the contents of the container
is, and what is the weight of the container. And if that
carrier does not see a weight for that particular box, he won't
take it on board the ship, because he would be in violation of
these SOLAS guidelines.
But, more importantly, these guidelines are designed for
stability purposes and for Safety of Life at Sea. So what
happens is that box does not get loaded until the weight can be
verified. And there are two methods of verifying that weight.
You can add the container and the contents all at once, or you
can take the weight, the tare weight that shows up on that box,
and then add in whatever weight is added into it, add the two,
and then that is the weight that would show up on the cargo
manifest. But the carrier has to see a weight before they will
take that container on board, effective 1 July of this summer.
Mr. Rouzer. I am sorry I wasn't here to hear the entire
question and answer with my colleague, Mr. Graves. I was
chairing a hearing of the Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture of the House Committee on Agriculture a few minutes
ago, and just got here.
But my question and what I am most concerned about,
apparently the shipping industry feels like this is a change in
direction, the rug has been pulled out from under them, so to
speak, in terms of what they were anticipating, and the
conflicting statements from the Coast Guard. Can you address
that, specifically?
Admiral Zukunft. I will. The IMO guidelines came out on the
9th of June of 2014, and we have been engaged with the World
Shipping Council, a number of exporters, carriers here in the
United States. So we have had a very aggressive outreach
campaign as this date draws nearer. And perhaps it is our
outreach campaign that has sensitized others, and maybe it
wasn't the IMO guidelines that came out. And I can only
conjecture in that regard. But the information has rolled out
and has been rolling out for nearly 2 years now, as this
implementation date draws near.
Foreign carriers are pretty much all in compliance today.
When I was at the container terminal in Long Beach a month and
a half ago, all of the containers that come on to that yard are
already weighed before they go in. So I am not seeing a sky
falling panacea playing out around us, but we need to make sure
that there are not unintended consequences while we are
continuing to reach out with the many exporters and how their
commodity ultimately gets in the container, and that container
shows up on a manifest before it is loaded on board a ship.
What is needed is that final weight. But, by and large, most of
these manifests already have that weight filled in in that
column.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mr. Hunter. I thank the gentleman. I have got just a
quick--bring up a subject, and it is unmanned aircraft systems
[UAS]. And from what I understand, the CBP has kind of taken
control for the Coast Guard. If the Coast Guard wants to use
UAS, they have to use CBP UAS. Is that correct? It means you
don't have organic assets.
Admiral Zukunft. Correct.
Mr. Hunter. So if you want to use them, you have to say,
``Hey, Border Patrol,'' or hey, whoever, ``We would like you to
launch a UAS over this part of the Caribbean,'' right?
Admiral Zukunft. Correct.
Mr. Hunter. Has that ever happened?
Admiral Zukunft. It has. We have done two proof of
concepts, one in the Caribbean, and then we did another one in
the Eastern Pacific. What this particular UAS lacks is a wide
aerial surveillance sensor. It ostensibly looks through a
straw. And so----
Mr. Hunter. Let me stop you there, I mean, because we have
wide area surveillance stuff, and you have the straw stuff, you
have whatever you want. I mean you slap a sensor, any kind of a
sensor, on any UAS, pretty much. So why haven't you, then?
Admiral Zukunft. Well, I can't speak for another agency's
acquisition project----
Mr. Hunter. Which, to my point, why doesn't the Coast Guard
have their own organic assets in which you could put on what
you--whatever kind of sensor you wanted?
Admiral Zukunft. So two-part answer to your very
challenging question. The first is our immediate need is sea-
based UAS, because we follow a very mobile threat. And so,
within our--you know, this year we will down-select, and it is
not a major acquisition, a small UAS that will go on board our
National Security Cutters that can look over the horizon,
provide covert situational awareness.
We are first pulling in national-level intel, so we already
know that something is out there. And then we use a small UAS
to discern what it is. And we have had great success using this
in the past. But this technology will emerge.
And do we need to be in the land-based UAS program?
Absolutely. And as you look across our capital investment plan,
as we get into years 20 and 21, we start making significant
downpayments on UAS, which would be land-based, to keep step
with technology as that emerges, as well. But this will be a
key contributor for maritime----
Mr. Hunter. Here is what I would ask. I mean if you are
using a land-based UAS, you are not going to be armed,
obviously. You are going to have over 40 hours of time up in
the air, if you use a Predator, for instance. Up in the air for
40 hours, plus. You don't need to launch off a ship, because
you have so much sustained time, where they can loiter for
pretty much--you know, forever. You have two or three, you are
up in the air 24/7.
I hope the money is not going into proof of concepts or
saying, hey, let's try to figure out what we need, when they
make what you need right now, especially for the land-based
side. I mean that is out there, it exists. There doesn't need
to be any tests on it or anything else. And I would say for
your ship-based UAS, let the Navy lead the way, right? Why not
use what the Navy is doing? If the Navy is spending tens of
millions of dollars--hundreds of millions of dollars on R&D
[research and development], on ship-based UAS, whether it is a
Fire Scout, whether it is a, you know, rotary-type UAS or a
fixed-wing, they are doing all of this for you, right? Why not
piggyback?
Admiral Zukunft. So we have done exactly that. So we took--
the Navy, as they went ahead with a ship-based UAS, we put it
on one of our ships, and it is the same size as one of our
manned helicopters. It comes with a support team of 20 people.
And so, in our case, that is a lot of people. It becomes the
tail that wags the dog. So that is why we are looking at small
UAS, going forward.
At the same time, though, we made an investment in the
peopleware. We have Coast Guard members working with CBP so we
operate these land-based UAS. And that is a downpayment, at
least in the skills that it is going to take to bring this
fully on board into the Coast Guard, as we take advantage of
this technology.
Mr. Hunter. Administrator Jaenichen, we have been working
the National Maritime Strategy for a couple of years now. How
is it going?
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you for the question. I am happy to
report that the draft strategy is with OMB, it is going through
the interdepartmental review. Prior to delivering it to OMB I
did share it with the Committee on the Marine Transportation
System, about 27 different Government agencies and commissions.
I have incorporated all of their comments, as the comments from
our national advisory committee, the Marine Transportation
System National Advisory Council. Those have all been
incorporated in the draft strategy that is currently undergoing
interdepartmental review.
So I am hopeful I will be able to get something that I can
publish in the Federal Register here soon. And prior to that
publication, we will provide it to the committees both in the
House and the Senate.
Mr. Hunter. But why--when are we going to get
recommendations from you? When are we going to get
recommendations? Not necessarily--I mean we are not doing this
as an exercise on how to do it, right? We are doing this so we
can actually do something and have an effective maritime
strategy that incorporates everybody here today, and everybody
that operates on the ocean who is not here today, all the
fishermen, all the shippers, the Jones Act, all of that
combined into one thing, right?
Mr. Jaenichen. Absolutely.
Mr. Hunter. So, I mean, we want recommendations from you on
what we should do. That is why we are doing this.
Mr. Jaenichen. Absolutely, and that is going to be included
in the National Maritime Strategy, Chairman.
Mr. Hunter. So when is OMB going to release it? Blink once
if it is this year, blink twice if it is next year.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Jaenichen. We have met with OMB, and I can tell you it
is going through the interdepartmental review, and I am hopeful
we will have it out within a couple of months.
Mr. Hunter. OK. Last thing, really quick. How do you choose
who gets the small shipyard grants? Is it geographic location?
Is it the type of project? Is it the yard itself that would be
doing the shipbuilding? Or all of those things? What are your--
--
Mr. Jaenichen. It is really all of the above, Chairman. And
I will tell you, from a distribution standpoint--and we took a
look at the actual numbers--we had 80 applications that were
submitted with this particular round when it closed back on the
16th of February. Actually, I am sorry, we had 118 that were
submitted, a total of $80 million in requests. Of those we had
about 22 from the west coast, 6 were from California. So it is
a pretty even distribution, about 28 or so from the gulf coast,
22 from the west coast, and the rest are from the east coast.
So it is a fairly equal distribution, geographically.
We do take a look at the return on investment, we do take a
look at the projects. In this particular case, thank the
Congress for appropriating $5 million, but it is a much smaller
amount in order to disperse, and we are probably going to be
limited to about eight different projects. So we are--it is
going to be a very small portion of that which was--the
applications that were actually submitted.
But we do take a look at the whole project, in terms of
what return on investment you get in terms of employment
opportunity, you know, how it potentially impacts the local
community. Have you received a previous grant? All those things
are factored into the review.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you all for being here. And I am going to
pass it off to Mr. Graves. I am going to go--the Army Chief of
Staff is in town here, and I am going to yield to Mr. Garamendi
and then Mr. Graves is going to chair and finish up. So thank
you all. We are going to keep on working and pushing forward,
and we look forward to doing block-buy stuff, UAS, happy Coast
Guard people, maritime strategy, and great oversight from the
FMC. So, thank you.
Mr. Garamendi is recognized.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let's just take--
you just mentioned the Small Shipyard Grant Program. It zeroed
out this year. A little bit zeroes out in 2017, is that
correct? And you discussed it.
Have you engaged--Mr. Jaenichen, have you engaged with the
SBA [Small Business Administration] and other governmental--
Federal governmental programs to assist the small shipyards,
everything from educational programs, job training, SBA, and
the like?
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I
have not personally engaged. I would have to go back to my
staff and check and see if we have done that.
We do know that, as we build the budget, you know, some of
the--we are challenged with our top-line number. In the 2017
request we had to take a look at some other priorities that we
had, and one of those included the--our ship disposal program,
primarily because I am under a very tight timeline with the
California consent decree to remove the last 3 remaining ships
that were identified of the 57 back in April of 2010.
So, I had to put a priority. And in some cases those
priorities beat out other priorities. Otherwise, I would like
to be able to include this funding in every year, because we
know that it has a great return on investment.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, here is my point. There are other
Federal programs that could be coordinated with the Small
Shipyard Grant Program, everything from job training to the
SBA. SBA has actually had a significant increase in their
budget year, year after year. So if you look at that--and maybe
they are doing the same thing, maybe they are not--I am going
to go at them and find out.
With regard to the scrap metal ship disposal, you mentioned
California. I think you are talking Suisun Bay. You had three
ships there. I think--yes, it is. Mare Island is about 5 miles
away. So why are you taking all these ships to Texas?
Mr. Jaenichen. Currently, Mare Island is not a qualified
Maritime Administration disposal facility.
Mr. Garamendi. Is it not?
Mr. Jaenichen. It has not----
Mr. Garamendi. Could we not request it?
Mr. Jaenichen. It has not been requested under the new
ownership.
Mr. Garamendi. Oh. You do not take into account the cost of
moving the ship all the way to Texas from California, do you?
Mr. Jaenichen. We actually do take into account in terms of
the request for appropriations. We also have requirements from
an invasive species standpoint to be able to drydock them
before we actually remove them from the California waters----
Mr. Garamendi. In terms of bid competition. In terms of the
bid competition, you do not. The cost of moving the ship is
separate from the bid itself. So the bid might be 100 for
Texas, and, I don't know, 105 for Mare Island or San Francisco.
But the cost of moving the ship is not part of that bid, is it?
Mr. Jaenichen. The bid for a--sales, it actually is
included. And--but if we do a service contract, we have to
include that as part of the contract, to be able to get it
moved.
One of the challenges is currently today we are at a
historic low for the number of ships that we actually have
remaining to be recycled. That number is 16 today. I think it
is a business decision on the part of the companies tho decide
to do recycling. In this particular case, Mare Island does not
have an application with us to certify them as a recycling
facility.
Mr. Garamendi. OK. I want to move on. Mr. Cordero, you say
you are overloaded with 75 requests for information.
Mr. Cordero. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. Could you send us information as to what
those 75 are? And are we the problem, we, the Congress,
requesting multiple reviews and information? And, if so, could
you please describe the 75? Not here, but in writing, so that
we might assist you in reducing the onerous burden that has
been placed upon you.
Mr. Cordero. Thank you for the question, Congressman. We
will do that.

[The information can be found on page 80.]

Mr. Garamendi. Good. Maybe we can help you. The supply
chain. You spoke of the supply chain. I believe we moved a bill
out of here called the FAST Act [Fixing America's Surface
Transportation Act] that had a freight movement in it.
Mr. Cordero. That is correct.
Mr. Garamendi. How are you coordinating your work with the
freight movement?
Mr. Cordero. Well, first of all, by way of the Department
of Transportation, they have the Bureau of Transportation
Statistics, which will form a working group to address some of
these issues. One of the primary questions is in terms of the
metrics, the work performance group. The FMC is identified as
one of the parties to that group, and we will be more than
happy to participate and offer our insight with regard to that.
Mr. Garamendi. So you are clearly integrated into and
coordinating with the freight movement programs that the
Department of Transportation is putting together?
Mr. Cordero. Absolutely. We will partner with them. The
Administrator has been very helpful in working with the FMC, as
well as the Department of Commerce, and as well as the Surface
Transportation Board. One of the good things that we have been
doing the last couple years is partnering with our fellow
agencies regarding issues of mutual interest.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Chairman Hunter left to go talk
to the Army about their needs, which is important. But also
going on simultaneous with this hearing was General McDew, on
the other side of this building. And I have been informed that
General McDew said that he has a very serious concern about the
ability of the merchant marine to meet the needs of his global
movement of men, women, and materiel.
So, Mr. Jaenichen, can you explain to me why you and the
administration are further weakening the ability of the
merchant marine to have cargo, as in the food aid program, if
we have a national security issue that--spoke about just a few
moments ago? Is it that the administration is not coordinating
on this critical issue of the ability to move materiel?
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you for the----
Mr. Garamendi. You seem to be going in different directions
here. Can you explain why you are going in different
directions, why we have Mr. McDew over there, saying he is
terribly concerned about this, and then, on the other hand,
your organization and the USAID [United States Agency for
International Development] removing cargo?
Mr. Jaenichen. Ranking Member, the--General McDew and I are
very closely tied with regards--and the real issue he is
talking about is the mariner numbers. And I talked a little bit
earlier about the mariner pool, and where we are, and it is----
Mr. Garamendi. The real issue is cargo.
Mr. Jaenichen. Well, without cargo, you don't have ships.
Without ships, you don't have mariners. I agree, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Cargo comes from Export-Import Bank loans,
guarantees. It comes from military, as you said earlier. And it
also comes from food aid and other things. You and the
administration are rapidly reducing one of the three.
Why are you doing that, when we have--at least according to
General McDew--a significant national security issue? Why are
you doing it? Is it that you are not coordinated, the left hand
doesn't know what the right hand is doing? Or maybe you just
don't care about this. And by ``you,'' I mean the imperial you.
Mr. Jaenichen. The administration's proposal, Ranking
Member, is to ensure that there is some funding in the program.
That is what is in the $25 million to try to offset some of
these----
Mr. Garamendi. The welfare program.
Mr. Jaenichen. We certainly would tend to disagree with
that, this would be a welfare program, but we recognize that a
program that is modeled after the MSP program works. So that is
the reason why we structured it as we did, as we attempted to
support the administration's proposal, with regard to food aid
reform. And that was a piece that was actually installed as
part of that proposal. And that is the administration's request
to achieve the 25-percent additional flexibility----
Mr. Garamendi. The administration's request was to reduce
food and transfer the money to the military. That is for the
MSP program, which was a very interesting program. So we got
hungry people in Africa. We are going to reduce the money for
them and give it to the military. Is that still part of the
program that you are proposing that----
Mr. Jaenichen. That is not the administration's position.
Mr. Garamendi. It was.
Mr. Jaenichen. No, there was a discussion that was ongoing
between the USAID and MarAd to support a proposal as a food aid
reform. That is not on the table any longer, Ranking Member.
Mr. Garamendi. Any longer. Good. So where is the $25
million coming from?
Mr. Jaenichen. The $25 million is included in the MarAd's
2017 budget request, as part of the MSP program, and it is an
effort to ensure that any type of food aid reform--in this
particular case for the 25-percent additional flexibility for
interventions that include local and regional purchase--to
ensure that it does not affect the merchant marine fleet.
Mr. Garamendi. Wouldn't it be better all the way around to
ship food than to just ship money?
Mr. Jaenichen. USAID has indicated that the cost of that
actually does have an impact on the number of folks that can be
fed. And again, that is a calculation that they have provided
and the administration supports.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, this fight is not over. And we are
going to stay with it.
I am out of time, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana [presiding]. Thank you.
Administrator, thank you also for being here today. It is good
to see you again.
Some folks in the office recently had a meeting in regard
to the Maritime Security Program. It is my understanding that
under that program you have a number of priorities. Number one
is RoRo [roll-on, roll-off] vessels, number two is----
Mr. Jaenichen. Tankers.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Heavy lift. Yes, number two is
heavy lift----
Mr. Jaenichen. No, number two is tankers, number three is
heavy lift. Those priorities that were established by the
U.S.----
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Wait, so it is RoRo----
Mr. Jaenichen. Tanker.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana [continuing]. Tanker, geared----
Mr. Jaenichen. Heavy----
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Oh, heavy lift----
Mr. Jaenichen. Heavy lift, geared container ship, and then
container ship.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. OK. And it is my understanding
that you have a current section 2 participant that is proposing
to replace vessels. And as I understand, they are allowed under
the operating agreements to provide for a replacement vessel of
equal or greater capacity, and it is my understanding that they
have done just that, but that they are having some trouble
getting approval from MarAd in regard to that.
I want to ask, before you make a final decision on that, I
would like to schedule a briefing with you to get an update on
what is going on there, to understand the prioritization
process, to understand the compliance or lack there of, of the
operating agreement, if you would agree to that before you make
a final decision on this.
Mr. Jaenichen. Congressman, I would be happy to meet with
you, but I would emphasize that both of these operating
agreements have been vacant since the 15th and the 22nd of
September of last year. And so we have been working with the
company in question to get substitution, and we have been
working and imploring them to fill those vacancies, and we are
reviewing what they have submitted thus far. And I will make a
decision here shortly. I well get with you some time this week
to have that discussion.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Great. Great, thank you.
Commandant, I would like to come back to you. There has been
talk--and following up on a previous conversation, there has
been talk about the Jones Act recently, and I have seen some
folks that have expressed concern about the Jones Act from a
fiscal perspective. It certainly concerns me, as well, anything
that would be perceived or in reality, of course, as being a
waste of taxpayer funds.
If you--you know, going back to what we talked about
earlier, if we repealed the Jones Act, if we made significant
changes, the potential game changer from a security situation
and many others--referring back to your previous comments--do
you view--you know, if you were to monetize the Jones Act, the
capability it provides to the defense industrial base, the
security stability that it provides, do you view that as a
money loser for taxpayers?
Admiral Zukunft. I can only conjecture on that. You know,
my biggest focus is what is due to our resiliency, as a
maritime Nation. And, quite honestly, it will nearly bankrupt
our maritime resiliency.
When we look at the challenges that the MarAd Administrator
is facing, that the Commander of TRANSCOM [United States
Transportation Command] is facing in the event of a
contingency, and we don't have a lift within the U.S. fleet to
respond to a contingency at a point in time we are seeing the
reemergence of peer competitors, you know, it is in our
Nation's best interest. And I think, from a sovereign interest,
not necessarily from a taxpayer, that we protect our maritime
resiliency. And the Jones Act does provide that wherewithal.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Another question----
Mr. Jaenichen. Congressman, if I might interject----
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Please.
Mr. Jaenichen [continuing]. On this particular topic, if
the build requirement were changed, there's about 40 different
yards across the country that are building both Federal
programs and also commercial.
Today, under construction, there are 32 large vessels under
construction. And, of those, 12 are what I would refer to as
normal, self-propelled tankers. There's also 20 articulated tug
and barges with large vessels, in terms of the capability to
carry 150,000 to 200,000 barrels. We also have four of what I
call special purpose ships, they are built to carry containers.
And roll-on, roll-off, and also just regular LNG-ready type
container ships. Without the Jones Act, those builds don't
occur, which means that the Federal Government now has to
assume all of the cost of the overhead for that industrial
base, which means that your cost for those vessels is going to
go up.
The industry itself--and that includes both the Federal
shipbuilding and the commercial shipbuilding--we just released
a study last fall that updated some numbers we did from 2013--
that is 110,000 people around the country that are building
ships; that is a $36 billion industry. Without that commercial
shipbuilding and that industrial base, it will have an impact
on the taxpayer, in terms of what we have to pay to acquire the
ships, whether they are for the Navy, the Coast Guard, for
NOAA, for the Army Corps.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Administrator, could you provide a
copy of that report for the record?
Mr. Jaenichen. Yes, sir, I can.
[The Maritime Administration report from November 2015 entitled
``The Economic Importance of the U.S. Shipbuilding and Repairing
Industry'' can be found on the Maritime Administration Web site at
https://www.marad.dot.gov/wp-content/uploads/pdf/
MARAD_Econ_Study_Final_Report_2015.pdf.]

Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. So again, I want to
make note, you know, any program that is going to waste
taxpayer funds would obviously cause great concern. And I think
if you look at only the surface, in some cases it may cause
concern. But it sounds like, based on what you are saying and
some of the admiral's comment, when you actually dig deeper,
that this does provide value to taxpayers in regard to the
resiliency of our defense industrial base and the security of
the country.
One last question. Admiral, I want to come back. The fiscal
year 2016 NDAA bill, the National Defense Authorization Act,
transitioned the military retirement program for the Coast
Guard for new military servicemembers, or Coasties, from a
defined benefit plan over to the Thrift Savings Plan that many
other agencies participate in, and it requires participation in
that. It provides a match from the Coast Guard in that program.
Has the Coast Guard talked with OMB to determine how the
Coast Guard's current mandatory funding for these benefits can
be moved to a discretionary situation, as DOD currently is?
Admiral Zukunft. Congressman, we haven't, but it is a
conversation we must absolutely have. Right now we don't know
how many people will opt in to up to 5 percent, with a matching
5 percent. But we do know, if we have a significant number,
right now that comes out of our operating base. And that will
directly impact frontline operations. It will challenge some of
our many other operating expenses that we have right now.
And so, we need to build that wedge for those who will be
required to opt in in 2018, whether they contribute the 5
percent or not. But how many other members with fewer than 12
years of service decided, hey, they want to opt in, as well?
And so there are real costs involved with this. And right now
our base does not provide us the wherewithal to sustain those
type of matching payments to thrift savings.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you. Would you support using
the $25 million for increased MSP payments, pursuant to the
recently passed increase in the authorization? I am sorry, to
the--Administrator Jaenichen?
Mr. Jaenichen. Would that be assuming that food aid reform
is actually implemented or not, Congressman?
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. No.
Mr. Jaenichen. What I can tell you with regard to the MSP
program is that they are under severe pressure with regards--
when the program, at its inception back in 1996, it was really
based on three things. It was based on a stipend amount, it was
based on access to Government-impelled cargo, both DOD and
civilian cargo, and also the ability to carry civilian cargo.
Currently, civilian cargo today is--there is an over-
capacity, with--the actual scrapping price is so low they are
not--ships aren't being scrapped, so that capacity is
continuing. We have seen the lowest shipping rates in a long
time. Our Government-impelled rates, as I indicated earlier,
DOD is down 75 percent, agriculture and USAID cargoes are down
40 percent. The only place you can go now is to go to the
stipend amount in order to ensure the fleet is viable.
DOD and the U.S. Transportation Secretary both support the
viability of this program. We understand its significance in
support of DOD requirements, specifically for sealift, to
globally project and sustain our armed forces.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Thank you.
Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. First of all, I would like to enter into the
record of this hearing Mr. McDew's testimony today that he
provided with regard to the MSP program and the necessity for
that. I think it would be useful to have on our record.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. Without objection.

[The information can be found on page 90.]

Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. I think I will probably leave
that go for a while.
Chairman Hunter had been talking about the UAV [unmanned
aerial vehicle], or UAS, or RPAS [remotely piloted aircraft
system], as the military now calls them. There is a program
that the CBP is conducting. They have nine Predator B and
Guardian--a maritime variety of the Predator B that they are
using to patrol the border.
Recently, the analysis that has been done on their program
by the Department of Homeland Security indicates that that
program is just totally inefficient and ineffective. They are
spending $600 million annually on that program, presumably to
protect, like, one one-hundredth of the Mexican border. It
seems to me that we need to make some choices about--here,
where $600 million is being spent.
We know that the Coast Guard has a need for better
surveillance, some of which will be provided by new ships, but
others of which might be more effectively provided by UAS, UAV,
or RPAS, whatever we want to call them. And so I think this
committee ought to take this issue up with the homeland
security committees about where $600 million could be most
effectively spent in protecting our borders. Since there is a
whole lot more sea border than there is land border, perhaps
that $600 million could be better spent by the Coast Guard
acquiring maybe those very same assets.
So, I put that out there. Mr. Zukunft--or Admiral, excuse
me--you normally don't go mess with other people's budgets, but
it seems to me you are part of the Homeland Security
Department. Have you talked to the Secretary about transferring
this $600 million and the nine Predators to you to be used more
effectively?
Admiral Zukunft. That would be the equivalent of internal
warfare, Ranking Member.
But what we do have within the Department of Homeland
Security, we have a Joint Requirements Council. These nine
Predators predate the standup of this Joint Requirements
Council. An example is, working with the Navy, we identified
the right sensor package to go into our fixed-wing aircraft. It
is called Minotaur. But it is a defense project. You know, the
R&D, the work has been done. And through this Joint
Requirements Council at the Department of Homeland Security, it
is not just Coast Guard, but CBP is now acquiring this Minotaur
project, as well.
As we mentioned earlier, you know, the remotely piloted
aircraft, whatever we want to call them, it is merely a
platform. It is the sensor pod that you put in it, and the
sensor pod that is in it right now does not afford for the
wide-aerial surveillance that we would need. But you could
argue you might need that same capability, whether you are
flying over land or over the water, as well. But that would be
a process to work through the Joint Requirements Council that
has been stood up under this Secretary's leadership within the
Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Garamendi. You got a problem with internal warfare,
when you have got $600 million that is inefficiently used by
the CBP, and you are not willing to go grab it and be able to
use it more effectively by putting in the new sensor system
that the Navy and you are jointly commissioning?
Admiral Zukunft. We are at an inflection point where, under
this Secretary's leadership, it is all about unity of effort.
And so we have created joint task forces, where we have
combined the cultures of Coast Guard, CBP, and ICE [Immigration
and Customs Enforcement]. And we are--you know, so we are
operating at the front line.
But if you have one agency now second-guessing how another
administration expands its----
Mr. Garamendi. It is our business to second-guess. And we
have a report that there is $600 million that is being spent
very inefficiently by CBP with their Predator B UAS. And I am
curious as to whether they could be repurposed.
Let me ask you a specific question. Could they be
repurposed with a different sensing device for the use by the
Coast Guard?
Admiral Zukunft. Absolutely.
Mr. Garamendi. Absolutely? Is that your answer?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes. Identifying the right sensor pod that
goes----
Mr. Garamendi. Is that this new Minotaur thing that you
are----
Admiral Zukunft. This would probably be yet a different
sensor pod.
Mr. Garamendi. Does it exist today?
Admiral Zukunft. That I can't answer. We will have to do
a----
Mr. Garamendi. I think the chair answered the question as
yes, it does.
Well, it is our business to conduct internal warfare within
the Departments, and to decide where the money goes. We have
evidence that the CBP is inefficiently using $600 million, and
six or nine Predators that could be repurposed for the Coast
Guard. If you had them, could you use them?
Admiral Zukunft. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. No more questions.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. If there are no further
questions----
Mr. Garamendi. Note that as a yes.
Mr. Graves of Louisiana. If there are no further questions,
I thank the witnesses for their testimony and the Members for
their participation.
The subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:50 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
