- HELPING REVITALIZE AMERICAN COMMUNITIES THROUGH THE BROWNFIELDS PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HELPING REVITALIZE AMERICAN COMMUNITIES THROUGH THE BROWNFIELDS PROGRAM

=======================================================================

(114-25)

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 22, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available online at: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/browse/
committee.action?chamber=house&committee=transportation

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-581PDF                       WASHINGTON: 2017
_____________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC area (202) 512-1800
Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
Vice Chair                         Columbia
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                JERROLD NADLER, New York
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        CORRINE BROWN, Florida
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            RICK LARSEN, Washington
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
JEFF DENHAM, California              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              JANICE HAHN, California
TOM RICE, South Carolina             RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            DINA TITUS, Nevada
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
JOHN KATKO, New York                 JARED HUFFMAN, California
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   JULIA BROWNLEY, California
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

(ii)

Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

BOB GIBBS, Ohio, Chairman

CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JOHN GARAMENDI, California
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
JEFF DENHAM, California              JARED HUFFMAN, California
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
TOM RICE, South Carolina             DINA TITUS, Nevada
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN KATKO, New York                 Columbia
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada                PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon (Ex
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             Officio)
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania (Ex
Officio)

(iii)

CONTENTS

Page

Summary of Subject Matter........................................   vii

WITNESSES
Panel 1

Hon. Mathy Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid
Waste and Emergency Response, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency:

Testimony....................................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio...................................    55
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano of California...................    67

Panel 2

Cynthia A. Hafner, Chief Legal Counsel, Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency:

Testimony....................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    73
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio...................................    77
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano of California...................    80
Hon. J. Christian Bollwage, Mayor of the city of Elizabeth, New
Jersey, on behalf of the U.S. Conference of Mayors:

Testimony....................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    81
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio...................................    89
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano of California...................    93
Kelley C. Race, P.G., L.S.P., Brownfields Program Manager, TRC
Companies, Inc.:

Testimony....................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    95
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio...................................   104
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano of California...................   112
Paul Gruber, P.G., on behalf of the National Ground Water
Association:

Testimony....................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................   116
Responses to questions for the record from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio...................................   124
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano of California...................   128
Vernice Miller-Travis, Vice Chair, Maryland Commission on
Environmental Justice and Sustainable Communities, and Member,
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council to U.S. EPA:

Testimony....................................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................   131

PREPARED STATEMENT SUBMITTED BY MEMBER OF CONGRESS

Hon. Janice Hahn of California...................................    36

SUBMISSIONS FOR THE RECORD

Letter of July 20, 2015, from Clarence E. Anthony, CEO and
Executive Director, National League of Cities, to Chairman Bill
Shuster and Ranking Member Peter A. DeFazio, Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure, and Chairman Bob Gibbs and
Ranking Member Grace F. Napolitano, Subcommittee on Water
Resources and Environment......................................   138
Letter of August 6, 2015, from Michael Forbeck (PA), P.E.,
President, Association of State and Territorial Solid Waste
Management Officials, to Chairman Bob Gibbs, Subcommittee on
Water Resources and Environment................................   141
Written statement of Jonathan Philips, Managing Director, Anka
Funds..........................................................   144
Written statement of Scott A. Thompson, Executive Director,
Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality...................   163
Questions for the record to Vernice Miller-Travis, Vice Chair,
Maryland Commission on Environmental Justice and Sustainable
Communities, and Member, National Environmental Justice
Advisory Council to U.S. EPA, from the following
Representatives:

Hon. Bob Gibbs of Ohio.......................................   167
Hon. Grace F. Napolitano of California.......................   170

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

HELPING REVITALIZE AMERICAN COMMUNITIES
THROUGH THE BROWNFIELDS PROGRAM

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 22, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2167, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bob Gibbs
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Mr. Gibbs. The Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment of the full Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure will come to order. I want to thank everybody
for attending today. I know there will be Members in and out.
There is a lot going on today. I think everybody is trying to
finish up a lot of loose ends, cross the t's and dot the i's
here before we go back and meet with our constituents in
August. Some housekeeping business first. I ask unanimous
consent that the hearing record be kept open for 30 days after
this hearing in order to accept written testimony for the
hearing record. Is there objection? Without objection, so
ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that written testimony
submitted on behalf of the following parties be included in
this hearing's record: Scott Thompson, the executive director
of the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality; Clarence
Anthony, the CEO and executive director of the National League
of Cities; Jonathan Philips, the managing director of Anka
Funds; and Congresswoman Janice Hahn from California. Is there
objection? Hearing none, without objection, so ordered.
OK. I will open up with my opening remarks. Today, we are
here to talk about helping revitalize America's communities
through the Brownfields Program. Following the passage of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, also known as Superfund, a new kind of
property emerged, brownfields. Brownfields are properties where
contamination was suspected but unknown. These sites include
inactive factories, gas stations, salvage yards, and many other
previously used properties where possible environmental
liability and cleanup standards prevented their continued use
and redevelopment.
Fear of environmental liability at these sites caused
developers to look outside cities to previously undeveloped
properties for new opportunities. This left many sites
untouched, driving down property values, contributing to
blight, and providing no tax revenue to cities. Both the States
and the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] began looking for
ways to more successfully address the concerns of potential
contamination to get these sites back to productive use.
In 1995, the EPA issued demonstration grants to help assess
sites to determine what cleanup might be needed. States,
cities, and developers also began looking for better ways to
address these sites. In 2001, Congress created the specific
authority for dealing with brownfields, the Brownfields
Revitalization and Environmental Restoration Act of 2001,
amended the Superfund law, and authorized funding to the EPA to
provide grants for assessment and cleanup, provided targeted
liability relief for property owners, and increased Federal
support for the State and tribal programs that were already
underway.
The authorization for brownfield grants under the
Brownfields Revitalization and Environmental Restoration Act of
2001 expired at the end of fiscal year 2006, though Congress
has continued to appropriate funds for the Brownfields Program.
To say this program has been a success is understating its
achievements. As of June last year, the EPA and the State and
tribal programs had assessed more than 21,000 properties,
completed over 99,450 cleanups, and made more than 900,000
acres ready for reuse. On average, $17.79 was leveraged for
every EPA dollar spent in the Brownfields Program. And nearly
106,000 jobs have been leveraged since the start of the
program. The benefits of having these sites redeveloped include
increased property values of between 5 percent and nearly 13
percent, and measurable environmental benefits, such as fewer
vehicle miles traveled and decreased stormwater run off.
To quote a line from our upcoming witness from the Ohio
EPA, Cindy Hafner, Ohio has been ``blessed with a rich
industrial history, which resulted in a very large number of
brownfields that no one wanted to use.'' I know Ohio is not
alone in its appreciation for this important program. The
Brownfields Program has been a successful partnership between
the EPA--I want to stress that, partnership--between the EPA,
States, communities, investors, and developers. Because it
applies to so many sites and generates such a high return in
investment, it is an incredibly popular program throughout the
country. But like many other good programs, there may be ways
to make it more effective. And I think this is a good time to
look at this, since the authorization expired in 2007, it is a
good time to see what is happening, see what adjustments might
be needed, and how we can make the programs better, and be more
successful.
Today, we will hear from the Honorable Mathy Stanislaus,
the Assistant Administrator for the Office of Solid Waste and
Emergency Response at the U.S. EPA. Our second panel, we have
Ms. Cindy Hafner, the chief legal counsel for the Ohio EPA; the
Honorable Christian Bollwage, mayor of Elizabeth, New Jersey;
Ms. Kelley Race, Mr. Paul Gruber, and Ms. Vernice Miller-
Travis. I want to thank the witnesses for taking the time out
of their schedules to be here today. I now recognize Ranking
Member Napolitano for any remarks she may have.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you so very much, Chairman Gibbs,
for holding today's hearing on the status of the EPA's program.
Welcome to our witnesses again. The EPA's brownfields was
conceived and initiated as a pilot program, as was indicated by
my colleague, during the Clinton administration and the fully
fledged program was enacted during the Bush administration. It
has proven to be a critical community development tool that
transforms some, not all, underutilized and potentially
contaminated sites into productive and useful environments. The
term ``brownfield'' refers to abandoned and underutilized
properties where, with expansion or redevelopment, it is
hampered by either real or perceived environmental
contamination. They are not Superfund sites, but are properties
that are former gas stations, dry cleaning establishments,
warehouses, industrial properties and other things as such
where the potential stigma of contamination was enough to
hamper redevelopment. As one can imagine, these types of sites
are located in almost every community in our country. The
brownfield signed in 2002 represented a needed and unique
solution to the challenges facing redevelopment on these sites
into productive spaces with grants as seed money for assessment
or cleanup of brownfields, and eases legitimate liability
concerns of potential developers.
Benefits are twofold: First, the redevelopment of these
brownfield sites discourages development of greenfields, which
would exacerbate the problem of suburban sprawl. Second,
creating new uses for these otherwise underutilized sites
reinvigorates the tax base and generates job growth with
sustainable economic development in the areas surrounding these
sites. The Brownfields Program has been very successful because
it facilitated the redevelopment of approximately 49,000 acres
of land, and created nearly 106,000 jobs. And EPA estimates
that it has created 7.3 jobs for every $100,000 invested,
leveraging over $17 of investment for every Federal dollar
invested.
It is a highly effective and productive program. And it is
not surprising that the competition for brownfield grants is
highly competitive. These results beg the question then: Why
are we not investing more in redevelopment of brownfield
spaces? Further, if this is a success rate of an underfunded
program, imagine the potential economic impact and potential
for job creation that would come from fully funding this
program. EPA estimates that over the past 5 years, as my
colleague has pointed out, funding deficiencies have caused
1,767 viable programs to go unfunded.
This is a backlog of $693.6 million worth of projects.
These sites are not only sitting idle and unproductive, but are
missing out on the return of investment that these sites could
realize if these proposals had received the funding. And it is
estimated the grants would have leveraged approximately 50,600
jobs and over $12 billion in public and private financing.
In my world, I call that a missed opportunity. There is an
area where the Brownfields Program has yet to achieve its goal.
It is my impression the program was originally created with two
goals in mind. First, spurring economic redevelopment of
formerly underutilized and potentially contaminated sites; and,
secondly, targeted redevelopment of sites located in
economically distressed communities in particular, which begs
the question, are we then not looking at areas where we have
more need? In other words, checking whether or not they really
are in need of this economic development.
While the program's success speaks for itself on the first
mission, I am interested to hear whether or not our witnesses
feel as though gains are being made on the second mission. Put
another way, are we doing enough to encourage the redevelopment
of brownfield sites located in communities throughout the
country where the market forces may not be as strong? Are there
ways to make sure the successes of the Brownfields Program can
be amplified for urban neighborhoods away from city centers or
rural or smaller communities where redevelopment may need just
a little more push to get started.
And I can tell you, Chairman Gibbs, and everybody that
might be interested, is that there was an EDI and a BEDI [HUD
Economic Development Initiative and Brownfield Economic
Development Initiative grants] in my background in Santa Fe
Springs which created 3,000 jobs, 3,000 jobs with the EDI and
the BEDI. So does it work? Yes, it works. And I think we need
to take a longer look in how we can spur more funding into this
program to make it more available where it is most needed.
Again, welcome to our witnesses. And thank you, Chairman Gibbs,
for holding this hearing. And I yield back my time.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. At this time, I want to recognize the
chairman of the full Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Chairman
Shuster.
Mr. Shuster. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs. I appreciate you
holding this hearing. I think most people who have been around
here long know that there aren't many times that I give great
compliments to the EPA. But this is one of those programs that
has been very beneficial. And I think the EPA has done a good
job. But we always can do better. When we are dealing with
these brownfield sites, I know there are hundreds of thousands
around the country. My home State of Pennsylvania, there are
thousands and thousands. And we have seen great examples of how
you can take those brownfield sites and turn them into valuable
productive pieces of land. As we know, the property values, tax
revenues, when those are able to be brought back online, things
improve in the area in general. So we want to continue to view
these things and work with the EPA. It makes good economic and
environmental sense to move forward with these.
And in 2001, we passed legislation, the Small Business
Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act. That was
really the starting point for many of these brownfields to be
turned back into, as I said, productive pieces of land. And,
again, we appreciate what the EPA has done. I am not going to
be here for the second panel of witnesses. But Kelley Race
spends a lot of time working brownfield issues in Pennsylvania.
We appreciate you being here with your expertise in helping us
to move forward. So I thank you and all of our witnesses for
being here today. I appreciate that. And with that, I yield
back.
Mr. Gibbs. I thank the chairman. At this time, I want to
welcome our first panel, our witness, the Honorable Mathy
Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator of the Office of Solid
Waste and Emergency Response at the U.S. EPA. Welcome. And the
floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF HON. MATHY STANISLAUS, ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR,
OFFICE OF SOLID WASTE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE, U.S.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

Mr. Stanislaus. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Gibbs,
Ranking Member Napolitano, and members of the subcommittee. I
am Mathy Stanislaus, Assistant Administrator of the Office of
Solid Waste and Emergency Response. Again, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today. And really, thank you for your
recognition of the value and benefit of the program. And we
welcome this exchange. The brownfield sites are the heart of
American's downtowns and economic centers. And reclaiming these
vacant, underutilized properties are a real core to EPA's
community economic revitalization efforts. Our Brownfields
Program has been a catalyst for redevelopment, revitalization,
and really hinges on the success of local partners working
together to implement the vision of local communities. It
achieves public health protection by cleaning up these
properties. It achieves economic development and community
revitalization. And it addresses social issues like
unemployment.
EPA's Brownfields Program provides direct funding to
communities, States, tribes, and not-for-profits for brownfield
assessment, cleanup, revolving loans, technical assistance,
areawide planning, and environmental job training. The
Brownfields Program is premised on partnerships between the
public and private sector. The EPA's critical early resources
provide certainty to leverage funding from other Government
agencies and the private sector to achieve economic,
environmental, and social outcomes.
On average, as recognized earlier, for every dollar EPA
invests in a community, it leverages about $18 of public and
private investment. We think, as a model, that works. The
Brownfields Program is also a key component of the
administration's effort to advance manufacturing in the United
States through the investing and manufacturing community
partnership. It is also a key aspect of the administration's
work on advancing sustainable communities in partnership with
HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] and DOT
[U.S. Department of Transportation]. As recognized earlier, the
Brownfields Program grantees for fiscal year 2014 are projected
to assess more than 1,300 properties, and clean up more than
120 properties, leverage about $1.1 billion in cleanup and
redevelopment, and create at least 5,000 jobs in communities
across the country.
Additionally, EPA's research has shown that redeveloping a
brownfield site, rather than a greenfield site, has
significant, environmental, and public health benefits,
including reducing vehicle miles travel, reducing emissions by
32 to 57 percent, and reducing stormwater runoff estimated by
47 to 62 percent. It also reduces the infrastructure investment
necessary to promote economic revitalization. Over many years,
the Brownfields Program implementation has taught us that it is
a real model for successful projects. And it is a real model
for maximizing limited Federal dollars to really achieve local
outcomes. And that occurs, again, through public-private
partnerships and leveraging the limited Federal dollars to
State, local, and private investment.
The job training program is highly successful. We have a
70-percent hiring rate. It is really targeted in areas of high
unemployment. And it is a multiskill, multicertificate program.
Over the years, we have heard from stakeholders lots of things
about the Brownfields Program, how it can be improved. One of
the issues that we have heard is whether we should consider
increasing the size of the cleanup grants. We actually think
that it could have the unintended impact of actually reducing
the total number of communities that receive grants, and
actually, potentially get in the way of this good model of
leveraging EPA dollars with local and private dollars.
We have also heard some focus on particular kinds of end
uses. And we actually think that it should be the community to
decide the end use that works for them and for us to administer
a nationally competitive process that looks at the key factors
of additional resources, strong local partners, and a real plan
to really implement that rather than the Federal Government
determining what uses are best, be it waterfront,
manufacturing, or housing kind of issues. The Brownfields
Program also provides on a noncompetitive basis tremendous
resources for State and tribal programs to build and administer
a cleanup program. As you all know, the cleanup side of the
Brownfields Program is largely administered by States and
tribes, as really critical resources to States to administer
that program.
Now, a critical aspect of what EPA provides is, as
technical assistance, is really critical, particularly for
communities with limited capacity. And we believe that has been
really successful in the real spread of communities receiving
grants. So in the last grant cycle, 56 percent of communities
under 100,000 population receive our grants. And 24 percent of
communities under 10,000 receive our grants. With that, I will
close. I am out of time. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. I will lead off here. First of all, I
like your comment about the communities deciding what the end
use is going to be. That is better, I always believe they know
what is best in their local communities. So I am glad to see
the U.S. EPA recognizes that. I am curious, approximately how
many applications each year do you get? And how do you make the
decisions which sites get it? And has it become more
competitive? Is it a competitive process?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes, I can get you the specific numbers
over the years. But in terms of how many we actually award,
about a third of the applicants that we award every year. And
how we make determinations, it is a national competition based
on criteria that we establish the basic elements of a project,
how far in advance the project is, what kind of leveraging
other resources. Because ultimately we want to make sure that
these projects are successful.
Mr. Gibbs. And, I think, to go along with that, if you can
get us the information later on. But how many brownfield sites
since the program has been in use have been cleaned up and put
in new use? And of that, how many was the U.S. EPA involved in
versus the States doing it all, you know, how that works?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. We can provide information regarding
where EPA has invested in projects, as well as through States
and State resources where States have invested in cleanups.
Mr. Gibbs. I am curious about administrative costs. This
program, how does it compare to other programs within the EPA
for administrative costs?
Mr. Stanislaus. The comparison to other programs, I don't
have that in front of me. Again, I can get that to you.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Do you expect it is higher or lower?
Mr. Stanislaus. I think it is a model program. I think it
is a lean program.
Mr. Gibbs. Yesterday, the EPA's inspector general released
findings that some sites which had been cleared by the EPA,
regions 4 and 6, for redevelopment may still contain levels of
toxic substances above public health standards. Can you please
explain how your office plans to handle this report?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. I need to take a look at the details
of that report. But cleanups, in any redevelopment of a site,
in some cases, may require a complete cleanup of contaminants.
Some places leave the contaminants in place with effective
engineering and institutional controls. A lot of that is
administered through the State programs. So we will look at the
details of that report. We completely are in support of, we
want to make sure these cleanups are protected, while also
advancing redevelopment.
Mr. Gibbs. Personally, I didn't see the report, but I know
that the two regions, that they cleared it for redevelopment.
And, obviously, according to the IG [inspector general] anyway,
there are toxic substances still there. So that is something we
really need to address to make sure that our processes and our
end processes are adequate so we don't have problems down the
road, especially for a new owner.
Mr. Stanislaus. There are many successful projects where
contaminants continue to be in the ground, but it is still
protective. And if you have effective engineering mechanisms,
effective legal mechanisms, it can still be protective while
the contaminants are left in place.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. One thing I know that was in the original
authorization is a 25-percent set-aside for petroleum, i.e.,
abandoned gas tanks. And I think through this, you know, over
the years, it used to be, if you were in an urban area, it
seemed like almost every intersection, on three of the four
corners there would be a gas station. Now, that is not the case
anymore. So we have gone through a lot of cleanup. The 25-
percent set-aside, is that still needed, or is that causing
problems for you when you only have so many dollars to work
with? But if you have to allocate 25 percent to an earmark,
essentially, I am assuming we have made a lot of progress, the
program is working, that should be a declining set-aside
percentage. What are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Stanislaus. Actually, we have suggested elimination of
that provision. Because I think the administration of that
provision really requires upfront dividing----
Mr. Gibbs. Wait. Did you say you suggested eliminating the
25 percent?
Mr. Stanislaus. That provision, that 25-percent provision.
Because what that does is it, in a sense, requires us to set
aside 25 percent. And what we prefer is a consistent national
competition among all sites, and all sites should compete in
the same way, whether it is petroleum or hazardous substances
and all the other elements.
Mr. Gibbs. I agree. The reason we are having this hearing
today is see what we need to do to make this program better.
Briefly here, do you have any other ideas or suggestions where
you see, if we are looking at a reauthorization bill, that we
should be----
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, a couple--administrative costs have
clearly been raised. Particularly by smaller applicants, it
continues to be a burden. And the current legal prohibition of
administrative costs, I think, has been raised by grantees to
us. Extending the not-for-profit eligibility for also
assessments. Not-for-profits play a real strong role with local
governments, like the housing organizations. And so right now,
they are ineligible. Those are the things that immediately come
to mind. But we can provide broader technical assistance to
you.
Mr. Gibbs. I am out of time. I do have one question I do
want to get to before I move on. The small business liability
protection, liability protection in general, how do you see
that? Has that been working well? Or are there problems we
should be addressing with that?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, yes, I think the law does provide the
acquisition, be it voluntary, involuntary, and the kind of due
diligence. I know that looking at the testimony of the National
League of Cities, there, potentially, is either a concern about
a perception or reality in terms of how do we make sure we
protect from liability. We have done a lot of things in this
way. For example, we have heard from lessees, particularly, a
number of projects rely on lease arrangements, not fee simple
arrangements. So we issued a guidance to make clear that a
lessee would fall into the same shoes as an owner. But I think
there is more, we want to engage more with, be it the National
League of Cities or other kind of local mayors and communities
on this issue.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Next, to Mrs. Napolitano for any
questions you may have.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, sir. Administrator Stanislaus,
on the topic of liability, there are some that would claim that
local governments are left unprotected by CERCLA's
[Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980] liabilities defenses and exemptions due
to how they acquire the site. Even properties acquired through
tax delinquency may not be exempt if local government took
voluntary steps in a tax delinquency process. However, has EPA
taken action to address this over the years, or have you come
up with some remedy for this? And if so, what specifically has
been taken? What actions has EPA taken to ensure that these
procedures, protections, rather, do not have the chilling
effect on some of the groups they warn of?
Mr. Stanislaus. We have taken the liability protections set
forth in the brownfield law, and provided for the guidance of
that and provide clarity, that a municipality can acquire,
either voluntarily or involuntarily, as long as they do certain
kinds of due diligence actions. We also understand that there
may be a need for more to provide that certainty. Because none
of us want properties to be lying idle, even for the perception
of liability. So we welcome further engagement with you all, as
well as communities around the country of what more we can do
to, one, better communicate how they can protect themselves
from liability, but if there is more that we can do.
Mrs. Napolitano. Sir, do you communicate that with either
the Conference of Mayors or the Governors associations so that
they understand that this is something you have been
addressing, and somehow, some of the smaller communities that
have no way of being able to further look into the issue may be
able to garner information to help themselves?
Mr. Stanislaus. Absolutely. In fact, in September, I
invited all the members to attend, we are having a brownfields
conference. And one of the things that a number of communities
around the country are going to explain how they manage
liability, how they have been able to underwrite projects----
Mrs. Napolitano. Is this going to be live-streamed?
Mr. Stanislaus. I don't know. I will check on that.
Mrs. Napolitano. We need to be able to get all this
information. See, everybody thinks that local governments know
what is happening here or what the Agency's rules may have now
encompassed into helping them. But if we don't get that
information to them, we are not able then to get enough
information from them how we can help develop the brownfields
into productive land.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK.
Mrs. Napolitano. I look forward to working with you on
that, sir.
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure.
Mrs. Napolitano. Then, one witness who will be testifying
in our second panel indicates we must refocus our efforts in
the hope of the successful brownfields redevelopment, what it
does to broad-based economic opportunity and community
revitalization, especially those in the bottom of our economic
strata, in other words, our poorer areas. So what is EPA doing
to ensure that these underserved communities receive their fair
share? Not only that if they are not successful in the first
round, and they should be able to reapply, do you tell them how
to better their ability to be successful in the second round?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. We put in place a broad technical
assistance program for that reason. Because we have heard from
smaller communities, distressed communities, the issue of how
to best put together an application. So we do direct outreach.
But we are prevented----
Mrs. Napolitano. How direct, sir? How direct? Because,
again, I go back to being able to ensure that they have the
ability to know where to find that information, whether it is
through some of their organizations, the county governments, et
cetera. That is the issue I am trying to get across is getting
more openness to this process.
Mr. Stanislaus. Everything from engaging, be it the
National League of Cities or the Conference of Mayors and local
community groups, but we also, through our technical
assistance, provide and conduct workshops around the country.
And we also, in some of our contract vehicles, enable direct
assistance to actually prepare applications. We can provide
that direct assistance by providing grants to others to help
them. So we think that is going a long way of dealing with this
issue. But we hear from a lot of small towns that from budget
constraints, that they may not have staff on board to really
follow these opportunities. So we completely agree that we need
to really invest in that technical assistance for smaller
communities.
Mrs. Napolitano. Again, sir, I would love to be able to
ensure that we able to put this in the hands of everybody that
would want to patch in, if you will, to any of the online
discussion. Then the other area was, and I think you just
touched on that, that there are areas where DOT helps out in
the Brownfields Program and some other agencies. Is there a way
to be able to get that information to us and to--well, we can
disseminate to our areas, but we need to know who the other
partners are besides the local government, your county
government, and your private parties.
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. Sure. I will get that to you. I will
give you one example of working with DOT. We have something
called the Areawide Planning Program, which really was a tool
designed for communities that have broad economic distress, to
be able to conduct infrastructure studies, market studies, and
planning studies. Based on that, DOT has built within its
program some preferential points for communities who have done
that local planning effort. That is one of the areas that we
are collaborating with DOT.
Mrs. Napolitano. Great. That would be something I would
love to see. And I hope that you can get a copy to this
subcommittee. Thank you, sir. I yield back.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Rokita.
Mr. Rokita. I thank the chair. Good morning, Mr.
Stanislaus. I appreciate your presentation. I mostly now
represent a suburban and rural district with some cities in it.
This is really my first exposure to brownfields, not only since
being on the committee, but since being in Congress. I didn't
have much experience when I was secretary of state with
brownfields. So bear with me. But it seems like the myth is
that brownfields are an urban situation. Are there situations
where brownfields exist in rural areas or suburban areas? What
might that look like for me?
Mr. Stanislaus. Absolutely. It is one of the reasons, I am
trying to remember the statistics, about 56 percent of
communities less than 100,000, and 24 percent less than 10,000,
so in smaller rural communities, it could be the former ag
processing facility, it could be a former petroleum-related
facility. In some cases, it could be that former, one big
manufacturing facility that that community was built around. So
it kind of runs the gamut of the prior uses.
Mr. Rokita. OK. Got it. Thank you. Regarding non-owners
that might be occupying the land that was a brownfield or is a
brownfield: Is there a Superfund liability of some sort, and
does that liability extend to tenants or other non-owners? How
does that work? How do we ensure that the non-owners are
secured or protected from liability?
Mr. Stanislaus. If you are asking in a scenario of an
existing contaminated site and a lessee wanted to redevelop the
site and not have liability?
Mr. Rokita. Yes.
Mr. Stanislaus. We have actually issued guidelines to make
clear that the lessee will be protected from liability as long
as they follow the same steps as an owner would in terms of due
diligence.
Mr. Rokita. OK. Then the flip side of that question: How do
you protect against exposure risk to tenants?
Mr. Stanislaus. From the contaminants themselves?
Mr. Rokita. Yes.
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, yes, the program is built on, EPA
administers the grant program. But the cleanup side is almost
exclusively administered by State cleanup programs which are
very effective.
Mr. Rokita. OK. Now, if I understand this right, we have
brownfield assessments. Your data suggests that the assessments
of brownfields find little or no contamination when the
assessment is done. Do you agree or disagree with that?
Mr. Stanislaus. No, I think the universe, a certain
segment, as was noted earlier, of brownfields are abandoned,
underutilized, either because there is real contamination or a
perception of contamination, because it could have a former
use. So when you go into a site, you may discover that actually
you don't have contaminants on the site. You can move forward
on redevelopment.
Mr. Rokita. Right.
Mr. Stanislaus. In other cases, you identify, yes, there is
some contamination. And then you develop----
Mr. Rokita. What is the percentage breakdown?
Mr. Stanislaus. I can get that to you. It may be in my
testimony. But I will get that to you. I don't have that
available.
Mr. Rokita. Let's assume it is not in your testimony. If it
is not, can you get it to me in 2 weeks?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. No problem.
Mr. Rokita. Is that fair enough?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes.
Mr. Rokita. Two weeks?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. No problem.
Mr. Rokita. OK. So should we be funding the assessment side
of things, assuming a good number of these assessments find no
contaminations? I am looking for certainty and increasing
property values. If we are finding that a lot of these
assessments, and I don't know the percentage but we are going
to find out, find no contamination, maybe we need to change the
definition of brownfield. Is the brownfield definition too
strict?
Mr. Stanislaus. Really, I view the assessment as a key
component of a financial transaction. What assessments would
do, whether you find contamination or you don't, really enables
the financial underwriting of a project.
Mr. Rokita. Right.
Mr. Stanislaus. So having done underwriting before I got
here, you know, does a site have contamination, then you can
immediately go to underwriting. If it has contamination, how do
you wall off and then estimate that cleanup of contamination.
And then you can build it into project financing. So it is a
real critical component of addressing uncertainty to enable
projects to move forward.
Mr. Rokita. If that is the case, regardless of what
percentage of assessments we find with no contamination, should
we front-load? I am not saying new funding or new money, but
should we take some of your funding and use more of it for
assessments?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, you know, over the years, in working
with stakeholders, we think we have struck a balance between
the right proportion of assessments and the cleanup grants. It
is kind of driven by how many applicants we get for the
assessment. It is kind of driven by need, given our fixed
resources and how we break it up between assessment and
cleanup.
Mr. Rokita. Great. I see I am out of time, Chairman. But I
just want to say for the record that you, indeed, put it in
your testimony, and 20 percent of the properties assessed show
little or no contamination.
Mr. Stanislaus. That is right.
Mr. Rokita. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Esty.
Ms. Esty. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
important hearing. Thank you, Ranking Member Napolitano. And
thank you, Administrator Stanislaus, for joining us again
today. It is great to see you. This is a really important
issue. I represent central and northwest Connecticut, which is
full of brownfield sites, a few Superfund, but, frankly, a lot
of brownfield sites. So this is of critical importance to us to
both preserve open spaces, which I am glad you mentioned, as
well as ensuring we get these properties back into productive
play for our communities.
It is an important part of revitalizing. So I want to give
you two examples of how importance this is. We have--Naugatuck
Valley Community College received a grant for one of the
training programs. It had tremendous success, have trained a
lot of young, and not as young, people to enter into the
workforce and are helping to clean up sites. And this is a
vitally important part of the program, and I am glad you
flagged that.
My city of Meriden just recently won a $200,000 award,
again, to do assessment. And it is going to be part of an
important downtown revitalization. And I want to also salute
you for mentioning the critical importance of this to the
administration's and, frankly, the country's commitment to
manufacturing. Many of our communities in the Northeast, as
well as the Midwest, as well as Ohio, Indiana, are full of
former brownfield sites. And it is vitally important if we are
going to reinvigorate the manufacturing sector to take
seriously our commitment to these communities that helped drive
the last century's economic development.
We need to look, I think, at the nonprofit sector. You
mentioned that in passing. And I would like to explore that a
little bit more with you. For example, in my largest city of
Waterbury, there is a nonprofit called Brass City Harvest. They
want to address the nutritional needs of the community, help
put people to work, and, frankly, help teach STEM [science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics] education to young
people. It is a wonderful program. But as a nonprofit, they are
not eligible for some of these programs. Can you talk a little
bit about what the Agency is looking at in this, how important
they think that might be? Thank you.
Mr. Stanislaus. We have heard from numerous not-for-
profits, those that would like to get, particularly this is
applicable to assessment grants, they are currently ineligible.
So everything from housing developers that are the extension of
local government to construct affordable housing, to various
kinds of manufacturing, not-for-profits locally, they would
like these assessment grants to really, again, extend the arm
of local government. I think it was an inadvertent division
between cleanup and assessment. So you have not-for-profits
eligible for cleanup, but they don't have the ability to get
the upfront assessment resources to identify sites, whether
they are or are not contaminated.
Ms. Esty. And I can tell you our nonprofits have a great
deal of trouble coming up with the funds as it is. So to come
up with the funds for an assessment to even determine whether
this is feasible is a real barrier. It may not seem like a lot
of money. But to them it is. Is this an area where you believe
Congress, congressional action would facilitate or, frankly, be
necessary in order for the Agency to include nonprofits?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. Again, as we have heard from the
stakeholders, because the statute prohibits not-for-profits
from being eligible, it would require congressional action.
Ms. Esty. Next, I wanted to follow up on your remarks a
little bit. We know there is a Senate proposal out there that
cordons off some areas of funding and sets them aside. Could
you talk a little bit more about whether you think that is a
good route, are there unintended consequences that could come
from an understandable and laudable attempt to ensure that
certain areas get more attention?
Mr. Stanislaus. Yes. Again, I think that it should be up to
the community at the right time to determine end uses. A lot of
times, viable end uses really come in the middle of that
process. Once you have done assessment, you can quantify the
cost of cleanup, you can figure out what is financially viable
at that site, among a suite of uses. So if we divide the pot
upfront, essentially you are putting the Federal Government in
the position of judging an end use, which we don't believe is
the right place for the Federal Government.
Rather, we would rather have--let's just look at is the
applicant competent? Have they demonstrated competency? Have
they demonstrated partnership? Additional leveraging resources,
will the end, ultimate shared end result of making a project
happen, whatever those end uses may be that the community
selects.
Ms. Esty. And if I may, it ties into, you mentioned in your
written testimony about multipurpose grants. Could you tell us
a little bit more about what you discovered on that?
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. This really emerged from comments
that we received from communities, the opportunities to
possibly look at both assessment and cleanup grants together.
We think that we want to continue to pursue that. We have
authority, existing authority to do that. We are still looking
at what is the best fit of mixing a number of uses in one
grant. I think what we are trying to do is balance flexibility
for the applicant versus if you have money that is laid out for
extended periods of time, then it may not be the best use of
money.
So we are trying to figure out giving flexibility for
multipurposes, but making sure it is structured in a way that
is accountable as well.
Ms. Esty. Thank you. And I see my time has expired. Thank
you very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Katko.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much. I am from Syracuse, New
York. That is my district. And we have had a tremendous amount
of experience with brownfields and Superfund sites. As a matter
of fact, Onondaga Lake, which is adjacent to the city of
Syracuse, is, perhaps, one of the largest Superfund sites in
the country. And it is reprehensible what previous industry did
to the lake. But now, we are enjoying a renaissance of that
lake that is truly amazing. So I really believe in
environmental revitalization with the help of Government when
it is appropriate.
Along the lake, in addition to what is going on with the
lake itself, the property along the eastern shore of the lake
has enjoyed some renaissance as well. One site where there was
a very large metal scrapyard with all kinds of contaminants has
now become one of the largest malls in the United States, a
very successful mall that employs 4,000 people. So the program
does work when properly applied. But that being said, I want to
throw a little fact pattern at you so I can properly understand
your portion of the brownfield revitalization.
There is a company that just up and pulled out of Syracuse,
Roth Steel, that operated on the shores of Onondaga Lake for
over 80 years, I believe. And they went bankrupt. They are
gone. And they left behind a scrapyard that probably has a
stunningly high amount of PCB [polychlorinated biphenyl]
contaminants in the soils. Now, this property is on the shore
of Onondaga Lake, the shore of a Superfund site. And now local
authorities are now trying to figure out what the heck to do
with this place.
One of the problems is the unbelievable contamination. A
good citizen and a good member of our community bought the
property not knowing how badly it was contaminated and promptly
had to get rid of it because he realized he couldn't do
anything with it. And so another steel manufacturer, a steel
company, scrapyard bought it. But I am not sure that is going
to work. There is some contemplation about taking the property
by the county.
So with that fact pattern, that being adjacent to a
brownfield site, on the shores of it, there is some concern of
possible leakage into the lake. And after all the hundreds of
millions of dollars that have been spent by industry, and by
the Government to clean up that lake and to fix it, we now have
this problem. The company is gone. So I don't know what
liability there is going to be to that company. It is bankrupt.
But what can we do with your program for this site, assuming
that the county takes it over? And maybe look at both sides,
whether the county takes it over and whether it doesn't,
whether somebody else takes it over. What is available to make
this site, and stop it from leaking into the lake, and
poisoning what is becoming a great place. And I will note
today, I just looked online, a bunch of local leaders, to prove
the lake is good, all went swimming in it today. We don't want
to have to have them go swimming in PCBs. So what can we do?
Mr. Stanislaus. I would break my answer to a short-term
addressing the risk that you identified and a long-term cleanup
and redevelopment. So separate from the Brownfields Program,
and you have the Superfund program, and so we have resources,
if there is imminent risk, we can conduct what is called a
removal action to deal with imminent risk. So if there is
ongoing migration of PCBs, give me the information and we will
work with our regional office on that.
Mr. Katko. It is Roth Steel on Hiawatha Boulevard in
Syracuse.
Mr. Stanislaus. OK. So assuming that we have dealt with the
imminent risk issue, then the longer term strategy is to really
figure out what is the extent of contamination, how can we
quantify the cleanup, and what are the redevelopment uses. That
is going to drive what cleanups and, obviously, the
redevelopment. So we have site assessment grants that the
county or the municipality can access. We also have in
certain--it is really designed for individual sites, mostly for
communities that have struggled to participate in the grant
competition, we have a contract base assistance for going in
and actually conducting assessments on sites. So we have a set
of tools that are potentially available.
Mr. Katko. How quickly, if you believe there is an imminent
risk, how quickly can we get that moving?
Mr. Stanislaus. Well, I mean, I will connect with my staff
and connect with the regional office. And if I can get a point
of contact, we need to figure out is there an imminent risk and
then the action necessary. But we could do that in a relatively
short time period. I am not sure exactly that time period. But
we can initiate the examination of that relatively soon.
Mr. Katko. Great. I will make sure my office contacts
yours. And we can get that moving. I appreciate it. These are
the types of things that communities like Syracuse, New York,
that are recovering from the mass exodus of manufacturing over
the last 20 years, revitalizing those neighborhoods and
revitalizing those areas. I agree with my colleague, Ms. Esty,
we absolutely have to get manufacturing back in New York State
and the Northeast. And I believe we can do that. But in the
meantime, we have got to take care of the sites that some
manufacturers and businesses left a mess. Whether there is
liability to those companies on road I think is a separate
issue. We have got to get these places cleaned up. And we can't
ruin what is becoming a gem for central New York and Onondaga
Lake. So thank you very much.
Mr. Stanislaus. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Huffman.
Mr. Huffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, thanks
for your testimony, Mr. Stanislaus. I have seen the value of
this Brownfields Program in my district in the North Coast of
California. Among many examples, I have an Indian tribe in a
very rural part of the far northern end of my district, the Elk
Valley Rancheria, they have used Brownfields Program funding to
redevelop a couple of abandoned motels that were highly
contaminated with asbestos. And they are turning those into
really important economic development projects. So thank you
for that. An even better example is in another rural part of my
district, Humboldt County, where at the height of the timber
industry, there was a pulp mill on a spit of land called Samoa,
with the pristine Pacific Ocean on one side, and the pristine
Humboldt Bay on the other side. It was abandoned. The Chinese
company that came to own it at one point basically walked away
from it, leaving all sorts of toxic chemicals in place and
leaking tanks.
And we discovered that millions of gallons of highly toxic
pulping liquors were leaking right as we went into the
Government shutdown a couple of years ago. And I really want to
thank your agency, because that would seem like the worst
possible time for a Member of Congress to have a crisis like
that, right in the tsunami zone, could have been one of the
worst toxic incidents in the country if something had gone
wrong. And EPA leapt into action with other local government
partners and we got that site cleaned up, despite the shutdown
that definitely complicated that effort. So you are doing
terrific work. And I am very grateful to your program and your
agency.
I wanted to ask you about a problem, a very vexing problem
in my district and throughout the West and that is trespass
marijuana grows. These are illegal activities that are
happening more and more on public lands. I have seen these
sites in wilderness areas. And the level of pollution and
environmental destruction is quite significant with
rodenticides and highly concentrated fertilizers and just about
every terrible practice you can imagine in very sensitive,
pristine areas.
We can interdict and shut down these sites. But we don't
have funding in most cases to actually clean them up. And so I
wanted to ask you if you had given any thought about that,
about how folks who are affected by this on public lands
throughout the West may be able to work with EPA and the
Superfund program. Congress did definitely highlight controlled
substances as a source of pollution for this program. But I
wanted to hear your thoughts. And also, whether there are steps
that communities like the ones I represent should be taking to
better access those funds?
Mr. Stanislaus. I have not thought about this marijuana
problem. There have been other situations where drug production
has resulted in contamination. In some cases, we have used the
Superfund program to go in and conduct cleanup. In other cases,
we provided resources to communities to conduct site assessment
or cleanup. And we could follow up. We have also worked with
law enforcement where there is some opportunity in the proceeds
from an enforcement action that they may take to bring that
back into local communities. But we can talk more.
Mr. Huffman. I would love to work with you more on that.
And then my second, and probably last question involves the
California drought. And you know that we are in the fourth year
of a critical drought. We have entire communities in southern
California that have lost wells and lost drinking water
supplies because of contamination from perchlorate or, in some
cases, nitrates and other pollutants. The Superfund program has
provided some benefits, the Brownfields Program as well.
But I often hear from stakeholders that cleaning up
contaminated aquifers, getting them back into the drinking
water supply is sometimes an afterthought. And with this
critical drought forcing us to value every possible source of
potable water that could be brought online and be part of the
solution to get us through it, I wonder if you have any
thoughts on how your program might be better leveraged to
stretch our drinking water supplies in places like that?
Mr. Stanislaus. It is really more the Superfund program
rather than the Brownfields Program. And we fundamentally
believe that we should protect and restore drinking water
sources. I don't think at all that it is an afterthought.
Although cleaning up aquifers are very tough and takes a longer
period of time, it is just the technical nature of cleaning up
groundwater aquifers. On the brownfield side, there are
opportunities to prevent contamination of groundwater. One of
the things we have done is try to link up things like green
infrastructure, things like preventative measures to prevent
further contamination as part of the footprint of a new
project.
Mr. Huffman. All right. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Nolan.
Mr. Nolan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Stanislaus, for being here and all the important good work that
you do. As some of the other members have indicated, we often
see, you know, the benefits of a particular program at a
specific level, hopefully, within our own districts. And then
we try to draw some larger conclusions from that. We have had
several projects in Duluth, Minnesota, which is in my district,
Canal Park Brewing site, and the Clyde Iron Works, both of
which were funded by the Brownfields Program. But they ended up
stimulating and leveraging State investment, city investment,
private, for-profit investment, nonprofit investment, creating
businesses and restaurants and retail and recreational
facilities, hockey rinks, which are a big deal up in our area.
My grandkids happen to play frequently at the Clyde Iron
Works Hockey Arena. And they really create a lot of good jobs,
a lot of good business activities, help to revitalize important
neighborhoods. My point in bringing all that up is that
clearly, in our case, the brownfield investments by the Federal
Government have stimulated a tremendous amount of additional
investment that has been so important for the development of
those communities and the businesses and the jobs that flow
from that.
My question is twofold. One is, have you attempted to
quantify the amount of investment that flows from a brownfield
investment, the investment made by the other entities that I
just cited? And if so, you know, what is that amount? And then,
secondly, how many worthy brownfield projects have you had to
look at and reject for lack of funding? Those would be my two
questions. Thank you.
Mr. Stanislaus. Sure. So of the applicants, over the past 5
years, a little over 1,700 viable projects that we scored
highly but were not selected because of limited funding. Again,
these are highly qualified projects that if we had funding we
think would result in a lot of the outcomes that you are
talking about.
In terms of quantifying the additional investment, our 1-
for-18 ratio, for every $1 we invest, $18 is other investment,
is information that we have collected from the applicants based
on reporting to us, based on the various kinds of mix of
funding. We also have done studies about real estate values
adjacent to these properties. And it was cited earlier, we see
real estate values increasing, I think, in the range of about
10 percent or so. We are also conducting a study of local tax
revenue from the site and associated sites. So there is a
stimulative effect as you noted. It is not just the project
itself, but the stimulative effect of that anchor project which
then attracts other kinds of investments. We are in the midst
of quantifying that as well.
Mr. Nolan. OK. Thank you. That is important. And it
continues to have an even ongoing effect. Once you clean up a
site and you stimulate all that investment around it, why, it
remains forever an inducement to other business activities to
gravitate toward that site. So I applaud you for the good job
you are doing administering that program. And I look forward to
working with you and my colleagues here to see what we can do
to expand the tremendous benefits that flow from this program,
both in terms of cleaning up our environment and the messes we
have made in the past, and then moving us forward with good
jobs, good communities, good neighborhoods and community
development activities. Thank you very much.
Mr. Stanislaus. Thank you.
Mr. Gibbs. That concludes all our questions. I do have a
request. It is a simple request really. I know my ranking
member is going to ask some more questions in writing to you,
and any response, give back to the full committee, so we will
keep it so everybody knows what is going on and gets what they
requested.
I appreciate that and I appreciate you coming in today, and
you are excused, and we will bring up panel number two.
While panel number two is coming up, I do want to recognize
a young gentleman who is going to be leaving the committee.
Tracy Zea, hold your hand up. He's been here, in his tenure he
has worked with the Subcommittee on Water Resources and
Environment. He's been a great asset to the subcommittee and
the full committee. I personally want to wish him well in new
endeavors.
Am I allowed to say who it is? Waterways Council. I am sure
we will have a lot of interaction in the future and input, but
I wish him well in his new endeavors and new challenges as he
grows in his professional career.
So, Tracy, thank you very much for all you have done here
for us, thank you.
Take a moment here for our panelists to get situated. We
are ready. I want to thank you all for being here and taking
time out of your busy schedules to come here and talk about
something I know is near and dear to your heart, and it is
important.
Our first witness is Ms. Cindy Hafner. She is the chief
legal counsel of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency out
of Columbus.
Welcome, Ms. Hafner, the floor is yours.

TESTIMONY OF CYNTHIA A. HAFNER, CHIEF LEGAL COUNSEL, OHIO
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY; HON. J. CHRISTIAN BOLLWAGE,
MAYOR OF THE CITY OF ELIZABETH, NEW JERSEY, ON BEHALF OF THE
U.S. CONFERENCE OF MAYORS; KELLEY C. RACE, P.G., L.S.P.,
BROWNFIELDS PROGRAM MANAGER, TRC COMPANIES, INC.; PAUL GRUBER,
P.G., ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL GROUND WATER ASSOCIATION; AND
VERNICE MILLER-TRAVIS, VICE CHAIR, MARYLAND COMMISSION ON
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE AND SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES, AND MEMBER,
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE ADVISORY COUNCIL TO U.S. EPA

Ms. Hafner. Chairman Gibbs and members of the subcommittee,
I really appreciate you inviting me here today to talk about
Ohio's successful Brownfields Program. I am Cindy Hafner, and I
am chief legal counsel for the Ohio EPA.
Today I want to talk a little bit about our voluntary
cleanup program that was designed to clean up brownfields. I
will tell you a little bit about how we use the Superfund
grants for brownfields in Ohio and about the State funding that
we use for brownfields in Ohio.
In 1994, the Ohio General Assembly and Governor George
Voinovich passed a law that created a voluntary cleanup
program. It was designed to address the universe of
contaminated sites that weren't being addressed by the
Superfund program or the State's involuntary cleanup program.
We have a rich industrial history in Ohio, and that
resulted in thousands and thousands of these brownfield sites
that were sitting idle, contaminated, and underused. So this
program was designed to help those sites get cleaned up.
The voluntary cleanup program authorized anyone to clean up
a dirty site and receive a legal release in exchange for it.
Three key components of the program are rules describing clear
processes in cleanup standards that are protective and based on
the plan's land use; reliance on certified consultants and
laboratories to oversee the cleanup in partnership with Ohio
EPA, while Ohio EPA focused its oversight on developing the
cleanup standards in auditing cleanups after they were
completed; creation of incentives in the form of tax abatements
and, at the time, low-interest loans.
Today volunteers have used this program to clean up and
request a legal release at 484 properties, covering more than
9,251 acres. Those, however, are just the tip of cleanups in
Ohio, and there is an iceberg of cleanup effects that is
underneath it. The program was designed intentionally so that
users did not have to request a legal release if it was not
necessary for the redevelopment project. Certified consultants
tell us that for every one project that they work on that seeks
a legal release, there are five times as many they are working
on where no legal release is sought, but the cleanup standards
for the program are used for the private property transaction.
While the statute's policy maximizes privatization and
flexibility, it can sometimes create a misperception that only
those 484 cleanup projects are a result of our cleanup program.
In actuality, a more accurate number is probably about 2,500
cleanup projects have resulted from the program.
As the program matured, stakeholders asked for additional
liability relief. In 2001, Ohio EPA finalized a Superfund
memorandum of agreement with U.S. EPA, providing additional
assurance to Ohio's volunteers that EPA was satisfied with our
program and that they would not ask for additional cleanup for
projects that are cleaned up in our program.
Additionally, the State's statute was amended several times
to expand eligibility of the program so more different kinds of
sites could use the program to limit the liability.
In late 1990, CERCLA was amended to provide Federal
funding, and Ohio uses this funding in four ways. First, we
provide services free of charge to local governments. Since
2002, Ohio EPA has assisted 104 communities in 57 counties by
completing 81 phase I assessments; 23 certified asbestos
inspections; and 86 phase II sampling events.
We also provide regional workshops for local economic
development officials and provide them information about all
the financial tools that are available to local governments. We
also perform training for our certified environmental
consultants, where we inform them of changes in the program and
seek their input on improvements to the program.
Finally, we provide free technical assistance to 60 to 80
communities each year conducting brownfield cleanups. This is a
very popular tool, especially for our small and medium-sized
communities. We used CERCLA 104(k) brownfield revitalization
for our local governments. This has been available since 2002.
There have been 128 awards settling approximately $55.4
million, and this is very essential to our local communities to
revitalize their urban cores. They use it for planning,
assessments, and cleanup of brownfields.
Our State funding programs for brownfields started in the
early 2000s. Since then, the State has provided $417 million to
assess or clean up 409 brownfield projects. This has leveraged
nearly $4 billion in private investments. Ohio's economic
development partner Jobs-Ohio provides $45 million per year for
assessment or cleanup where the projects create or retain jobs.
Ohio EPA has also invested nearly $500,000 of our own budget to
perform phase I for local communities. This fills a gap because
those are projects that aren't eligible for other Federal
funding.
Ohio has benefited greatly from the funding available for
both CERCLA and State law. Thank you for the funding that you
have given to U.S. EPA to pass along to us. As Ohio's economy
continues to grow today, new businesses are still interested in
locating in brownfields. Ohio's cleanup program, State funding,
and Federal funding are keystones to the economic growth and
revitalization of Ohio.
Thanks, again, for inviting me here to extol the virtues of
our cleanup programs in Ohio, and I will answer any questions
later.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Our next witness is the Honorable Christian Bollwage, he is
the mayor of the city of Elizabeth, New Jersey.
The floor is yours.
Mr. Bollwage. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and members
of the committee for holding this most important hearing. I
have been the mayor since 1993. I have testified here in
Congress both before Senate and congressional committees on
brownfields in 1994 to 2001 when President George Bush signed
the brownfield legislation in Conshohocken, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Chairman, brownfields legislation has made it really
possible for the private sector to work with municipal
governments and invest in our cities. We all know the history
of brownfield legislation, and it is part of my testimony, but
I am not going to go through that. I would just like to
highlight one in Elizabeth and then talk about some things
where the mayors of this country think we can make the
legislation a little bit better.
The Jersey Gardens Mall in our city was built on a former
166-acre landfill. This partnership between the county, and the
State, and the Federal level of the Government all started with
a brownfield assessment grant in the 1990s. The conversion of
this former eyesore into a shopping center had numerous
positive effects, up to 5,000 jobs, not only the people who
work there but construction jobs; took a health hazard away
from our city; continues to flourish with business up 10
percent; visits are up 37 percent. The Jersey Gardens is
adjacent to Newark airport. It has now been renamed The Mills
and recently announced a 411,000-square-foot expansion on top
of the existing 2 million square feet that is there. We work
with Union County College. We have a retail skill center, a
workforce investment center, provides job placement, soft skill
training. We work with We Are One New Jersey, an initiative
spearheaded by the county of Union. It also has a 4.8-megawatt
sun-powered rooftop solar system, which is among the largest
rooftop systems in North America. That broke ground in 2011,
and it started producing power in February of 2012.
Some ways that the mayors and the U.S. Conference of Mayors
think we can improve this program because it has such a proven
track record. The GAO has mentioned that there are 400,000 to
600,000 brownfield sites throughout the U.S. The one Member
asked a question about the rural areas. The U.S. Conference of
Mayors did a study years ago that shows there is at least 10
brownfield sites in every congressional district throughout
this entire Nation. We would suggest that there is full funding
of the Brownfields Program, that the EPA only funds, as the
Assistant Administrator said, about 30 percent of the
applications. We would ask that the previously authorized
levels of $250 million is fully funded, but we also ask that
this committee address higher funding levels. We recognize
budgets are tight.
Creation of the multipurpose grant, the Assistant
Administrator also spoke of that. Many cities could use the
ability to assess a number of properties and provide cleanup
grants and loans depending on which sites are chosen for
redevelopment. It hinders the opportunity if a city has to
apply for a grant, wait 6 months to see if they will get
funding. The developer, the partner, could walk away in that
period of time. The Conference of Mayors would like to see the
establishment of this type of grant, and especially
municipalities who have a proven track record of fully
utilizing their brownfield money.
Increase the cleanup grant amounts: Many of the easy
brownfield sites have been developed, especially in our city.
We developed some gas stations that may have been easy to
develop. The brownfields economic development that occurred at
the mall, just south of Newark airport, was something in
retrospect that the joint effort, financially, but there was a
market for it. So now we have the tougher ones. We would like
to see an increase in the funding ceiling of the cleanup grants
to be $1 million and, in some circumstances, to be $2 million.
This could give additional resources to conduct cleanup at more
contaminated sites and bring those properties back to
productive use.
Allow some reasonable administrative costs: Should be
allowed to use a small portion of the grant to cover reasonable
administrative costs.
Clarify the eligibility of publicly owned sites acquired
before 2002: We believe that as long as local governments do
not cause or contribute to the contamination of the property
but just happened to own the property before the law was
enacted, they should be allowed to apply for EPA funding for
that property.
It took Congress 9 years to pass the original law, Mr.
Chairman. I know; I testified here for 9 years, so I know how
long it took. It has been an extremely productive piece of
legislation. We can work together to remove barriers to the
local and State governments by addressing some of the mothball
sites to the CERCLA liability that the earlier speaker just
highlighted how it worked in her State.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the
subcommittee for having me testify. I have submitted written
testimony and will be available to answer questions.
Thank you for your time, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you for your input and all your time
before the committee. This program is making it work.
Our next witness is Ms. Kelley Race. She is the Brownfields
Program manager for TRC Companies. Welcome.
Ms. Race. Good morning, Congressman Gibbs and honorable
members of the Water Resources and Environment Subcommittee.
Thank you for allowing me to testify about this very important
program.
As you mentioned, I am a Brownfields Program manager. I
have 25-plus years of experience, and I have a bachelor's and
master's in geology, and I have worked on contaminated sites
for most of my entire career.
Many of the EPA-funded Brownfields Programs that we work on
are located in the Northeast as well as the Midwest and
California. We are passionate about the redevelopment of
brownfields and the impact brownfields have had on communities.
We have seen firsthand how a single site----
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Race, could you pull the mic a little bit
closer? We are having trouble back here, pull the box, just
yank it.
Ms. Race. How is that?
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, thank you.
Ms. Race. We have seen firsthand how a single site using a
few thousand EPA assessment dollars can be transformed into a
community icon and how a portfolio of sites can actually result
in the rebirth of a downtown, infusing millions of leveraged
dollars into a community.
My testimony today will highlight EPA brownfields
successes, highlight some challenges, and offer some
considerations that we think would help make the program more
versatile.
We all know EPA brownfields funding has led to many
successful cleanups and redevelopment and has leveraged
millions of dollars in private investment. Obviously, an $8
million to $10 million decrease in funding for assessment,
cleanup, and revolving loan funds has resulted in fewer
grantees being awarded. But, actually, let me back up and ask,
what are brownfields to communities? Brownfields are
opportunities. They are the funding that is often the seed
money to different organizations to assess, clean up, and
sustainably reuse a property. Many of these eligible entities
have limited resources to address and facilitate redevelopment
of brownfields as communities are tasked with doing more with
less.
A couple examples that I would like to actually highlight
on some creative successes that we have seen over the hundreds
of sites that we have worked on across the country include one
from Massachusetts, which is a transit-oriented development.
This site was initiated with a $3,000 Phase I Site Assessment
and a Phase II Site Investigation. This project actually
facilitated over $100 million in private developer interest in
the area. The project created construction of a pedestrian-
friendly parking garage, linking it with a former shoe
manufacturing mill, and renovated new housing, creating over
340 housing units, 75 of which are set aside for low-income
families and individuals.
The second example is the reuse of a former textile mill in
Sanford, Maine. The former mill once produced armed service
uniforms. From a $4,000 EPA brownfields assessment grant, over
$60 million of investment was secured, resulting in 274
construction jobs, 36 affordable housing units and retail and
commercial businesses.
The third example, a 100-acre former steel facility in
Jefferson County, Ohio. From this--Jefferson County received a
$1 million Assessment Coalition Grant. Based on that coalition
grant, they were able to leverage an additional $6.5 million in
State and private brownfields funding, returning 9 vacant
properties to beneficial reuse and creating over 150 new jobs.
As someone who assists communities in preparing
applications, the application process can be challenging but
also rewarding when a community must think outside the box on
how they will utilize the funds and turn a story of despair
into sustainable reuse and opportunity. There are so many
worthy projects and communities out there, but the EPA
application process is extremely competitive.
Now for some of the challenges. The FY 2015 Brownfields
Guidance for Assessment: EPA allocated approximately 50 percent
of the total amount of funding available under the announcement
was to be used for grants for new applicants. While dedicating
50 percent of funding to new applicants creates a base of
eligible new entities, it also limits the funding available for
existing grantees, who may have a long established program,
spent a considerable amount of time creating an inventory and
conducting phase I and phase II's to ready those properties for
redevelopment. Existing grantees who may have submitted
multiple applications only to lose again may result in a
disincentive to compete, leaving a program with a large
inventory of potential sites stagnant.
With regard to petroleum assessment funding, EPA must
expend 25 percent of the amount appropriated for brownfields
grants on sites contaminated with petroleum. The brownfields
law outlines specific criteria by which petroleum sites may be
eligible for brownfields grants if EPA funding or the State
makes a petroleum eligibility. Because of the eligibility
determinations, petroleum brownfield funding is harder for
grantees to utilize and is more complicated, as it is a case-
by-case State agency determination. Therefore, the brownfields
petroleum funding may actually be sitting on the sidelines
stranded.
In summary, the EPA Brownfields Program works, but we
believe there may be considerations in the brownfields funding
that provide versatility and flexibility to the program.
I would like to thank the subcommittee for my being able to
provide testimony, and I am available to answer questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
The next witness is Mr. Paul Gruber, on behalf of the
National Ground Water Association.
Welcome.
Mr. Gruber. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs, Ranking Member
Napolitano, and members of the subcommittee, thanks for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Paul Gruber, I am testifying on behalf of the
National Ground Water Association, the trade association and
professional society of 11,000 members in every State
represented here. My testimony will address the importance of
used science-based decisionmaking for the investigation,
remediation, and redevelopment of brownfields sites, as well as
highlight the importance of preserving and improving the
availability of our Nation's groundwater resources.
The Brownfields Revitalization Act is an excellent example
of the right law for the right reasons. Brownfields Programs
are not only critical for environmental improvement and
protection of public health, but they are vehicles to provide
economic development, providing employment opportunity for
thousands of Americans in both urban and rural areas.
On a typical brownfields project, our members support all
stages of the investigation and cleanup process. NGWA
professionals evaluate various remediation alternatives,
employing a variety of sophisticated tools. These tools, such
as groundwater models, can cost-effectively assess the public
health impacts of proposed remediation technologies and
optimize cleanup selections, ultimately turning the site into a
springboard for community revitalization.
Often brownfields redevelopment success stories in urban
areas receive the most publicity. I want to be sure to
emphasize the need to promote the success of rural brownfields
development. Potential brownfield sites in rural areas include
a variety of legacy industrial operations that previously led
to economic development in the area. Examples include
manufactured gas plants, fertilizer plants, tanneries, and
small businesses, like gas stations and dry cleaners, among
others.
These rural brownfields sites affect soil, surface, and
groundwater quality and availability. As most rural residents
rely on individual wells or community water systems for potable
water supply, these resource impacts can be more critical than
those in urban areas. In rural areas, groundwater quality
impacts can be more widespread, and hence, cleanup costs can be
cost-prohibitive while having a broader local community impact.
In rural areas, the presence of ample green space often
minimizes the perceived need to clean up and restore a
brownfields site. Rather than an either/or scenario,
brownfields and green spaces should be viewed in tandem. By
restoring rural brownfields sites, communities can preserve
natural existing systems. The preservation of these systems
improves and protects surface and groundwater quality and
quantity; maintains important groundwater recharge systems; and
improves stormwater management opportunities.
As many communities currently experienced unprecedented
drought conditions, by improving and preserving these natural
systems in greenfield areas, local communities are now more
resilient and sustainable.
The EPA Brownfields Program is a well-crafted and effective
program. As the subcommittee considers reauthorization of the
program, NGWA would like to offer the following observations
and recommendations. Congress should consider brownfield grant
incentives that not only limit liability but also encourages
cleanup and redevelopment of brownfield sites rather than
greenfield sites; why incur the potential liability with
brownfields sites where, in rural areas, ample green space is
available for development, unless the right incentives are in
place.
The committee should consider increasing incentives for
rural applicants by directing EPA to prioritize funds for rural
communities where local groundwater supplies are impacted.
Public-private partnerships are effective vehicles to leverage
investments and create economic benefits for all stakeholders
where single-entity investment may not be feasible, encouraging
beneficial reuse of brownfield sites and providing liability
limits while managing long-term cleanup.
Lastly, Congress should urge EPA to continue its research
focus on development of new technologies and methods of site
remediation that integrates combined remedies, integrating risk
assessment of future land uses when establishing cleanup goals.
Since its inception in 1995, EPA's Brownfields Program has
changed the way we approach development and reutilization of
contaminated sites. It has provided a vehicle to investigate
and clean up abandoned sites without encouraging development in
greenfield locations. Brownfield grants and cleanups focused in
rural areas can be instrumental in reinvigorating economic
activity while increasing the value of ecosystem services of
undisturbed natural systems.
With over 400,000 brownfields sites across the country, it
is likely we probably all live or work near one. The work
needed to clean up these sites is far from complete, which is
why reauthorizing this program is critical. I would like to
thank the subcommittee for its attention, and I look forward to
your questions.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you.
Our next witness is Ms. Vernice Miller-Travis. She is the
vice chair of the Maryland Commission on Environmental Justice
and Sustainable Communities. She is a member of the National
Environmental Justice Advisory Council to the EPA.
Welcome, Ms. Miller-Travis.
Ms. Miller-Travis. Thank you, Chairman Gibbs and Ranking
Member Napolitano and all the members of the committee for this
hearing today. I have invested the last 22 years of my life in
bringing this process forward and brownfields and helping to
draft some of the language in the implementing law. I served on
the All Appropriate Inquiry Federal Advisory Committee that
wrote the implementing language for the Small Business
Liability Relief and Brownfields Redevelopment Act. I was there
at ground zero, as they say, when EPA began this process. And
immediately I saw the opportunity to bring real, long-term
reinvestment to some of the most distressed parts of our
country, which were also the places that had some of the
biggest and largest and longest impacted brownfields sites
across the country. So when EPA announced this process, I
jumped at the chance to be a partner with them to really bring
this process to life.
One of the things that EPA did early on through its
National Environmental Justice Advisory Council and the
Subcommittee on Waste and Facility Siting, which I served as
the cochair of from 1997 to 2001, was to host a series of
public dialogues on urban revitalization and brownfields,
envisioning healthy and sustainable communities, in 1995. The
public dialogues were held in five cities: Boston;
Philadelphia; Detroit; Oakland, California; and Atlanta,
Georgia. The public dialogues were intended to provide an
opportunity for environmental justice advocates and residents
of environmentally impacted communities where brownfield sites
proliferated to offer their input and perspective regarding the
development of EPA's brownfields economic redevelopment
initiative. In my written testimony, I included a link to the
report; here is my dog-eared copy that I still lecture from and
talk about 19 years later because it is still very relevant.
Those dialogues led to the publication of this report, and
many concerns were raised by communities during that process,
including whether or not the brownfields issue was a
smokescreen for gutting cleanup standards, environmental
regulations, and liability concerns because, heretofore, when
people talked about brownfields and recapturing industrial and
commercial vacant spaces, they were talking about the real
estate transactions but not talking about the economic
revitalization that could come to low-income and distressed
communities who live near and bore the burden of the
environmental contamination and the perceived disinvestment in
their communities, which was driven largely by the loss of
industrial and commercial activities in those communities. So
this was a very personal issue for a lot of communities around
the country who pin their hopes on revitalization and new
economic activity on the success of this program.
So they have a tremendous amount invested in the
Brownfields Program.
Much of the national conversation today regarding
environmental protection and improving public health, job
creation to address high levels of unemployment and
underemployment, reducing growing inequality and poverty rates,
and how to spur community revitalization and create public-
private partnerships to undertake these decades-old problems
were tackled in this report.
The success of the program today has been just
extraordinary; we have heard lots today from Administrator
Stanislaus and others, but by any objective measure, after 20
years of brownfields redevelopment, there is much to report in
terms of success. For example, the Brownfields Job Training
Program has trained over 14,100 individuals to become certified
in a range of site remediation skills. The Brownfield Jobs
Training Program graduates include many unemployed and
underemployed veterans, at-risk young adults, and 50 percent of
the graduates are ex-offenders. Seventy percent of the
Brownfields Job Training graduates have been placed in living
wage jobs. The program's placement rate is to be highly
commended, especially when one considers the target population
of trainees.
Other successes of the program to date include hundreds of
examples of transformative brownfields redevelopment projects,
including the epic struggle to clean up brownfields sites and
restore the Los Angeles River. Atlantic Station, where a former
steel mill has been transferred into a brandnew, thriving,
high-end community in Atlanta. It is really breathtaking if you
haven't seen it. The Spicket River Revitalization Project,
which is a partnership with Groundwork USA, where a once dying
mill town has been revived in Lawrence, Massachusetts. And the
Florida Brownfields Association Partnership with environmental
justice and other medically underserved communities like the
Eastside community of Jacksonville, Florida, by developing
brownfields sites into healthcare facilities.
But there is a downside to successful brownfields
redevelopment. Of all the promise I envisioned for distressed
serving communities via successful brownfields redevelopment, I
did not envision a large-scale gentrification and displacement
of longstanding communities of color that brownfields
redevelopment projects have spawned in some places. For
example, Bayview-Hunters Point in San Francisco, The Dudley
Street community in Roxbury, Massachusetts; here in the
District of Columbia, the Southwest Waterfront; and my own
beloved hometown of West Harlem in New York City where Columbia
University, my alma mater, is building a new campus that will
occupy more square footage than the former World Trade Center.
A lot of people in public housing, and low-income and
affordable housing are being displaced by a lot of these
successful projects. That was not what EPA envisioned, but
nevertheless, it is an unintended consequence, so we need to
balance the economic revitalization that is happening and
driven by brownfields redevelopment with the needs to make sure
that that revitalization is broad-based.
We must refocus our efforts if the hope of successful
brownfields redevelopment is to bring broad-based economic
opportunity and community revitalization to all. The last thing
I would say is the program needs to be fully funded. EPA's
brownfields redevelopment initiative has been catalytic in
transforming economic opportunity in large cities, small
cities, tribal communities, you name it, the Brownfields
Program has been there, and we want to see that revitalization
happen everywhere, and your appropriation is what makes that
program happen. I strongly recommend that you fully fund it.
And please, under no circumstances, diminish the funding that
goes to the Brownfields Program. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you and that might be more talk to the
appropriators. Ms. Hafner, I see in your testimony, you cite an
example of a program in Louisville, Ohio, at Chesapeake Energy.
I want you to know that is in my district, I have been there.
Great work. I want to recognize that you put that in there.
That is actually my district.
I do want to ask you, Ms. Hafner, in your testimony, you
talked about how the State of Ohio handles liability aspects in
its Brownfields Program. Can you explain how the Ohio example
could be replicated in the Federal Brownfields law?
Ms. Hafner. In terms of the liability?
Mr. Gibbs. Yes. I am really concerned about liability
aspects. What have you done in Ohio that maybe could be helpful
in the Federal legislation?
Ms. Hafner. Well, notwithstanding one of the most important
things of the Brownfields Program, in my view, is that the
State programs are uniquely designed for each and every State.
So adopting some of the things that we did in Ohio and putting
them on a Federal level may not maintain that flexibility.
However, individual liability tweaks along the way may provide
some additional assistance to the volunteers and folks who are
cleaning up the sites.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Race, do you have a comment on the liability
aspects of your examples, should we be looking at it as
concerns?
Ms. Race. Well, I would just add that I do agree that it is
a State-by-State designation. There are several States,
Pennsylvania is actually an example where Act III has actually
reduced some of the liabilities and they have actually used
wording to get their hands around that liability. I think with
the liability protection, that is where the brownfields, the
phase I's, and due diligence is really important, because that
actually gives you the AAI, All Appropriate Inquiry, it gives
you the baseline of some of the liability protection initially.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Gruber, I am a little intrigued. You talked
about the groundwater cleanup, aquifers and stuff. Where it is
feasible to do cleanup, what tools and technologies are
available to ensure that the contamination doesn't spread, can
you just elaborate on what's happening on that?
Mr. Gruber. So there is a variety of different tools and
technologies, most effective and probably used most commonly
are groundwater pump and treat systems; there are barriers that
can be placed inground that can prevent the spread of
groundwater contamination, all associated with different levels
of cost. So one of the roles that professionals like myself and
Ms. Race get involved with is trying to optimize the
groundwater treatment technology to stem the spread of
contamination, and to effectively treat the groundwater systems
and prevent it from spreading.
Mr. Gibbs. I really appreciate your comments regarding the
rural areas and green spaces. You are absolutely right, there
are lots of sites in rural areas, like abandoned fertilizer
facilities, whatever, and I think that is--I am glad you
mentioned that because I think there is an important need
there, and, of course, it really ties the importance to the
groundwater because in the rural areas, that is where we get
our water, in most cases, so it is important.
Mr. Gruber. That is correct. I think there is a real impact
in rural areas associated with brownfields sites and propensity
for developers to look for new greenfield locations.
Particularly in areas, in rural areas where community water
systems don't have a lot of funds available to treat
groundwater, they are pumping it directly out of the ground
with minimal treatment. The effort to encourage redevelopment
of brownfield sites as opposed to new greenfields is critically
important to preserving community resources.
Mr. Gibbs. What is your experience with public-private
partnership investments in brownfields sites?
Mr. Gruber. Well, I think everybody has addressed the
issues associated with liability limits. From a public
investment perspective, obviously, liability limits are
different than when private parties get involved. I would ask,
perhaps, the mayor to address some of those issues, but the
opportunity to increase private-sector investment in public
projects by limiting liability associated with the long-term
development of these sites, would go a long way towards
accelerating the pace of brownfields redevelopment.
Mr. Gibbs. Mayor, the question, what recommendations do you
have to improve the Small Business Liability Relief and
Brownfields Revitalization Act on the liability issue? What is
your take on that, and what recommendations might you have to
make that better to help incentivize people?
Mr. Bollwage. I believe it is in the testimony about
removing the barriers on the mothball sites and the CERCLA
liability and the Government and the brownfields defined by
section 101-39, if it did not cause or contribute to the
contamination of the property, and exercises due care with
regard to any known contamination to site. We also, in our
testimony, have attached recommendations on exact language that
we submitted in our written testimony, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Mrs. Napolitano.
Mrs. Napolitano. Oh, definitely, sir. Thank you. In fact, I
could do the whole 1 hour on this. Ms. Miller-Travis, your
statement about investment in underserved communities, how
would we incentivize the investors to be able to go to those
areas? The market forces are great because they will go to
where they think they are going to make the best investment,
how would you incentivize them to go into lower income
communities?
Ms. Miller-Travis. So there has been a lot of conversation
about approaching the Department of the Treasury to explore
opportunities to encourage greater use of new market tax
credits, and the low-income housing tax credits to enable those
who are doing brownfields redevelopment to tap into those tax
credit programs, so that they can spur investment in terms of
new markets as well as low-income housing.
Mrs. Napolitano. Is that anywhere in writing? I am sorry, I
don't want to run out of time.
Ms. Miller-Travis. Sure.
Mrs. Napolitano. In reference to HUD, EPA, Department of--
--
Ms. Miller-Travis. Energy.
Mrs. Napolitano [continuing]. Energy, DOT, Office of
Economic Adjustments, Department of Defense, Community Health
Initiative under CDC [Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention], all those areas, add Treasury to it. Why are we
not getting them all together and saying we need to address
this as a whole rather than everybody doing their own thing and
spreading those funds out in different areas?
Ms. Miller-Travis. It would be great if the new
legislation, or reauthorized legislation, could direct EPA and
the Federal family to do exactly that, because local
governments, local community development organizations, State
agencies are having to shop all of those entities.
Mrs. Napolitano. It would take also those entities, the
counties and the cities to be able to work with, including the
Governors organizations.
Ms. Miller-Travis. Yes.
Mrs. Napolitano. Now how do we then look at prioritization
of those areas, as Mr. Gruber was saying, groundwater
contamination, because we are having continuous drought cycles.
That is not going to go away. Are we not looking at how do we
protect our water? How do we clean it up? How do we help the
communities be able to revitalize that source of critical
water? Water is money, there is no investment if water isn't
there for business.
Ms. Miller-Travis. Absolutely. So there is also a
recommendation to encourage EPA to access its Clean Water State
Revolving Fund, which allows States to then push money down,
Federal money down to local governments and tribal governments
to really do new investment in infrastructure for clean water.
We would like to see those--that program, that revolving loan
fund be accessed and merged, in a sense, with access to the
brownfields revolving loan.
Mrs. Napolitano. I would love to see your recommendations
to the subcommittee.
Ms. Miller-Travis. It is in my testimony, ma'am.
Mrs. Napolitano. Right, I know. But that is a
recommendation, because I will be looking a little further on
this one. All of you, when was the last time that EPA
utilized--how would I say, cost of living. The year 2001 was
when the maximum amounts were set. What do you think that
affects the ability to be able it use those dollars in today's
dollars? Anybody?
Ms. Miller-Travis. So if I could start, I actually disagree
a little bit with Administrator Stanislaus, I think the grant
amounts do need to go up to $300,000, but that can only happen
if the appropriation for the program is increased somewhat. But
I do think it is time to increase the amount of money in those
assessment----
Mrs. Napolitano. Yeah, it was just $200,000 was set for
2001. We are in 2014, 13 years later, and we are still at that
amount.
Ms. Miller-Travis. Well, actually $200,000 was set in 1995
when they first launched the program.
Mrs. Napolitano. You understand where I am going, is we
need to increase the funding based on today's dollars.
And let's see, to Mr. Gruber, I very much am interested in
how you look at the rural applicant, because you have
fertilizer and all kinds of other insecticides that go into the
ground and eventually into the water table. How do we help be
able to identify that, especially when there is no funding in
those rural areas by small communities?
Mr. Gruber. So I think EPA does have an outreach program, a
technical assistance program to provide support to communities
to develop brownfield grants. I think we need to do as much as
we can to encourage EPA to step up on those activities, because
often in rural communities, they may not have the technical
resources or the financial resources to address the development
of the grants, hire engineers like myself, or Ms. Race. So I
think anything you can do to increase opportunities for EPA to
broaden their outreach to rural communities, where many of
these brownfield sites are located, would be very instrumental
in making the program more successful.
Ms. Race. I was going to add to that, I think one of the
things that is being looked at now are technical assistance
grants. For a small amount of dollars, maybe in the $7,000 to
$10,000 range, those type of funds would be very instrumental
to these small communities and these small entities that really
can't afford to hire a big giant consultant, or even actually
facilitate something like that.
Mrs. Napolitano. Understood, but don't forget, right now
with economic stress that many of the communities face, they
may not even be able to match any funding. Why are we not
looking at the Treasury incentivizing those areas to be able to
put those properties back on the tax roll?
Ms. Race. I think it would be a great idea.
Mrs. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank you to the
witnesses. Although I came in late, I was reading your
testimony while questions were being asked at another hearing
that I was a part of. I do appreciate what you are doing here
today.
Mr. Gruber, I do want to put a specific emphasis on
offering you my appreciation, because the emphasis that you
make in your testimony about the importance of brownfields
development in the projects in rural America that I know my
colleague just alluded to, I want to commend you on that.
As you note, the impact of soil surface and groundwater
contamination in rural areas can have serious implications for
potable water supplies and addressing these contaminations, I
am sure has been discussed before I got here, it can be very
cost prohibitive to some of the smaller communities that I
serve in Illinois right in rural--the middle of rural America.
Earlier this year, I joined two of my colleagues from
Illinois, John Shimkus and Mike Bost, in sending a letter of
support to the EPA for a brownfield assessment grant
application submitted by Madison County, Illinois. I was
subsequently pleased to learn that Madison County was actually
awarded two brownfield grants; one to assess a hazardous
substance site, and one to assess a site contaminated by
petroleum. I look forward to working with Madison County and
the other stakeholders as these projects move forward, and want
to say thank you to those who made those decisions.
Mr. Gruber, I know it was alluded to in the last question
about how do we help ensure that rural America is not left
behind when it comes to brownfield development projects. Is
there any other--is there any advice that you would give us to
be able to help make sure that that does not happen?
Mr. Gruber. I think I addressed a little bit of it when I
talked about EPA's ability to provide outreach and support to
rural communities for the development of brownfield grants. I
think Ms. Miller-Travis also addressed some critical funding
issues. State grants under the Clean Water Act have been
significantly diminished over the last 20 years. Anything
Congress can do to increase appropriations and broaden the
funding support under the Clean Water Act to support local
communities, particularly in rural areas, which are often
excluded from Clean Water Act funding grants, would be a very
important mechanism to improve environmental quality and
availability of surface and groundwater quality in rural areas.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Gruber. I appreciate your
comments. I, too, want to reprioritize how we spend money here
in Washington. That is something that I hope all of my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle want to continue to do.
That is the only way that Congress and our legislative branch
can actually regain the power of the purse that many of the
witnesses that sit at your tables we see on a regular basis
come in and talk about increased appropriations, the need for
more money to actually put forth to solve some of the problems
that we are even talking about here today. And I, too, agree.
But both sides of the aisle have to make tough decisions
how we actually spend the taxpayer dollars, and that is a
debate that I look forward to having with all of my colleagues
here. I guess I will open my last question quickly to the first
one who wants to volunteer to answer it. Is it your experience
the working relationship that State, local and private leaders
have with administrators of the Brownfields Program at EPA has
been positive? Is there any specific issue that you think could
improve that communication or relationship? Who is first?
Ms. Race. I will go first.
Mr. Davis. Ms. Race.
Ms. Race. I actually think the State programs and the
region programs are very strong as far as community outreach. I
do a lot of work in region 1 and region 3, I think there is a
great partnership between those agencies, they do a great job
in trying to get the word out there about what needs to be
done. As far as more improvement, I think sometimes the States
need to talk more with the regions themselves as far as making
sure that everybody is on the same page with what they want to
have as the outcome.
Mr. Davis. Anybody else? I have 30 seconds.
Ms. Miller-Travis. I would just say that I think EPA has
gone to great lengths to try to decentralize the Brownfields
Program to put brownfields coordinators in each of the regional
offices to provide technical assistance, to provide counseling
to States, to make it possible to do the letters of no further
action so the States can give people a sense of comfort that
they can go in and redevelop those sites and purchase them
without getting tangled up into the CERCLA liability scheme.
I think EPA has spent 20 years trying to figure out how to
push this money out and down and give as much technical
assistance as they can. If you are in Chicago, since you are
from Illinois, if you can be there the first week of September
for the brownfields conference, you will see thousands of
people from all over the country who have been able to do
extraordinary work because of the support of EPA.
Mr. Davis. Well, let me see if that might be a possibility.
I am 3\1/2\ hours south, hence the rural references. But I do
very much appreciate the largest city in my State of Illinois.
I would love to be able to be a part of that. Thank you. My
time has expired.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Johnson.
Ms. Johnson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me
thank you and the ranking member for holding this hearing and
let me thank all the witnesses. I have enjoyed hearing all of
you and I think it is because I agree with everything you have
said. It is gratifying to see that EPA has a program that gets
so much positiveness. EPA is probably one of the most beat-up
agencies around here when they are trying to protect the health
of individuals. But I have strongly supported the brownfields
legislation over the years, and feel that because it is such a
public-private partnership, it has been very, very successful.
And I would hope that all of you would advocate, because I
think that there are more and more municipalities, and small
municipalities as well, that would need to put brownfields into
greenfields to create more of a tax base. When you create that
tax base, we all profit from it because some of those taxes
flow back in here where we need some money. So I would applaud
you for working with the program. I don't have any particular
questions other than what I would ask you might be illegal for
you to answer, that is, how much do you advocate reauthorizing
this program with more dollars?
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I won't insist that they answer
that.
Mr. Gibbs. I have just a couple of questions for the panel
I would like to ask. Are there any categories of parties, like
tenants or other non-owner parties that might occupy a user
site who still fear exposure to the Superfund liability, even
though they did not contribute to the contamination of
brownfield sites? Does anybody want to respond? Is there still
a fear out there?
Mr. Gruber. I will take a crack at that. One of the issues
I think that we have been advocating as an organization and an
association is associated with vapor monitoring, and vapor
intrusion in occupied buildings particularly, sites that are on
or near petroleum locations because the volatile organic
chemicals from petroleum spills can easily seep into buildings.
People may not know that they could be exposed to harmful
vapors from toxic gases. So I think the funding and the effort
associated with vapor monitoring and vapor intrusion could be
improved as part of the program to protect residents in
buildings.
Mr. Bollwage. Mr. Chairman, what we did with the Jersey
Gardens Mall, which was built on a landfill, is we vented the
methane and then created power from the methane for the mall.
So the 200-and-some-odd stores that are in the Jersey Gardens
plus all the people that go there, we don't really deal with
the issue because of the proper ventilation.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Race.
Ms. Race. I would just add there are sites that I think
some of the Federal programs have to talk to each other about.
Some of the RCRA [Resource Conservation and Recovery Act]
obligations are not the same as some of the brownfields. What I
mean by that is there are entities out there that are
interested in using brownfields money to redevelop a property,
but because it has a RCRA designation, there are certain
liability protections that they just can't get over because of
the RCRA Superfund tie-ins with that.
Mr. Gibbs. Ms. Race, you mentioned in your testimony about
the 25-percent set-aside, and I mentioned petroleum. I
mentioned that to the Administrator, and you heard his
response. What is your take on how we should we modify that?
Ms. Race. I am thrilled. I think there should--actually,
either do away with it or have a much less percentage that has
to go to petroleum. I can speak as one that knows a lot of
grantees that have a lot of money sitting on the sidelines that
they just cannot use.
Mr. Gibbs. What would your take be on the applications? I
think everybody is in agreement, we are making progress with
these petroleum-abandoned tanks. You know, what percent would
you guess might be in the application process now that actually
would qualify for that set-aside?
Ms. Race. I would rather see closer to 10 percent, not any
more than 10 percent, because the State designation and a case-
by-case where the State actually makes that determination, a
lot of States are requiring tax returns for a property owner
before they can actually even assume that there is any
viability----
Mr. Gibbs. I know, you mention flexibility.
Ms. Race. Yes.
Mr. Gibbs. I am big for that, too. I think that obviously
that was put in--it probably made a lot of sense because we--
like I said, there was a gas station in three of the four
corners, most typically in urban areas.
Mr. Gruber. If I might add to that.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes.
Mr. Gruber. Many States have leaking underground storage
tank program funding mechanisms individually, so the
opportunity to investigate and clean up underground storage
tanks can come from other sources and not the Brownfields
Program, so it is a way of leveraging other dollars and
improving and increasing opportunities if you remove the 25-
percent requirement for funding for underground storage tanks
under the Brownfields Program.
Mr. Gibbs. Excellent point. Do you have any more questions?
Mrs. Napolitano. No questions, but I certainly would want
to ask all the panelists to forward any recommendations you
might have that will help this committee, subcommittee, be able
to understand some of the things that you are facing that we
may not have in writing, especially issues like coordination
between the agencies to be able to leverage. And then how do we
reach out to the Conference of Mayors, the League of Cities,
the Governors associations, to have them identify where the
major issues are in economic development to be able to help us
understand a little better how EPA can then look at maybe it's
rural, to me, it is water runoff for contamination because of
the drought issue, things that you see that might help us be
able to better deal with this issue as the subcommittee, joint
subcommittee on a bipartisan basis, because water and economic
development is everybody's issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibbs. I do have one more question since we do have a
State administrator of a very successful program. Ms. Hafner,
if you could name the most important aspect of your Brownfields
Program's success, what would it be?
Ms. Hafner. I think, at least in Ohio, and other folks have
talked about it, so it is probably true in other States as
well, but it's our collaboration with the stakeholders who are
actually implementing the program, so the local governments,
the consultants, the developers--we are truly partners with
them in not only developing the statute and writing the rules,
but also in implementing the program.
It is a culture of working together, collaboratively. And
so even the staff view this as part of their job to ask those
folks first what do you need to make this program better. And
so I think it is a little unique at Ohio EPA, and that, to me,
is one of the most important factors to its success.
Mr. Gibbs. Just a thought too, I am just curious, are there
times when you have to work with, besides U.S. EPA, but another
Federal agency, Army Corps of Engineers, Department of
Transportation, can you elaborate if that is the case or not?
Ms. Hafner. Right. Most of our partners are U.S. EPA and
the local governments, but the Navy was interested in using the
voluntary program to clean up the site in Ohio, and so far we
have not gotten the Army Corps of Engineers to use some of the
old defense sites in the voluntary program, but that would be
of interest to us.
Mr. Gibbs. OK. Thank you, thank you for all witnesses
coming today, it has been very helpful to us and the written
testimony, as we look towards working reauthorization of the
Brownfields Revitalization Program. So thank you and that
adjourns us here.
[Whereupon, at 12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
