- EXAMINING THE OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE OFFICE OF
FINANCIAL RESEARCH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 7, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-64

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-295 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah                       DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

ANN WAGNER, Missouri, Chairwoman

SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado, Vice         AL GREEN, Texas, Ranking Member
Chairman                         KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
PETER T. KING, New York              EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
December 7, 2017.............................................     1
Appendix:
December 7, 2017.............................................    25

WITNESSES
Thursday, December 7, 2017

Berner, Hon. Richard, Director, Office of Financial Research,
U.S. Department of the Treasury................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Berner, Richard..............................................    26

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Wagner, Hon. Ann:
Statement for the record by Lawrance L. Evans, Jr., Managing
Director, Financial Markets and Community Investment, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...........................   104
Statement of Eric M. Thorson, Inspector General, Department
of the Treasury, Office of the Inspector General...........   115
Beatty, Hon. Joyce:
American Banker article entitled, ``Mnuchin shows no interest
in continuing FSOC's hedge fund inquiry''..................   122
Berner, Richard:
OFR Annual Report to Congress................................    43

EXAMINING THE OFFICE OF
FINANCIAL RESEARCH

----------

Thursday, December 7, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ann Wagner
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Wagner, Tipton, Ross, Zeldin,
Trott, Kustoff, Tenney, Hollingsworth, Hensarling, Green,
Ellison, Cleaver, Beatty, Gottheimer, and Crist.
Also present: Representative Loudermilk.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Subcommittee on Oversight and
Investigations will come to order.
Today's hearing is entitled ``Examining the Office of
Financial Research.'' Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare a recess of the subcommittee at any time.
And without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
within which to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for
inclusion in the record.
Without objection, the exhibit binder, which is pretty
heavy here, including the written testimony of the GAO
(Government Accountability Office), which I note was provided
to minority staff in electronic format yesterday is entered
into the record. The Chair now recognizes herself for 4 minutes
for an opening statement.
The Dodd-Frank Act requires the Office of Financial
Research, OFR, to report annually to Congress on threats to the
stability of the U.S. financial system, the OFR's activities,
and the key findings from the OFR's research and analysis.
Today the subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations will
receive the annual testimony from the Director of the Office of
Financial Research, Director Richard Berner. In addition, this
hearing will examine the OFR's work to support the activities
of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), its
management and structure, and finally its cooperation with
Congress and oversight bodies such as the Government
Accountability Office and the Treasury Department Office of the
Inspector General. Congressional oversight of the OFR is
limited by its inability to exercise the power of the purse.
The OFR has the authority to set up its own budget and to fund
itself outside the congressional appropriations process, making
them quite unique. In fact, in June of this year, the U.S.
Department of Treasury issued a report which recommended and I
quote, ``Congress reform structure and mission of the OFR to
improve its effectiveness and to ensure greater
accountability.''
Furthermore, the Financial Choice Act, which this committee
passed earlier this year, abolishes the Office of Financial
Research. And while I am sure our witness this morning will
argue differently, eliminating the OFR would actually improve
risk management by creating one less redundant Federal
bureaucracy. Recent work by this committee has uncovered as
many as 20 other Federal entities that currently exist and will
remain in place should the OFR be eliminated.
Collecting and analyzing data should be streamlined,
allowing Congress to make informed decisions when crafting
policy. For example, the Treasury Department where the OFR is
housed already has an Office of Economic Policy which is
responsible for analyzing and reporting current and perspective
economic developments in the U.S. and world economy. Likewise
the division of financial stability, which is maintained by the
Federal Reserve performs market surveillance for the purpose of
identifying threats to financial stability. Congress must
insist better coordination and eliminate unnecessary layers of
Federal bureaucracy when they exist.
And finally, and maybe most troubling is the questionable
analysis of reports produced by the OFR over the last several
years. A 2013 OFR report on the asset management industry
concluded that investment managers and institutions they worked
for could pose systemic risk to our financial system. That
report, which was widely criticized by the SEC, Members of both
the House and the Senate, and even former chairman Barney Frank
puts into question the OFR's effectiveness and capabilities.
Unfortunately, while the creation of the office might have
been well intentioned, reports of the mismanagement,
questionable reports and analysis, redundancy, and the
inability to fulfill its statutory mandate raise the question,
why does the OFR exist?
Director Berner, I look forward to hearing your testimony
this morning and I yield back the balance of my time.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, the
Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you so much, Madam Chair, it is an honor
to be with you this morning. I thank the witness for appearing
as well.
Madam Chair, OFR is a necessary part of the Dodd-Frank
defense against systemic failure. Some things bear repeating.
OFR is a necessary part of the Dodd-Frank defense against
systemic failure. It is the systemic threat sentinel, it looks
out for the next AIG, the next Bear Stearns, the next Lehman.
It has an absolutely necessary function in this Dodd-Frank
legislation, as implemented.
And as it looks across the economic order, it is looking
for the 3-7s that we were confronted with in 2008--3 years of a
fixed rate, 27 years of rates that would bounce around--given a
teaser rate that would coincide with a prepayment penalty such
that you could not extricate yourself from a dastardly loan. It
is looking for the next line of no-doc loans that would allow
people to just get loans for unusual amounts of money without
proper documentation.
It looks out for the interconnectedness between these huge
mega institutions, institutions that when connected improperly
can drag down not only this economy, but the economy of the
world. It is a necessary part of the Dodd-Frank defense against
systemic failure. FSOC on the other hand is a command center,
it is the command center, but the sentinel is OFR. OFR is
necessary.
Now like many police departments and areas of the Defense
Department, it has some problems. But when we have problems in
police departments, not all, some, some areas of the Defense
Department we don't decide to eliminate the police department,
we don't decide to eliminate the Defense Department or that
area that might have a problem, we repair the problem. We don't
decide that we are going to cut the budget of Defense by 25
percent because there are problems with some area of the
Defense Department. We don't decide we are going to cut the
workforce by 45.5 percent because there are problems in some
areas of a police department, we fix the problem.
It makes no sense to cut OFR by 25 percent, the budget. It
makes no sense to cut the workforce by 45.5 percent. I will
stand with anyone who wants to correct problems that may exist
in OFR, but I will stand against everyone who wants to
eliminate OFR. We worked too hard. It took us many months. And
the unfortunate thing about producing good legislation is
people don't remember the crisis sometimes that will become the
genesis for the legislation.
It is like when you go to the physician and you have a
toothache. You are willing to do whatever is necessary to get
it resolved. Let's get this pain away. We worked hard to
eliminate the pain in 2008. And now that we have eliminated the
pain and we have a means by which we can avoid the pain in the
future, we have forgotten what the pain was like. It is
difficult to remember the pain from your last toothache, but
you do remember this, you don't want to get another one. So it
is important for us to protect OFR and not allow those who
really want to eliminate Dodd-Frank--and by the way, I have
colleagues on the other side who have said as much--those who
want to eliminate Dodd-Frank start by using this salami
process, one slice at a time, OFR, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, one slice at a time and then you won't have
Dodd-Frank, just as we are taking one slice at a time from the
Affordable Care Act. I yield back my time.
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair now recognizes the Vice Chair
of the Oversight and Investigation subcommittee, the gentleman
from Colorado, Mr. Tipton, for 1 minute for an opening
statement.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Chair Wagner, I appreciate you
holding the hearing today to be able to look at the nature and
practices of the Office of Financial Research. In September
2014, Chairman Hensarling was quoted as saying, ``4 years after
Dodd-Frank's passage it is not readily apparent, what, if
anything, OFR has contributed to the process of identifying,
mitigating systemic risk.'' 3 years after that statement, it is
still not clear to this committee that OFR's fulfilling its
statutory purpose, a purpose that Director Berner himself
recently called an extraordinarily broad mission.
Since its inception, OFR has been a fixture of Government
bureaucracy, riddled with employee dissatisfaction, a lack of
transparency and accountability, and, at its worst, obstruction
of the work of another Government agency.
I am pleased that this committee is taking another hard
look at OFR and its function here today. I would like to be
able to thank Director Berner for appearing today and look
forward to getting a better understanding of his viewpoints.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. We now
welcome our witness, Director Berner. Today's witness is the
honorable Richard Berner, Director of the Office of Financial
Research was confirmed by the U.S. Senate in 2013. Prior to his
role as director, Dr. Berner served as counselor to the
Secretary of the Treasury with the responsibility of standing
up the OFR.
Before joining Treasury in 2011, Director Berner was co-
head of global economics at Morgan Stanley and chief economist
at Mellon bank. Director Berner received his doctorate from the
University of Pennsylvania and his bachelor's degree from
Harvard University. Without objection, the witness' written
statement will be made part of the record following his oral
remarks.
Once the witness has finished presenting his testimony,
each Member of the subcommittee will have 5 minutes within
which to ask questions.
Director Berner, on the table there are three lights, green
means go, yellow means you have 1 minute left, and red means
your time is up.
With that, Director Berner is recognized for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of his testimony. Director Berner.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD BERNER

Mr. Berner. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner, Ranking Member
Green, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning on behalf of the Office of
Financial Research. My written testimony covers the subjects
mentioned in your invitation letter. As background I also
attached our just released 2017 Annual Report to Congress and a
new report on OFR workforce culture. We will provide the
results of the 2017 Federal employee viewpoint survey as soon
as they are available.
As you may know, I am leaving the OFR at year's end, so I
think it is a good time to take stock of where the OFR is now,
compared with April 2011 when I was counsel to the Secretary
with responsibility to stand up the OFR. Back then we had four
staff members and no separate office or infrastructure, just a
broad mandate to help support U.S. financial stability after
the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
Today, we have resources to meet our mandate, an expert and
diverse staff of men and women with the tools needed to do
their jobs, an office in Washington, a small office in New
York, and an analytic environment where OFR members securely
maintain large datasets and conduct computing intensive
analysis.
More than 2 years ago we begin to take stock of the OFR,
resulting in initiatives to strengthen our workplace culture
and to streamline our functions. I believe those initiatives
will help us effectively and efficiently meet our mandate and
maintain the objectivity, integrity, and quality that are the
hallmarks of our work.
The OFR mandate is to support its stakeholders, primarily
the Financial Stability Oversight Council, by improving the
scope, quality, and accessibility of financial data; assessing
and monitoring threats to financial stability; and evaluating
financial stability policies. I have had the privilege of
serving as the OFR's first director since January 2013, and I
am proud of the accomplishments that the dedicated OFR
workforce has made possible.
For example, the OFR led the international initiative to
establish the global legal entity identifier (LEI), which is
like a bar code for precisely identifying parties to financial
transactions. If the LEI system had been in place during the
financial crisis, exposures to the failing Lehman Brothers
would have been easier to identify, assess, and manage.
The OFR's also collaborating with the Federal Reserve to
collect data describing repurchase agreements or repose, which
are critical sources of secured short-term funding across the
financial system. This data will be used in publishing an
alternative to LIBOR (London Inter-bank Offered Rate). U.S.
dollar LIBOR is a benchmark for setting interest rates, and
trillions of dollars in mortgages, and other financial
products. Our mandate includes developing new tools to better
assess and monitor financial system vulnerabilities. We have
done that with our new financial system vulnerabilities monitor
and financial stress index. We are also doing that by combining
network analysis with maps of the financial system to help
identify potential systemic vulnerabilities from cybersecurity
incidents.
Our mandating also includes making data more accessible. We
have done that with our U.S. money market fund monitor which
shows developments in these funds by tracking in detail their
investment portfolios. And it includes evaluating policies, and
we have done that by researching factors, other than size, to
assess the systemic importance of banks.
Our staff delivered these consequential contributions to
stakeholders despite headwinds from working for a startup amid
persistant uncertainties from existential threats to the OFR.
When I first testified before this subcommittee in 2011, I said
that OFR has mandated to shed light into the dark corners of
the financial system. Today, we and our stakeholders can see
into those corners more clearly than ever before. Because this
work requires ongoing vigilance, that light must continue to
shine.
Thank you again for inviting me here today. This oversight
helps ensure that the OFR is fully transparent and accountable
in carrying out its mission. We look forward to working with
you to promote the stability of the Nation's financial system.
And I am happy to respond to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berner can be found on page
26 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. The Chair thanks the witness for his
opening statements. And the Chair now recognizes herself for 5
minutes.
Director Berner, in previous testimony before this
committee you have indicated that you and the OFR had every
interest in being transparent and accountable, said yet again
today. Yet as we have already heard today, including written
testimony from the GAO, you have not. As we have already
discussed, OFR sets its own budget outside the congressional
appropriations process, determines the size of its staff and
their salaries, with no direction from Congress, and has a
single director, you. I would argue that the OFR is not
accountable at all.
Director Berner, isn't the lesson of the CFPB that Congress
indeed made a mistake in creating agencies with single
directors who can control every aspect of their agency and are
unaccountable to Congress, the President, and the public?
Mr. Berner. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question. I
believe that we are accountable in many ways to the Congress
and to others who oversee us. Hearings such as this one really
give us an opportunity to explain to you what we are doing and
the ways that we are doing it.
In addition, we file quarterly reports to the Congress on
all of our activities and our budget. And as you know from the
statute, I am required to consult with the Secretary of the
Treasury on budget and other matters and there is oversight
from that.
Chairwoman Wagner. Let me quickly go back to the GAO audit,
Director Berner. Quick yes or no, do you feel like your office
fully cooperated with the GAO in its investigation?
Mr. Berner. Yes, we have.
Chairwoman Wagner. What would you say about GAO's
testimony, that was submitted today, which talked about lengthy
delays and lack of access? To quote here Director Berner,
directly from GAO's testimony today. During--and I quote,
``during the course of our review of OFR we have experienced
repeated problems with gaining access to both people and
documents. Many meetings with OFR officials took months to
schedule, some were canceled with short notice and requests for
documentation and other information were delayed.'' And it goes
on, and on, and on sir.
What would you say about the GAO's testimony today about
all of the delays and lack of access?
Mr. Berner. I would say, Congresswoman, that we have
provided all requested witnesses and documents to the GAO. The
delays that did occur were the result of scheduling delays on
both sides of the equation, that those were unfortunate. We did
have some staff turnover during the period which that audit was
being conducted. And we understood from our communications with
the GAO that those had been remedied following a conversation
between our chief counsel and GAO counsel--
Chairwoman Wagner. Reclaiming my time, Director, because I
did want to cover a couple more topics. Let's discuss for a
minute the workplace culture study, by Charles River Associates
(CRA), which you, Director Berner actually asked for. Among
other things, the study identifies concerns from employees that
ranged from a lack of communication, problems with decision
making, a lack of direction, a lack of progress and structure,
and inexperienced and unskilled management.
A lot of these criticisms from OFR employees, many of whom
were hired under your watch. What is OFR doing to address the
concerns identified in this report, sir?
Mr. Berner. Thank you for that. We did ask for that report
and we have sought advice from various offices at the Treasury
who are experts in these matters in order to make that
engagement.
We recognized actually when our Federal Employee Viewpoint
Survey scores began to decline a few years ago that indeed
there were issues of workplace culture that we needed to
address. And we did start to address those in several ways. The
CRA report that you refer to is the latest of those, but it is
only the latest in a series of efforts that we have been making
in order to improve workplace culture, decision making, and
other matters.
Chairwoman Wagner. I appreciate that, Director Berner, but
if we are being honest here, when I read the Charles River
Associates study on the workplace culture of the OFR, which
states strategic planning continues to be a problem, I had
concerns.
When I heard your testimony today that the morale in the
written testimony, the morale of the OFR was low, it makes one
wonder about the leadership structure not to mention Director,
the multiple ongoing audits, investigation of the OFR by the
Treasury IG, the GAO's testimony today with its harsh criticism
of your agency, for any agency that is very young, OFR has
created a workplace that appears to outsiders and insiders to
be completely dysfunctional. And most concerning, Director
Berner, is how this atmosphere effects the work product, the
work product that you are obligated to produce.
I look forward--my time has expired--to you putting your
answer out in written form or in some way to explain the volume
of criticism and reports and information from governmental
agencies and studies and others that are most concerning
regarding your agency.
Mr. Berner. Happy to work with you, Congresswoman, to get
you what you need.
Chairwoman Wagner. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
distinguished lady and friend of mine from Ohio, Mrs. Joyce
Beatty for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman, and it is
certainly my honor to be here seated next to you.
And also, Mr. Berner, let me say thank you for your
testimony. Thank you for your years of service leading the
Office of Financial Research. And certainly I wish you the best
of luck in your future endeavors.
Mr. Berner. Thank you.
Mrs. Beatty. Now, I am going to try to get a couple of
questions in within my time. I am going to start, for obvious
reasons as you certainly know, we are looking at this tax bill
to say during the 2016 election, President Trump promised the
American people on several occasions that he was going to close
the carry interest loophole that hedge funds take advantage of
to pay lower taxes than every day American people.
Now I am not aware of any, so my question is going to be
about the Hedge Fund Working Group. In April 2016, the
Financial Stability Oversight Council, of which the director of
OFR is a nonvoting member, released a pubic statement entitled,
Financial Stability Oversight Council Update on Review of Asset
Management, Products and Activities. In this report the council
stated that quote, ``there appears to be a concentration of
leverage on the economic and corresponding risk exposure of
hedge funds.'' It went on to state that there is currently no
single regulator with all the information necessary to evaluate
the complete risk profiles of hedge funds and suggests that
there were further analyses that needed to take place.
We heard from this working group in November 2016 at the
tail end of the Obama Administration when Deputy Assistant
Secretary Crane provided an update on the group's progress on
the council. And after reviewing the FSOC minutes of 2017 under
the leadership of Treasury Secretary Mnuchin, there doesn't
appear to be any reference at all or updates by the Hedge Fund
Working Group. In fact, a couple months ago, the American
Bankers Association had an article, and Madam Chair, I ask it
be entered into the record--
Chairwoman Wagner. So ordered.
Mrs. Beatty. Mnuchin shows no interest in continuing FSOC's
hedge find inquiry. It was published and it raises the question
if Secretary Mnuchin led FSOC, he would disband the working
group, can you respond to that?
Mr. Berner. Thanks for your question Congresswoman, I can't
respond to say what Secretary Mnuchin is doing. But I do know
that he strongly supports the work of the council to look at
risk in the financial system and vulnerabilities where they may
occur. I also know that he strongly supports the work of the
OFR whose primary purpose is to support the council in a
variety of ways.
In particular, in regard to hedge funds--
Mrs. Beatty. Let me resume my time and ask you, does he
support the Hedge Fund Working Group?
Mr. Berner. I don't know whether he supports the Hedge Fund
Working--
Mrs. Beatty. Have you received any updates or anything
about it?
Mr. Berner. I have not.
Mrs. Beatty. Would you say morale in an organization can be
down if people are afraid that they are going to lose their
jobs?
Mr. Berner. Yes, I would, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Beatty. Have you heard anything that you should share
with us about what people might be thinking--why they would be
thinking they might lose their jobs?
Mr. Berner. I think the President's budget, which came out
in May of this year, indicated that there would be significant
cuts to the workforce and to the budget of the OFR, and that
might be one reason, I think that there are efforts to
eliminate the OFR. So there is a great deal of uncertainty that
employees are facing.
Mrs. Beatty. OK. Let me ask you another question. Are you
aware of video that was uploaded on YouTube from an alleged
employee at the Office of Financial Research? They had raised
concerns about disparate treatment of African Americans in the
workplace?
Mr. Berner. Yes, I am aware of those.
Mrs. Beatty. Do you know what is being done about that?
Mr. Berner. Yes. When we saw those videos, we referred them
immediately to the Treasury Office of the Inspector General for
them to look into those videos.
But I want to say, that in addition, if these expressed
concerns by employees, and we don't know who produced these,
but if they express concerns by employees, I want to strongly
say that we really respect concerns. We want to make sure that
employees have every opportunity to express their concerns.
Expressing them in ways other than that would be really good,
but we want to make sure that employees have every opportunity
to express their concerns about the workplace and about
anything else.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, the Vice Chair of
the Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee, Mr. Tipton for 5
minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Chairwoman. And, Director, again,
thank you for being here.
In its report, at the request of the Chairwoman of this
committee, the Government Accountability Office identified
strategic planning as a serious issue facing OFR. Would you say
that the findings of the GAO in this report had merit?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I would say the findings of the
GAO really overlook a lot of the things that we have been doing
in the Office of Financial Research.
Mr. Tipton. So you see no merit on the findings?
Mr. Berner. I think that the efforts we have been making
can be improved and we are taking steps to improve them. But I
would not say that there are no efforts and that those efforts
have gone without producing any results.
Mr. Tipton. How is the OFR supposed to achieve its
statutory mandates under your supervision?
Mr. Berner. First and foremost, as I mentioned earlier, we
are--our purpose is to serve the needs of the Financial
Stability Oversight Council and so we want to, and do work with
the Council in order to understand what they need from us,
whether it is data or analysis, or something else.
Second, once we understand that program--and that is an
ongoing conversation, once we understand that--we organize
ourselves in the way that the statute recommends and in a way
that produces the most effective and efficient way of doing
that. We are working hard on changing that right now, because
having taken stock of where we are, we are moving forward with
some changes that will help us make--get more effective and
efficient, including the strategic planning initiatives that
you allude to.
Mr. Tipton. When you are adding--basically with OFR was
actually a redundancy added on how many other agencies are
doing analysis and research and followed up with the OFR?
Mr. Berner. I won't argue that OFR is redundant, I would
argue that OFR has some unique things that other agencies don't
that complement their work.
First, no other agency had the ability to collect data
across the financial system. And those data are really needed
to understand systemwide where the risks might be. No other
agency has access to the data that we have in order to do the
work that we do. And that really complements the work of other
agencies.
Mr. Tipton. In light of your previous testimony regarding
the critical role that the GAO plays in overseeing OFR I would
be interested to know your thoughts on the GAO's forced
suspension of its audits. There were serious concerns that the
information OFR provided to the GAO, from datasets to staff
management practices, was unreliable.
The Government Accountability Office was forced to suspend
an audit because it couldn't verify if a Government agency
could be held accountable. Do you see this at all problematic?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I have just seen the testimony for
the first time this morning and it does say there were some
concerns about whistleblower activity that forced them to
suspend the audit. But as I mentioned earlier, we have, and
will, and always do collaborate and cooperate with GAO to give
them everything that they need to understand what we are doing
and how we are doing it.
And as I understand it, that matter was turned over to the
inspector general at Treasury from what they said here, and
that they are conducting an investigation. But, I don't comment
on investigations, that is what is going on there, it depends
on the Treasury OIG.
Mr. Tipton. I would be interested, Director, to be able to
know how you can testify before this committee that when we are
talking about the transparency being able to get that
information and accountability that you strongly support the
GAO's oversight function I assume?
Mr. Berner. I do.
Mr. Tipton. And appreciate the constructive work that they
do in conducting the reviews. If the information provided to
the GAO, if it is not able to be proven reliable, tell me how
that works with you?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, as I said, I cooperate with, and
my staff cooperates with, the GAO when they engage with them.
My staff and I meet frequently to understand what the GAO is
asking for. And my direction to them is to make sure that they
cooperate fully, that they give them everything that they need.
And if there are concerns expressed by GAO that they are not
getting what they need, then we make sure that we get them
everything that they need.
As far as this particular audit was concerned, as I
mentioned there were some delays that were unfortunate. But we
have been working with the GAO ever since we started the
organization, want to continue working with the GAO to make
sure that the oversight that is appropriate and necessary
really goes forward in a way that it should.
Mr. Tipton. My time has expired Madam Chair. I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, my friend and
delegation colleague, Congressman Cleaver for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you for being here, Mr. Berner.
Mr. Berner. Thank you.
Mr. Cleaver. One of my big concerns is if you don't have
sufficient resources and staff to fulfill your mandated
responsibility as an agency, then you get blamed for not
having--not being able to do all the things that we gave for
you to do. And when I discovered that in the 2018 budget
release, in May, it required a 25 percent cut, so you were at
220 something employees, I think you lost 100. Is that about
right?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I think our current workforce is
at 207.
Mr. Cleaver. Two hundred seven. So how many staffers have
you had to eliminate or positions since the budget release for
2018?
Mr. Berner. No steps have been taken in that regard yet.
Mr. Cleaver. Let me ask you another way, are you doing a
review now to figure out who--what jobs you can eliminate?
Mr. Berner. We are doing a thorough ongoing review of the
OFR as I mentioned in my testimony. We are taking stock of what
we do, how we do it, but with an emphasis on two things. One,
is to meet our mission, as you said. And second, that, as I
mentioned earlier, derives from the council's needs, to make
that as effective and efficient as we possibly can.
And we think that by doing that review, then we will be
able to decide in consultation with the Secretary and others at
Treasury how we should go about doing that and that review is
ongoing as we speak.
Mr. Cleaver. Suffice it to say the positions wouldn't have
been there if you didn't need them. The people--whatever
changes you make, whatever reductions you make in staff, I am
saying those positions would never have been created in the
first place if you didn't need them.
Mr. Berner. Congressman, when we started the organization,
as I mention, it was a startup. And I would be the first to say
that as we looked at the organization as it grew we made
changes along the way, in organizational structure and skills
needed. Furthermore, I would argue that the mission changes in
the sense that the financial system is always evolving and so
we need to be adaptable and agile in responding to those
changes.
So this is not something that is cast in stone, we want to
be a vibrant organization that really does meet its mission and
adapts to changing needs, and that is the kind of review we are
doing right now.
Mr. Cleaver. All right. Thank you very much. I have been
here since the creation, I went through the entire Dodd-Frank,
sometimes 6-hour committee hearings. And I know that your
agency was--had been beaten, slammed, and thrown under the bus
and then backed over for lack of transparency. And I think the
Council then took some steps to say we want full transparency
and openness, so you opened up to a number of public hearings,
each year--I am not sure how many you are having now--but where
the public can come in.
Mr. Berner. I am happy to appear wherever invited.
Mr. Cleaver. No, no, no. I am just saying I am curious
about how many are being held. How many sessions are open now
to the public?
Mr. Berner. All of our work is open to the public. So for
example, we just had two conferences recently, which were open
to the public, that focused on the issue of fintech and where
the opportunities in it and risks might be. Those are
completely open to the public. We webcast them on our website.
We want to make sure that everything that we do is transparent
and open to the public.
Mr. Cleaver. So are there people from the Administration
attending any of those meetings?
Mr. Berner. Yes, there are. In fact some people from the
Administration spoke at those conferences.
Mr. Cleaver. So where is all of this lack of transparency?
How do you come up with that? It's a rhetorical question.
Mr. Berner. I understand.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Trott, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Trott. Thank you Chair Wagner. I want to thank the
director for being with us this morning.
So you started out in 2013 with four employees in an
office--no office of your own and now you have 207 employees,
an office in New York, and an office in Washington. Is that
correct?
Mr. Berner. Yes, sir.
Mr. Trott. That is pretty extraordinary growth in 4 years.
Wouldn't you say?
Mr. Berner. Yes. Actually, Congressman, we began a little
bit before that, but yes, it is.
Mr. Trott. How many people--what is the most number of
people you have managed in your prior life perhaps when you
were chief economist at Morgan Stanley? How many people did you
manage there?
Mr. Berner. At Morgan Stanley I had a team of about 60
people managed on a global basis in every corner of the world.
Mr. Trott. I am greatly bothered by--and I haven't been in
Congress that long, but I am greatly bother by the GAO's
inability to complete its audit. When you first took over the
position and started to build the office in May 2013, you were
the keynote speaker at the conference, the Fed conference in
Cleveland, and you were interviewed. The interview described
your position as a linebacker, a roving linebacker that doesn't
have any specific job, but you just fill in the gaps where
necessary.
And in that interview you said it is your job to develop
trust from the other agencies, and to be successful it is going
to require that you develop a culture of collaboration,
engagements, and accountability. So certainly it is rhetorical
for me to ask you this, but you feel like you have accomplished
that, even though the GAO couldn't complete its audit so that
the taxpayers could know their money is being spent wisely?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I feel that we have really worked
hard to try to accomplish that and I have acknowledged that we
need to do more work to get to our aspirations.
Mr. Trott. So let's talk about some of your good work. So
your analysis of the asset management industry was roundly
disparaged by a number of different commentators, specifically
the bipartisan group Better Markets, which usually calls for
more heavy Government intervention, said that the OFR report
adopts an arbitrary analytical framework; it provides literal
empirical support; it ignores or minimizes the significance of
relevant factors; and it conveys its finding in such vague and
amorphous terms that it provides to be of little value and is
in fact misleading. So that was Better Markets, the Dean of
Columbia, the Chair of Brookings, the head of Harvard Law
School, a bipartisan group of Senators all said the report with
respect to the asset management industry was of no value.
What happened there, did the OFR drop the ball or do you
dispute all of the commentators and expert analysis of your
work?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I would say that in that report
one of the cornerstones of the analysis, the analytical
framework was an approach which looked at the activities of
asset managers, rather than at the entities themselves. I think
you need to look at both, but the activities framework is
something that is really important for us to all focus on when
we look at risk in those--in that industry and for that matter
in others. In fact, in the Treasury Report on Capital Markets
and the Treasury Report on Asset Managers and Insurers, that is
the framework that they recommended.
Mr. Trott. So all these smart people didn't understand the
purpose of the report. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Berner. No. I am simply saying that that was the
purpose of the report to shed some light on what the industry
looked like and how to go about looking at risk in it.
Mr. Trott. So let's go back to Mr. Green's opening
statement. Did you believe that without the OFR, FSOC could not
possibly identify an institution that posed a systemic risk or
that you are critical to that work?
Mr. Berner. I think the OFR is critical to that work
because, as I mentioned, we have some authorities, we have some
capabilities that others don't.
Mr. Trott. Right. But part of the--earlier my friend from
Missouri made a comment that you would never of course create a
position that wasn't necessary. And part of my concern sitting
here representing the people of the 11th District of Michigan
and hardworking taxpayers is you have these Government
bureaucracies that get created with no specific mission that
oftentimes develop a very problematic culture. I am not sure
which culture is worse, the culture at OFR or the culture at
CFPB, but they are both bad from what I have read. And they
grow, and they grow, and they grow. And that is why people
coming into D.C. come across the bridge and all they see are
cranes, there was never a recession in Washington. The
Government just keeps growing.
And if it were just the salaries that were the problem,
then we probably could live with that because we have a $4
trillion budget so we can have a few extra salaries baked in
there, but it is stifling the banking industry. And it is
really death by acronym is what I call it, a bank today has to
comply with every possible acronym from OFR, to CFPB, to EEOC,
to every possible acronym that is known to man. And it is
killing banking, that is why small businesses in my district
can't get loans.
But I appreciate your time this morning and I wish you the
best as you return. I don't know what your plans are when you
leave in December but maybe it's back to the private sector.
Mr. Berner. Thank you, Congressman.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Gottheimer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Mr. Berner, I was reading in the report and quoting from
page 6 of the OFR Annual Report to Congress, that quote, ``the
financial system is an attractive target for cyber thieves and
other hackers because financial companies manage the Nation's
wealth and handle trillions of dollars in transactions every
day and that underlie the U.S. economy.''
So my question, does OFR downsizing risk our ability in
your opinion to protect our country and our financial
institutions from cybersecurity attacks? Does it risk our
overall financial stability? And so if you don't mind
addressing that I would appreciate it, please.
Mr. Berner. Thank you, Congressman. I don't think that any
of us alone has the ability to protect our financial system,
our economy from cyber attacks. The attacks are going to
happen. But the work that we do in collaboration with Members
of the Financial Stability Oversight Council and others and,
indeed, in partnership with the industry, I think gives us a
better opportunity to add resilience to the system so that when
the attacks occur we can understand what their implications
might be and so that we can minimize the damage.
Mr. Gottheimer. Thank you. I am good. Thanks. I yield back.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Kustoff, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And Director
Berner, thank you for joining us here this morning. In your
testimony you mentioned that the OFR supports the FSOC by,
quote ``Purchasing and securely maintaining more than 65 other
datasets used by the FSOC staff.'' closed quote. That does seem
like a large number, 65. Can you tell us how much the OFR
spends each year on purchasing commercial datasets?
Mr. Berner. Yes, sir. I would have to go back and look at
the exact number, but we have a budget for purchasing datasets
that is roughly $4 million.
Mr. Kustoff. It seems like somewhere I read that the number
was between $5.5 and $6 million. Would that be incorrect?
Mr. Berner. I will go back and check, Congressman, and get
you the exact number.
But let me just say that as far as the number is concerned,
one of the things that we are doing in our review is to make
sure that we don't purchase or collect any data that aren't
absolutely necessary. So we are taking a review and really
looking thoroughly, and working with the council to make sure
that we make efficient use of our resources.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you. The GAO's testimony states that the
OFR's acting deputy director of research, chief data officer,
and chief operating officer were unable to respond to GAO's
questions about the OFR's strategic plan and performance
measures related to its data collection and data sharing
functions. Can you tell me how those commercial datasets were
chosen for purchase?
Mr. Berner. Yes, Congressman. They were chosen in
consultation with FSOC. When they had needs for data, we went
and made sure that those needs were satisfied. In addition,
when we worked with other agencies, we looked to their needs as
well and also to the work that the OFR was doing on behalf of
the FSOC. Some of those data were required for that purpose as
well.
Mr. Kustoff. Director, have there been any issues related
to OFR's ability to handle sensitive data appropriately? And if
so, if you could tell me what steps OFR has taken to ensure
that the controls are in place to manage the risk to the
confidentiality, the integrity, and the availability of
sensitive data?
Mr. Berner. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. It
is a very good one, because there is no priority for us that is
higher than maintaining the security of data that are entrusted
to us. We make sure that all of our employees go through
security training, which is extensive every year and 100
percent compliant with that. We make sure that all of our
systems and the way we share data with others is as secure as
it can possibly be. No data can be taken outside of the OFR
without an agreement.
Data that comes in are done under a strict memorandum of
understanding with the supplying agency. Even those which we
acquire or get from industry, those are subject to a strict
memorandum of understanding as well. And those specify the
purpose for which the data will be used, who will have access
to the data, how the data will be made secure. When we get data
from those entities, they come in and actually look at our
systems to make sure that they are in compliance with the
security standards that they maintain and we do the same for
them. So we go to great lengths to make sure that our data are
kept secure.
We also go to great lengths, you mentioned integrity of the
data, we go to great lengths to make sure that the data that we
have are as high quality as they possibly can be, because you
can't make good decisions unless you have high quality data.
So I can talk to you at greater length about that, but we
work hard on all those things.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you, Director. And thank you, Madam
Chair, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
Pursuant to clause D(4), committee rule 3, the Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Representative
Loudermilk for an additional 5 minutes upon the conclusion of
the time allocated under the 5 minute rule.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you for
the additional time, because this is extremely important. I
have really some information I would like to understand seeing
I wasn't here during this time period. I would like to really
drill down a little deeper on your statement to Chairwoman
Wagner that you believe OFR fully cooperated with GAO's 2014
audit.
In 2014 before this subcommittee you testified and I will
quote that, ``You wanted to reaffirm that the OFR is fully
committed to transparency and accountability.'' Director
Berner, do you still stand by that statement?
Mr. Berner. Yes, I do.
Mr. Loudermilk. You do. Regarding transparency and
oversight when you were before this subcommittee in March 2013
you testified that, and again I quote, ``As we pursue the OFR's
agenda we are committed to the highest level of transparency
and accountability to the Congress and the public. We strongly
support GAO's important oversight function and appreciate
constructive work in conducting this review.'' Do you stand by
that testimony?
Mr. Berner. I do, Congressman.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. Maybe this will go a little
quicker than I thought it would. I appreciate that.
So I assume that the sentiments you expressed toward OFR's
cooperation with GAO in support of GAO's functions have
continued unabated since that time, since March 2013 to the
present?
Mr. Berner. That is correct.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. In February 2014 you testified
that one of the reasons OFR didn't need additional
accountability to Congress was that and again I will quote,
``we are subject to oversight by the various inspector general,
inspectors general and by the Government Accountability Office,
which is an arm of Congress. And in fact, when I was here 10
months ago, I testified on a report about transparency and
accountability.'' Do you still stand by that testimony?
Mr. Berner. I do.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. Director Berner, given these
prior testimonies which you agree you still stand by today and
I appreciate that. I wanted to know if OFR engaged and
repeated, and as it appears, systemic obstruction of the GAO's
audit of the OFR.
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I am not aware of any obstruction
of GAO's audit of the OFR. If I may, we provided all the
requested witnesses and documents that GAO requested.
When the audit was closed, we were not made aware of that,
of the allegations, the reliability of the information provided
or of any ongoing concerns that GAO might have had.
Mr. Loudermilk. So your statement here today under oath is
that you fully cooperated with GAO, you were fully transparent
with GAO, there was no obstruction, you fully met their
timelines. Is that what I am hearing you say here today?
Mr. Berner. With regard to the timelines, as I indicated
earlier, there were some unfortunate delays in scheduling, but
we made every effort to make sure that GAO had the information
that it needed.
Mr. Loudermilk. Unfortunate would mean unforeseen.
Mr. Berner. Unforeseen. There were scheduling conflicts.
They wanted to talk to all the senior staff.
Mr. Loudermilk. There was no effort to avoid responding to
GAO's request for meetings?
Mr. Berner. Absolutely not.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Berner. No, we make every effort to comply with their
request.
Mr. Loudermilk. If you will turn to Exhibit 2 in your
binder, the testimony of Lawrence Evans, Managing Director of
Financial Markets and Community Investment at GAO. I will give
you a moment to turn there if you would like. Not too much
time, I am on a time limit here.
Mr. Berner. I am ready.
Mr. Loudermilk. Lawrence Evans the Managing Director of
Financial Markets and Community Investment at GAO, states,
``during the course of our review of OFR we experienced
repeated problems with gaining access to both people and
documents. Many meetings with OFR officials took months to
schedule, some were canceled with short notice and requests for
documentation and other information were delayed. We had to
make repeated attempts to obtain required documentation and
schedule interviews with agency officials.
These attempts included frequent follow-up emails and phone
calls, the imposition of deadlines for document delivery that
were either not complied with or resulted in production of
some, but not all required documents and a discussion between
GAO counsel and the chief counsel of OFR recording the agency's
continuing delays. Despite these extensive efforts, we
experienced significant delays that prevented us from
completing our audit work within originally planned
timeframes.''
Do you not deny those facts?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, as mentioned earlier, we made
every effort to comply with GAO's request and as I also
mentioned my chief counsel in consulting with the chief counsel
at GAO, I thought we resolved all the difficulties that are
described. And I just had a look at this this morning. So as
far as I know, we have really worked hard to make sure we
overcame those issues.
Mr. Loudermilk. So really this boils down to, it is not an
opinion question, it is really yes or no. So do you deny the
accusations, or the statement that was made by GAO in their
report that you weren't cooperative?
Mr. Berner. We made every effort to cooperate with the GAO.
Mr. Loudermilk. So it is not a yes or no. By what you are
saying, you are saying no, that the GAO is fabricating their
report?
Mr. Berner. I am not saying they are fabricating their
report. I am saying that there were some delays that we
acknowledged, but that we made every effort to work with them
and get them everything they needed.
Mr. Loudermilk. So you believe that transparency is still a
vital goal and as you stated strongly support the GAO's
important oversight function?
Mr. Berner. Yes, I do.
Mr. Loudermilk. You believe that this removes the need for
additional legislative oversight of the OFR, but at the same
time cooperating with GAO doesn't seem to be--you are stating
it is a top priority, but GAO is saying it was not a top
priority.
Mr. Berner. I am saying we made every effort to comply with
GAO's request so that we could be transparent and accountable.
Mr. Loudermilk. It is a little troubling about every
effort, because how do you define every effort? Is that an
effort by the standard that you set up or the standards that
GAO sets up?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I can appreciate the fact that
there were some delays. We want to resolve those problems, want
to make sure that GAO does have everything that they need to do
their work, which I think is very important.
Mr. Loudermilk. Let's take it one step further. Let's look
at a specific instance from Mr. Evans' testimony, this is in
Exhibit 2 of page 4, he stated ``OFR delayed and canceled
meetings. We first emailed the OFR liaison to request an
entrance conference, a meeting between GAO and the Agency under
review that marks the beginning of an engagement on February
6th, 2015. OFR's officials agreed to meet with us in person on
March 10 in part to accommodate our plans to bring field staff
to Washington, DC.
We sent numerous emails to the OFR liaison and attempted to
confirm the meeting logistics and attendees, but did not
receive a response. On March 4th we provided OFR with a set of
questions to guide the entrance discussions. However, on March
9th, 1 day before we were scheduled to meet, the OFR liaison
emailed to cancel the meeting.
Although we provided several options for meeting with the
agency officials, we were unable to hold the entrance
conference with OFR until April 8th, more than 2 months after
our first meeting.''
Do you dispute those facts?
Mr. Berner. I don't dispute those facts.
Mr. Loudermilk. Is this conduct of continuing to delay
meetings something that is acceptable?
Mr. Berner. Delaying meetings was certainly not the intent,
Congressman. Our intent was to try to work with GAO to make
sure that we got to them, that they got the things that they
needed, and that we made witnesses available to them on the
basis that they asked.
Now, I would say, Congressman, that we did have some
turnover in the people whom they asked to talk to. People had
left. We had a hiatus of leadership in certain areas.
Mr. Loudermilk. But if there was a reason to postpone the
meeting, you would have let GAO know in advance so they could
reschedule; is that what you are telling me?
Mr. Berner. I am telling you that sometimes we let them
know in advance when we knew the information.
Mr. Loudermilk. OK.
Mr. Berner. And so we would--
Mr. Loudermilk. Let's pursue that for a moment. Are you
aware of the fact that your senior staff knew about the
conflicts that led to the cancellation of the entrance
conference weeks before the conference date and then misled the
GAO about that fact?
Mr. Berner. I am not aware of that, no.
Mr. Loudermilk. We have staff emails. Exhibit 6 is a
February 18 email in which Alicia Marshall, senior attorney,
and your counsel office confirms the March 10 entrance
conference date with GAO.
Exhibit 7 is an email in which an OFR senior staff member
declines an invitation to the meeting with GAO because of a,
quote, ``3-day OFR senior management offsite from March 10
through 12.''
Now, that was in March--that was February 20, well in
advance of the March 10 date. And then Exhibit 8 is a February
26 email where Alicia Marshall is informed that another two of
the senior staff members invited to the GAO entrance conference
interview will be at the leadership offsite, and that is
February 26, well in advance of the March 10.
But Exhibit 9 is the March 9 email canceling the March 10
meeting on less than 1 day's notice and strongly suggesting
that the cancellation occurred because of a last minute change
in senior staff's schedules; however, she knew that a month in
advance, which the prior emails isn't an accurate
representation, or at least a few weeks in advance, I should
say.
Do you deny that?
Mr. Berner. I certainly--I see the emails in front of me. I
don't deny their veracity, no.
Mr. Loudermilk. I appreciate the Chairwoman giving me
additional time.
Chairwoman Wagner. A few more seconds to close, Mr.
Loudermilk.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I
apologize for the time I exceeded, but this is very critical.
And as I look at this, I understand what you are saying,
and I appreciate you standing by your testimony, but it doesn't
appear, to me, including whistleblowers telling us that there
may have been manipulation of data, that you haven't been fully
transparent, and that there is some evidence of obstruction,
which seems to be status quo with a lot of our agencies today.
And I appreciate you being here. I appreciate your answers.
And Madam Chair, I appreciate the time.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes to close.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Director, is it your opinion that the financial threats
to U.S. stability have abated?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I think that we have, over the
past many years since the financial crisis, done things to make
the financial system more resilient. The financial system is
always evolving, and new threats can emerge, and it is our job,
in collaboration with the council, to try to identify where
those vulnerabilities are, and we need to always be vigilant.
Mr. Green. There is a recommendation that requires, or
would require a cut in the amount of funding you receive,
perhaps as much as 25 percent.
Would you be able to function efficaciously with a 25
percent cut?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I think that, as I mentioned
earlier in my testimony, it really is time to take stock of
where we are in the OFR and to see whether or not we can get
more effective and efficient. We have discussed options to do
that with the Secretary and with staff with whom he works, and
we are looking at those options now to make sure that we use
our resources in the most effective and efficient way.
I do believe that the OFR can function effectively and
efficiency with fewer resources. Just exactly what that looks
like is really going to depend on what the counsel asks of us
and what others ask of us.
Mr. Green. Should I conclude from your testimony, your
recent statements, that you are here today to testify that OFR
should be eliminated; that there should be no OFR?
Mr. Berner. I am here to testify that the work that the OFR
does is essential, is critical to help policymakers make good
decisions so that we can make our financial system more
resilient.
Mr. Green. And would you agree that there is some amount of
cut in the budget that would cause OFR to lose its potency, its
ability to be effective?
Mr. Berner. I would agree with that, Congressman.
Mr. Green. Would you agree also that the budget cuts that
relate to employees, some 40.5 percent by one estimate--I have
seen another one a little bit higher--would you agree that
these employees, the elimination of these employees, at some
point that this would have an impact on your efficiency as well
as your effectiveness?
Mr. Berner. I would argue that if the cuts were too deep,
that that would have a big impact on our efficiency and our
effectiveness. I would also argue that I have enormous concern
for the wellbeing and the morale of my employees, and I want to
make sure that they are treated fairly and in a way that is
respectful.
Mr. Green. How do budget cuts and the cuts in staff impact
morale?
Mr. Berner. I think, as I mentioned earlier, Congressman,
that the uncertainty over where a budget is going, over whether
or not people are going to keep their jobs, I think that
uncertainty has weighed on morale. There are other factors, but
I think that that certainly is one of them.
Mr. Green. And if OFR had been in place in 2008, would it
have had an impact on the crisis such that it would have
possibly mitigated it in some way?
Mr. Berner. I think so. I mentioned earlier that the legal
entity identifier system, which enabled us to understand who
owned risk, who owned whom, those things would have really
helped inform policymakers where the risks were. The work that
we have done since that time, also would have helped us
understand better, risk in various parts of the financial
system, in short-term wholesale funding and derivatives
markets, and I can give you a complete list of those things. In
fact, we have written about that subject.
Mr. Green. Had you, or OFR, the opportunity to look into
AIG, would you have been able to spot the connectedness that
AIG seems to have had to so many institutions that were flying
under the radar, as it were?
Mr. Berner. I think that we would have done a better job of
that, for sure.
Mr. Green. And finally this: You would say to me, without
question, reservation, hesitation, or equivocation that AFR is
absolutely, totally, and completely needed?
Mr. Berner. Absolutely.
Mr. Green. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Ellison, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ellison. I thank the Chair and the Ranking Member.
Director Berner, first of all, I just want to say thanks
for your work and your hard work--
Mr. Berner. Thank you.
Mr. Ellison. --In your research analysis. It is helpful to
have thoughtful analysis about what makes our financial markets
work better, because ultimately, we are trying to serve people
and make sure people's lives are better.
Mr. Berner. I agree with that, Congressman.
Mr. Ellison. And so if you would, sir, please congratulate
your staff for the good work they are doing. I know you don't
get a lot of appreciation. When you go back to your office,
just let them know that we do--that your work is appreciated.
Mr. Berner. Thank you, Congressman. I will be sure to do
that.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you. Specifically, the slide on the
``Financial System Vulnerabilities'' is really interesting to
me. OFR finds some improvements since the financial crisis a
decade ago. Contagion risk is lower. That is a good thing. And
it is much less likely that financial stress in one financial
institution or market is going to spill over into others. I
think that is a good thing for mom and pop grocery stores,
homeowners, whoever, it is a good thing. Financial institutions
are less risky, and they are more solvent and are less highly
leveraged.
Do you agree with all that, as my reading of material you
supplied?
Mr. Berner. I do, Congressman. And, you indicated, that is
what we said in our report.
Mr. Ellison. Yes. Yes. But market risk and credit risk
remain high, and I would like to just ask you about risks
facing the nonfinancial institutions.
I am very concerned about the growing monopolization of
businesses in our economy. Has OFR looked at market
concentration and the threat it poses to workers, small
business, and competition? And let me just add for the record,
you can hardly look at any industry in our country without
about three or four big entities controlling 50, 60, 70 percent
of the market. That is my analysis, not yours.
But would you please answer whether or not OFR has looked
at market concentration and the threat it--and what risk it
might represent to workers, small businesses, and competition?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, we haven't looked directly at
concentration in nonfinancial businesses. Others have. I would
simply say we look at concentration risk in the financial
services industry and how it might affect financial stability.
That is certainly one of the things that we do look at.
For example, if there is an institution that first has a
virtual monopoly or a large concentration of risk, that is
something that we want to take into account. But as far as
nonfinancial businesses are concerned in our economy, there is
more concentration, and that is something that we need to pay
attention to as we think about what that means for the economy
as a whole.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you. Because as I talked to my
colleagues, we are all concerned about the falloff in the
number of startups. What role does the concentration of markets
have in starting a business? As you monopolize and concentrate,
maybe it is the barriers that are just tougher than they used
to be.
I am not saying that is certainly the case. I am saying it
is worth some study. And we all say we believe in small
business, let's think about this.
So let me jump to another question. We have seen deep cuts
for regulatory agencies, like the Office of Financial Research,
are being proposed. Do you have concerns that rewriting the
rules to benefit banks, Wall Street, hedge funds, could result
in lower wages, fewer businesses, more monopolies, more
concentrated markets?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, I have not written about concerns
like that, and I would say that before I answer in the
affirmative, we have to really take a look at those things, but
I think that it is a reasonable question to ask.
I think that it is time to take stock of the things that we
have done, to make the financial system more resilient, and it
is pretty clear that some tailoring, some adjustments can be
done.
One that is very important and that I support, in
particular, is not having a one-size-fits-all approach to
financial regulation, so that our community banks are not
burdened by excessive regulation. That is very important. That
is something that we talk about with our colleagues at Treasury
and other financial regulatory agencies.
Mr. Ellison. All right. I only have 24 seconds left. Could
you give us an update on LEIs? I was a little late to the
hearing. If you have a few seconds just to say what you can
share as to how that is going?
Mr. Berner. Sure. We have made great progress on that on a
global basis, but it is not sufficient, and I think it would
benefit by having U.S. regulators mandate the use of the LEI in
regulatory reporting. That would actually help reduce the cost
of regulatory reporting and make the reports more useable by
regulators and by the public.
Mr. Ellison. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Hollingsworth, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Mr. Berner, I genuinely appreciate you
being here today. I know that one of the things both sides of
the aisle are very concerned about is the prevention of a
future crisis like we saw back in 2008. But I know something I
am gravely concerned about is employing the same strategy that
failed to see the 2008 crisis and only doubling down on that
strategy and expanding that strategy instead of refocusing on
strategies that have a higher likelihood of reducing the amount
of systemic risk.
And to that point, I know one of the primary purposes of
OFR, at least as put forth in the Dodd-Frank Act, was to
perform some of the economic research for FSOC. Now, there are
a variety of other players that do the same thing. Notably, the
Fed has over 300 PhD economists in its employ, especially in
the division of financial stability, where the primary mission
is to, I quote, ``develop and coordinate staff efforts to
identify and analyze potential risk to the financial system and
the broader economy, including through the monitoring of the
asset prices, leverage, financial flows, and other market risk
indicators.''
Within this division, the financial macroeconomic stability
studies section also, specifically researchers, and I quote,
``linkages between financial stability and macroeconomic
performances, including the effects of distress of financial
institutions,'' end quote.
In addition to that, the Treasury Department has a number
of other economists in its employ. I guess what I am asking or
trying to get to is, why does the Federal Government need
another redundant agency with more redundant employees to do
the same type of research?
Mr. Berner. Congressman, as I mentioned earlier, we have at
least two unique features that make us good partners for the
Federal Reserve, for the Treasury Department, and indeed for
the FSOC.
Our purpose, as I mentioned earlier, is to serve the FSOC's
needs. Those are, first, that we have access to data that
others don't. If we can share them with others in the course of
their work, we do that. But certainly we share the work and
results that we do.
And second, we look uniquely across the financial system
where others cannot. Even the Fed, even others in the financial
regulatory community don't have that same broad authority that
we do, and so we work to fill the gaps that they might have
both in collecting data and in doing the analysis.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. So taking both of those points,
which I know you had made before, and I appreciate you
reiterating. The second one first is this really a nebulous
concept of looking at systemic risk, and I have heard witness
after witness after witness come in here and talk about how
difficult it is to both measure and understand systemic risk.
And, look, I am just an old business guy, and I feel like
we have, in this institution, redundancy, and now asking them
to try to look at and measure something that is really hard to
understand, nebulous, and maybe, in the end, isn't delivering
any further protection with regard to all of this research.
So I guess how do you measure the systemic risk, as you
look broadly across the economy, and what is it exactly that
you would measure the effectiveness by which you are looking
for that?
Are we just waiting for another crisis?
Mr. Berner. I am really glad you asked that question,
Congressman because I am an old business guy myself. Having
been in business for 30 years. But I actually don't like the
term ``systemic risk.'' I prefer to look at ``threats to
financial stability'' because that enables us to look at them
individually and collectively--both.
And that is our approach in the Office of Financial
Research. We look at vulnerabilities in the financial system.
We have identified them in our reports, including the latest
one, and we put them together to come up with an assessment of
overall risks. That is the purpose of the monitoring that we
do. That is the purpose of collecting the data that we do.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. So one of the old adages, ``fight
the last war,'' sometimes we fight the last war instead of the
next one.
We had these 300 economists at the Federal Reserve, all of
whom, presumably, were concerned about macroeconomic stability
and threats to financial stability, and now, I guess with an
extra 10 PhDs and an extra 12 PhDs, we should rest at night
knowing that 312 will do the job where 300 didn't do the job.
What is unique about your organization that enables them to
see something that no one has seen before, no economist quite
understands fully, and that we haven't at least seen the
results thereof to assure that what we think we are getting we
are getting, with those taxpayer dollars?
Mr. Berner. I wouldn't say that we have greater peripheral
vision than others, but I think we have the ability and the
authority to look in places that other people aren't looking.
When you look outside the banking system, you look in
nonbank financial institutions and how the financial system is
evolving. Think about innovation, which has enormous benefits
for the financial system and for the economy. But innovation
may also carry risks. So we need to understand what those risks
might be and consider them.
One of the things that we do in order to do that is to work
with not just our stakeholders in the Federal Government and in
the regulatory community, but we also engage with industry to
understand how they manage their risks and to see what they see
going on in the financial system.
Mr. Hollingsworth. I guess taxpayers back home are gravely
concerned about the level of redundancy that we have in the
Government, and even more concerned with the significant risk
and detriment of another financial crisis, that we are doubling
down on a strategy of we just need a few more people looking in
a few more places and certainly we will find the problem before
it becomes an enormous burden on taxpayers, and I worry about
reiterating that strategy.
And with that, I will yield back, Ms. Chairman.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would like to thank Mr. Berner for his testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
[Whereupon, at 11:23 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

December 7, 2017

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
