- FLOOD INSURANCE REFORM: A TAXPAYER'S PERSPECTIVE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FLOOD INSURANCE REFORM:
A TAXPAYER'S PERSPECTIVE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 7, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-21

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-176 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah                       DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 7, 2017.................................................     1
Appendix:
June 7, 2017.................................................    53

WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 7, 2017

Berni, Caitlin, Vice President, Policy and Communications,
Greater New Orleans, Inc.......................................     7
Ellis, Steve, Vice President, Taxpayers for Common Sense.........     5
Lehmann, R.J., Senior Fellow, R Street Institute.................    12
Saks, Joshua, Legislative Director, National Wildlife Federation.     9
Sternhell, Rebecca Kagan, Deputy Director and General Counsel,
New York City Federal Affairs Office...........................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Berni, Caitlin,..............................................    54
Ellis, Steve.................................................    62
Lehmann, R.J.................................................    73
Saks, Joshua.................................................    81
Sternhell, Rebecca Kagan.....................................    90

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Hensarling, Hon. Jeb:
Written statement of the National Association of Home
Builders...................................................    96
Written statement of the National Multifamily Housing Council
and the National Apartment Association.....................    98
Written statement of the Reinsurance Association of America..   102
Lynch, Hon. Stephen:
Written statement of the Consumer Federation of America......   104
Joint written statement of CIAB, IIABA, NAIFA and PIA........   107
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association...   110
Written statement of Mitchell J. Landrieu, Mayor, City of New
Orleans....................................................   111
Written statement of the National Association of REALTORS...   112

FLOOD INSURANCE REFORM:
A TAXPAYER'S PERSPECTIVE

----------

Wednesday, June 7, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:35 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jeb Hensarling
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Hensarling, Lucas, Posey,
Luetkemeyer, Huizenga, Duffy, Hultgren, Ross, Pittenger,
Wagner, Barr, Rothfus, Messer, Williams, Poliquin, Love, Hill,
Emmer, Zeldin, Trott, Loudermilk, Mooney, MacArthur, Davidson,
Kustoff, Tenney, Hollingsworth; Waters, Maloney, Velazquez,
Meeks, Capuano, Clay, Lynch, Scott, Green, Cleaver, Moore,
Perlmutter, Himes, Foster, Delaney, Sinema, Beatty, Heck,
Vargas, Gottheimer, Gonzalez, Crist, and Kihuen.
Chairman Hensarling. The Committee on Financial Services
will come to order.
The Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
committee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Flood Insurance Reform: A
Taxpayer's Perspective.''
The Chair now recognizes himself for 3 minutes for an
opening statement.
Today, we have 5 million households who are part of the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). Clearly, these people
need some level of security, continuity, and predictability for
their homes. They also deserve some fairness with respect to
rates in the face of mapping issues and numerous cross-
subsidies, because unfortunately today, many moderate- and low-
income individuals actually subsidize others.
But there is another group that deserves fairness as well,
and that is the 110 million households who are not part of the
National Flood Insurance Program, who subsidize the program.
Ninety-six percent of Americans are currently subsidizing 4
percent. We know this is a program that is nearly $25 billion
underwater and runs an actuarial annual deficit of $1.4
billion. It is unsustainable.
The 96 percent of Americans have their dreams, they have
their hopes, and they struggle to continue to bail out and
subsidize a program that unfortunately is unsustainable.
Before me and to my left and right is the national debt
clock. It continues to spin out of control. I know some view
this as some kind of partisan ploy. It is not. Perhaps others
have grown accustomed to it, perhaps they are even anesthetized
by it. But instead, it is something that should frighten us and
it is something that should anger us. It is not something we
can tax our way out of. As Lady Thatcher once said, sooner or
later you run out of rich people.
I, for one, cannot look my children in the eyes and be
complicit or complacent in the national debt that threatens
their future. It is not fair. We must act. It is both an
economic and moral imperative. Now is the time, as the NFIP is
up for reauthorization.
There are a number of items that we must discuss and
reform. One is mitigation. Mitigation can often be cost-
effective. It is a classic case where an ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure. And I would ask that all fiscal
conservatives be open to such.
Another is premiums: 31 cents of every premium dollar goes
to marketing and servicing of policies; this deserves
attention. And only 46 cents is available to pay claims; this
also deserves attention.
Risk transfer requirements are necessary as are catastrophe
bonds. We have challenges in multiple lost properties where
roughly 2 percent of all properties account for almost 25
percent of claims. And it begs the question, how many times
should taxpayers be called upon to rebuild the same property?
But most importantly, gradually, over time, we must
transition all to actuarial sound rates, otherwise we are
helping put more people in harm's way.
Equally important to both taxpayers and ratepayers is
opening up the program to private market competition.
Notwithstanding Congressional intent, the Federal Government
has an effective monopoly. We lose out on competition, we lose
out on innovation which is a consumer's best friend.
I want to thank the many Members who have worked on this
bill on a bipartisan basis. I want to especially thank Chairman
Duffy for his leadership, Chairman Luetkemeyer before him, and
the gentlelady from New York, Ms. Velazquez, on the other side
of the aisle. This is a problem that is not going away and
there is a better, smarter way to handle flood insurance.
I now recognize the ranking member for 3 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to all of our witnesses.
We are here to discuss draft legislation to reauthorize the
National Flood Insurance Program. This hearing is critically
important. The NFIP is set to expire in a matter of months and
we simply cannot allow the program to lapse.
For years prior to the passage of Biggert-Waters, Congress
had been extending the NFIP for just months at a time. Twice,
this led to shutdowns, including one that stalled more than
40,000 home sales in 1 month alone. These short-term extensions
place communities at risk and undermine our housing market.
That is why, Mr. Chairman, we cannot let politics get in
the way of the work of legislating to keep flood insurance
available and affordable. While there are certainly some
provisions in the draft package of legislation before us today
that seem to be reflective of the ideas that I and many of the
Democrats and Republicans that I have worked with on this
program share, it absolutely falls short in many respects.
Our requests are simple: provide a long-term
reauthorization to ensure stability and confidence in the
market; address the debt and the billions of dollars it costs
policyholders already struggling with unaffordable premiums;
provide robust affordability assistance to those who may
literally lose their homes if we do not act; put guardrails in
place to ensure that the development of a private market does
not threaten the affordability and availability of coverage;
invest heavily in mapping and mitigation, which we know saves
more money than it costs; and put policyholders first by
bringing transparency, accountability, and oversight to the
various entities that participate in the program.
Mr. Chairman, I truly believe that this reauthorization can
be bipartisan, but I am concerned that if you do not heed my
call to work together on the details of this package, it will
cause irreparable harm to the millions of Americans who rely on
the NFIP to protect their homes and businesses.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Duffy, chairman of our Housing and Insurance Subcommittee, for
2 minutes.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to thank you
for holding this important hearing.
And I thank our witnesses for being here today. I am
looking forward to your testimony and also hearing where
everyone stands in this committee.
And to the ranking member, I appreciate her comments. But I
think a lot of her concerns are addressed in this bill and I
look forward to continuing to work with her and other Democrats
on an important issue that is nonpartisan. This is an issue
that affects a lot of families in a lot of places across our
country, some of them in wealthy areas, but many people who
come from very impoverished areas rely on flood insurance to
make sure they can keep their homes.
But this is the third hearing we are having on this issue.
We have had two on the Housing and Insurance Subcommittee. One
was a hearing with FEMA and the other was a hearing with
stakeholders in communities that rely on flood insurance.
As the chairman mentioned, I think there are a few key
parts of this discussion draft. One is on mapping. We
continuously hear complaints about the mapping process and how
people are mapped and how unfair it is. Chairman Luetkemeyer
did a lot of work on this and I think we are striking the right
balance on reforms to make sure mapping is done correctly.
Another area of concern is Hurricane Sandy and the Sandy
claims process. Those in the Northeast have been very
aggressive and focused on making sure there are lessons that
were learned from Sandy and we take those lessons learned into
reforms into this package. And I think it has been a unique
coalition of Republicans and Democrats working together to make
sure that we had those reforms contained in this bill.
We have a great component for mitigation, helping families
mitigate their homes with about a billion dollars over a 5-year
period of time of this bill.
One of the key components is Mr. Ross's provision, which is
that our private markets: one, can lower the exposure of the
American taxpayer; and two, will offer better rates to
homeowners who can't get a market-based rate from the NFIP.
I have a lot more to say, but my time has expired and I
yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now yields 2 minutes to the gentleman from
Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, ranking member of our Housing and
Insurance Subcommittee.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Waters.
Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to speak
today to our full committee.
I have been able to work over the past weeks with Chairman
Duffy who has released six draft proposals designed to
reauthorize the National Flood Insurance Program. And I think
there are a number of things in there that many of us will
happily embrace.
And there are some things that I think will require some
significant debate. It is not in our best interest, for
example, to continue to pile debt upon debt with the $24
billion we already owe as a result of this program. And so I
think there should be a way for us to get that debt out of the
way, have it forgiven and start over in a new program. And for
us to do that, it would also be helpful if we could have the
reauthorization extended for a 10-year period.
If we do that, we will allow for the real estate industry
and, frankly, FEMA to have some time of stability. And I think
if we are really interested in getting the private sector to
become more involved, the opportunity for the expansion also, I
think, is a magnet for greater participation as we move into
the next few years with the private sector.
I have had a number of private conversations with Mr.
Duffy. I have had meetings and roundtables with those in the
private sector. I think everybody agrees that we need to do
this. I look forward to the hearing today and hopefully some
increased flexibility on some of the other issues that I have
mentioned.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
We now welcome the testimony of our panel, whom I will
introduce as a group. First, Mr. Steve Ellis is the vice
president of Taxpayers for Common Sense. Mr. Ellis joined
Taxpayers for Common Sense in 1999. Prior to that, he served as
an officer in the United States Coast Guard for 6 years.
Second, Ms. Caitlin Berni is the vice president for policy
and communications at Greater New Orleans, Inc. Welcome.
Greater New Orleans, Inc., is a regional economic development
alliance serving the 10-parish region of southeast Louisiana.
Ms. Berni is responsible for directing the organization's
policy work at the Federal and State level and serves as the
primary liaison with Congressional, State, and local elected
officials.
Third, Mr. Josh Saks is the legislative director of the
National Wildlife Federation. He coordinates outreach on clean
water and wetlands issues, energy policy, Federal
appropriations for wildlife conservation, and protection of
public lands in Alaska and the Rocky Mountain West.
Fourth, Ms. Rebecca Kagan Sternhell is the deputy director
and general counsel at the New York City Federal Affairs
Office. Ms. Sternhell was most recently a deputy assistant
administrator at the U.S. Small Business Administration.
Finally, Mr. R.J. Lehmann is a senior fellow, editor-in-
chief, and co-founder of the R Street Institute. He is the
author of the 2012, 2015 editions of R Street's Insurance
Regulation Report Card and numerous other R Street policy
papers. Before joining R Street, he served as deputy director
of the Heartland Institute's Center on Finance, Insurance, and
Real Estate.
Welcome, to each and every one of you. Thank you for
agreeing to testify.
I know some of you have testified before us before, so you
know the drill. For those who do not, you will be yielded 5
minutes for an opening statement, and without objection, each
of your written statements will be made a part of the record.
At this time, Mr. Ellis, you are recognized for 5 minutes
for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEVE ELLIS, VICE PRESIDENT, TAXPAYERS FOR COMMON
SENSE

Mr. Ellis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Chairman
Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the
committee.
I am Steve Ellis, vice president of Taxpayers for Common
Sense (TCS), a national, nonpartisan budget watchdog. Thank you
for inviting me to testify on the upcoming reauthorization of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
Taxpayers for Common Sense is allied with SmarterSafer, a
coalition in favor of promoting public safety through fiscally
sound, environmentally responsible approaches to natural
catastrophe policy. The groups range from free market and
taxpayer groups to consumer and housing advocates to
environmental and insurance industry interests.
Mr. Saks's and Mr. Lehmann's organizations, the National
Wildlife Federation and the R Street Institute, are also
members of SmarterSafer.
This brings me to the first of two issues I was asked to
address, whether the NFIP represents an ideal model for the
effective protection of residential and commercial property
owners from the damages related to flooding. The quick and
obvious answer is no, the NFIP is far from ideal. The program
was created in 1968 to reduce ad hoc disaster payments and to
deal with the perceived lack of available and affordable flood
insurance.
Nearly half-a-century on, it is nearly $25 billion in debt
to taxpayers and there have been enormous technological
innovations that enable insurers to accurately price risk and
provide products and coverages unavailable through the NFIP.
Today, the industry is clamoring to write flood and remove some
of the risks from taxpayers, like they do elsewhere in the
world.
Though the NFIP provides critical insurance coverage to
those at risk, the program must be significantly reformed to
ensure that it is financially sustainable, provides sufficient
incentives for reducing future flood damages and
vulnerabilities, better protects taxpayers who have repeatedly
backstopped the program, and better protects the environment
and promotes nature-based mitigation solutions for the long-
term benefit of homeowners and taxpayers.
We applaud the committee for putting legislative pen to
paper and releasing their proposals. While we would like to see
some changes and improvements, the legislative drafts provide a
great start to the process.
TCS believes that the rates in the program must over time
be linked to risk while understanding that there may be some in
the program who will need assistance in order to pay higher
rates or reduce their risk. Currently, subsidies are
effectively hidden from the homeowner, which eliminates any
price signal of risk or incentive to mitigate to reduce the
risk, thereby the premium.
To that end, we are pleased that the committee proposal
includes provisions to make premium methodology more clear to
the policyholder as well as an explanation of their full flood
risk and increased public access to historic loss and flood
claims information.
We are opposed to the artificial rate cap in the
legislative proposal. A better approach is to target any
premium assistance to those who need it and to encourage and
target mitigation measures that could serve to reduce rates by
reducing risk.
We are pleased to see that H.R. 1422, the Flood Insurance
Market Parity and Modernization Act, was incorporated into the
legislative proposals. H.R. 1422 would ensure that the private
sector flood insurance counts for the purposes of the mandatory
purchase requirements.
The private sector is now writing first-dollar flood
insurance, even in the highest-risk areas. There are 20
companies writing private flood insurance in Florida, home to
nearly 40 percent of the NFIP policies. A majority of these are
writing flood coverage in the highest-risk areas. TCS believes
that the mapping fee on NFIP and private policies in the
legislative proposal should be transparent to the policyholders
as to its providence and use.
On mapping, we support the legislative proposal for greater
public involvement, use of risk assessment tools in determining
rates, and directing FEMA to work with the Technical Mapping
Advisory Council to improve the mapping process.
Going further, FEMA should be required to move to a system
of more granular property-level mapping, as has been done by
States like North Carolina.
TCS is pleased to see the committee included provisions to
require an annual independent actuarial review of of the NFIP
as well as provisions to increase the use of risk transfer
tools. The greater information requirements as well as the
gradual removal of subsidies and shift toward risk-based rates
for multiple-loss properties makes sense.
I recognize the value of targeting mitigation assistance to
these properties, but it should be means-tested. If a homeowner
can afford to mitigate, they should not be subsidized to do so.
TCS also supports provisions that prospectively restrict
access to NFIP for properties with extreme loss profiles and to
not make available Federal flood insurance to high-risk
properties that are added to the special flood hazard area as
well as high-value properties when private coverage is
available and relatively affordable.
Again, TCS congratulates the committee on providing a
responsible, thoughtful legislative start to NFIP
reauthorization. While I noted some differences, we are ready
to work with the committee to make reforms to the NFIP to
ensure the program is sustainable in the long term.
The second issue I was asked to address is the cause of
NFIP's $1.4 billion annual premium shortfall and what reforms
are necessary to ensure the program collects sufficient revenue
to pay claims. My testimony ought to address that topic
throughout.
With better property-level mapping, a focus on mitigation
and risk reduction, and a move to risk-based rates with
targeted subsidies and private sector competition, we believe
the NFIP will be strengthened and more people will be able to
purchase needed flood coverage.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. I am happy to answer
any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellis can be found on page
62 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Ms. Berni, you are now recognized for
5 minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF CAITLIN BERNI, VICE PRESIDENT, POLICY AND
COMMUNICATIONS, GREATER NEW ORLEANS, INC.

Ms. Berni. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Chairman
Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and members of the
committee. I am honored to speak to you today about the package
of bills proposed to reauthorize the National Flood Insurance
Program.
My name is Caitlin Berni and I am the vice president of
policy and communications at Greater New Orleans, Inc. (GNO),
the economic development organization for southeast Louisiana.
Since April 2013, GNO, Inc. has led the Coalition for
Sustainable Flood Insurance, a national alliance of
approximately 250 organizations across 35 States, formed during
Biggert-Waters implementation.
Our coalition was a driving force behind the passage of the
Homeowner Flood Insurance Affordability Act, compromise
legislation that was cosponsored by more than 235 members of
this body, passed with 306 votes, representing the overwhelming
support of both caucuses, and passed the Senate with the
support of 72 Senators.
Since the passage of the 2014 law, our coalition has
focused on advocating for a stronger policy framework for the
NFIP. There are four primary policy areas that will provide for
this stronger framework: mitigation; mapping; affordability;
and program participation.
Let me start by recognizing that there is no simple answer
to the complex challenge of maintaining premium affordability,
keeping the NFIP on sound financial footing, ensuring taxpayer
protections, and accurately communicating risk. And this is not
just about our coastal cities. Flood, and therefore flood
insurance, matters for the entire country. Flooding is the most
common natural disaster in the United States, affecting
communities in each of the 50 States and territories.
That said, our coalition is concerned that the committee's
approach on several provisions may result in some of the same
unintended consequences primarily around affordability and
sustainability that arose during the implementation of the
Biggert-Waters Act.
Our coalition is concerned that increasing the floor of
rate increases from 5 percent to 8 percent will have a
detrimental effect on premium affordability. While the bill
does propose to lower the overall premium cap from 18 percent
to 15 percent, increasing the floor will negatively impact many
more policyholders than lowering the ceiling will help,
especially when considering that premiums are increasing an
average of 6.3 percent this year.
The rate structure and affordability provisions included in
the 2014 law will eventually result in higher flood insurance
premiums for all rate classifications already and increasing
rates will likely result in affordability challenges during the
midst of this next reauthorization period. We urge Congress not
to increase rates or surcharges in this reauthorization.
Another critical tool to preserving affordability is to
maintain grandfathering so that those property owners who did
everything as they were told by building to code will not be
faced with rate shocks when their communities adopt new maps.
Accurately communicating and assessing risk is a top priority
for our coalition.
We support the committee's proposals to improve mapping,
including using better technology in map development and
streamlining the mapping and appeals process. However, the
current map process often results in communities having to
fight inaccurate maps that do not take into account locally
built flood protection features, which results in artificially
inflated risk. We must question whether we can truly determine
actuarial rates if they are based on flawed mapping.
Ultimately, mitigation is the real answer to preventing
flood losses and reducing taxpayer exposure to flooding. We are
concerned that the committee's approach does not provide
communities with the tools needed to effectively implement
mitigation plans and will not accomplish reducing flood losses
or taxpayer exposure. Congress should instead consider
redirecting the surcharges in the 2014 law to better funding a
disaster mitigation and the flood mitigation programs. This
proposal will yield approximately $400 million annually for
flood mitigation activities.
However, our coalition does support several provisions in
this package, including improving map development,
strengthening the CRS program and modernizing ICC coverage. But
given the past record of broad bipartisan support for
affordable, sustainable flood insurance, we urge Congress to
pass a multi-year reauthorization by September 30th that
ensures affordability, improves mapping, increases support for
mitigation activities, and increases flood insurance coverage
across America.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today
and for your service. I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Berni can be found on page
54 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Mr. Saks, you are now recognized for 5
minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JOSHUA SAKS, LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
WILDLIFE FEDERATION

Mr. Saks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Hensarling,
Ranking Member Waters, and members of the committee, I am
Joshua Saks and I serve as the legislative director for the
National Wildlife Federation (NWF), the Nation's largest
member-based conservation group representing 6 million members
and supporters and affiliate organizations in 51 States and
territories.
NWF is also a member of SmarterSafer, as was mentioned
before.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today regarding the
committee's proposal to reform and reauthorize the National
Flood Insurance Program. But first, allow me to say a few words
about NWF's interest in flood insurance.
Floodplains, the flood-prone bottom lands that cradle
rivers, streams, and oceans are where the land and the waters
meet. Naturally functioning floodplains provide vital habitat
for countless wildlife species as well as a number of other
ecological benefits. As such, healthy floodplains are key to
NWF's mission of protecting and preserving America's wildlife.
But for today's purposes and more broadly speaking, healthy
natural floodplains provide the best flood protection money can
buy. Yet, while the NFIP was created with the intention of
slowing or preventing new flood-prone coastal and river
development, the current floodplain management system in the
U.S. is not working. Instead of reducing floodplain
development, flood-prone coastal population growth and
development in the U.S. has skyrocketed since the program's
creation.
The coastal area that covers 17 percent of the Nation's
land area is now home to half of its population. NFIP has
contributed to this problem by encouraging development in
flood-prone areas by charging subsidized rates and masking
flood risk. In addition, the subsidized rates have failed to
send market signals to encourage mitigation.
To address this, NWF encourages the NFIP to charge risk-
based rates and encourage mitigation. For these reasons, NWF
supports proposed efforts by the committee to ensure rates
continue to move towards risk-based while providing some
measures to keep flood insurance affordable.
NWF is comfortable with the limitation on rate increases
included in the committee's draft bills. We believe that this
allows FEMA the flexibility to continue to move towards risk-
based market signals while limiting the potential impact on
short-term increases.
NWF also applauds the committee for allowing States the
ability to create flood insurance affordability programs, the
first time Congress has addressed affordability outside of the
rate structure. We recommend the inclusion of additional
provisions that would provide means-tested assistance to low-
income homeowners with a preference toward mitigation
assistance rather than premium support.
While NWF supports the committee's proposals to keep flood
insurance premiums affordable, we believe the best way to keep
rates low and to protect people and property is through
proactive mitigation. In other words, we need to reduce
people's rates by reducing their risk, not by subsidizing risk.
A considerable amount of data shows this would be the most
cost-effective way. Several analyses have shown a $2 to $6
return on every dollar spent on flood mitigation. But not all
mitigation is created equal. Community-wide, nature-based
mitigation should be used whenever possible. These are
practices that protect, restore or, in some cases, even create
natural features that reduce erosion and flooding.
NWF urges the committee to consider any and all ways to
drive immediate investment in this kind of mitigation. We
applaud the increase to ICC compliance coverage to help cover
the cost of mitigation measures that would reduce flood risk,
but loans are not enough to upgrade America's resilience to
flooding. America needs immediate investment in coastal and
river resilience and we encourage the committee to consider any
and all ways to increase pre-disaster mitigation spending,
including empowering FEMA to analyze whether it is most cost-
effective to provide premium support or upfront mitigation
dollars.
We also encourage the committee to consider spending a
portion of the NFIP reserve fund dollars on up-front pre-
disaster mitigation.
NWF applauds the risk reduction planning provisions of the
proposal, a key step in protecting communities. We believe that
it is essential to target flood-prone hot spots to create
detailed plans to reduce flood risk and to implement them.
We support the Royce-Blumenauer proposal to create
mitigation plans for communities with multiple, severe,
repetitive loss properties, and request that the committee find
a way to ensure that the plans include community-wide, nature-
based mitigation.
We also believe that the proposal to create a pilot program
for buyouts of severe, repetitive loss properties for low-
income homeowners would ultimately provide the best type of
mitigation, that which avoids loss of life and property by
restoring lowlands to healthy, naturally functioning
floodplains.
Americans cannot wait until the next storm for long-term
planning to take hold and we encourage the committee to find
ways to invest immediately in community-wide mitigation.
Finally, NWF believes that the discussion draft before us
today represents true progress towards reforming the NFIP. We
thank the committee for its work and I am happy to answer any
questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Saks can be found on page 81
of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Ms. Sternhell, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes for your testimony.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA KAGAN STERNHELL, DEPUTY DIRECTOR AND
GENERAL COUNSEL, NEW YORK CITY FEDERAL AFFAIRS OFFICE

Ms. Sternhell. Thank you, Chairman Hensarling, Ranking
Member Waters, and the New York delegation Members--Mrs.
Maloney, Ms. Velazquez, Mr. Meeks, Mr. King, Mr. Zeldin, and
Ms. Tenney--for the opportunity to testify here today.
I bring the perspective of New York City as it engages with
the NFIP. Many of the challenges the City faces, urban cores,
waterfront development, and riverine communities, are common
across communities nationwide. But New York has them on a
larger scale.
When Hurricane Sandy hit in 2012, the city was in the
process of remapping, as the City's flood maps had not been
updated in over 30 years. As the floodplain continues to grow
with more extreme weather events, the NFIP will continue to
play a critical role for our property owners. It is our
position that the NFIP must be preserved.
As we talk about the program today, I hope to emphasize
that at the end of the day we are talking about real people,
real taxpayers and their homes where they raise children and
seek refuge. The property is almost always most homeowners'
largest tangible asset and nest egg. Too often as this
discussion proceeds, we can lose sight of this point. It is
easy to glibly say people need to move or too bad, it is quite
another to talk face-to-face with a constituent who must leave
the home that has been in their family for generations, or to
let them know that their property has little to no value
because of insurance costs and policy made many miles away in
Washington, D.C.
The remainder of my testimony will focus on the chief
concerns of our residents and the legislation being discussed
today. The issue of greatest concern is affordability. A few
months ago, the City was pleased to share with this committee
and other stakeholders a RAND report commissioned to look at
what affordability meant and model out options to remedy the
issue.
There are three major findings I wish to highlight here:
grandfathering of properties is one of the most effective
affordability tools available; targeted, means-tested vouchers
or credits are the most cost-effective tools available; and
mitigation is cost-effective with greater premium reductions
and grants in support of it. Given this, we are concerned about
the proposal in the integrity bill that ostensibly eliminates
grandfathering after 2021.
The affordability issue also looms large in the proposed
integrity bill that would in many ways disallow any new coastal
or riverine development and at the same time foreclose the NFIP
as an option to many residents.
Section eight would not allow NFIP coverage for new
construction in the SFHA. In order to be eligible for NFIP plus
the mandated 10 percent surcharge, the State would need to
certify that insufficient private coverage is available. This
must be done year-over-year adding bureaucracy and complication
to the NFIP.
Most troubling to residents is the resultant uncertainty as
to whether their coverage will be dropped by the NFIP from one
year to the next. What if no coverage is available that they
can afford? More importantly, what happens with maintaining
continuous coverage or if no private insurer will insure a
given property?
The situation becomes nightmarish for taxpayers and has the
potential to leave many in a doughnut hole of no coverage. I
would strongly urge the committee to revisit, if not eliminate,
this provision and instead find a way to work within the
mitigation bill.
Hundreds of communities would face the threat of being
kicked out of the NFIP because of a small number of properties
with repeat claims. According to an analysis of FEMA data, 33
of the members of this committee, spread equally across party
lines, would have at least one community in their district
potentially kicked out of the NFIP or sanctioned under this
provision. These numbers grow far worse with the proposed
change to the definition of multiple-loss property and severe,
repetitive loss in the integrity bill that would qualify even
more communities for sanctions.
Another area of concern is the elimination of the non-
compete clause for write-your-own companies. Past witnesses
representing the insurance industry in Congressional hearings
have admitted to cherry-picking the policies which will leave
the NFIP with only the riskiest properties, thus undermining
its solvency.
Rather than a dualistic approach, sharing all or sharing
nothing, the City would like to offer a third way: eliminating
the non-compete for a subset of properties, the A through D
properties, for example. They can be a proving ground to
validate or dispel fears about cherry-picking FEMA's book. The
committee could set a timeframe for this and a review, ensuring
the review is conducted by a non-stakeholder third party,
invest the administrator with the authority to reinstall or
remove more non-competes. This need not be an all-or-nothing
proposition.
Lastly, after the experience with the Sandy claims process
and fraud, we wholeheartedly endorse the revisions to the
claims process. We would also offer that a provision be
included such that none of the rights to appeal, litigate, or
review documents can be waived in court.
I thank the committee again for their time and attention
today and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sternhell can be found on
page 90 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Mr. Lehmann, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes for your statement.

STATEMENT OF R.J. LEHMANN, SENIOR FELLOW, R STREET INSTITUTE

Mr. Lehmann. Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters,
and members of the committee, my name is R.J. Lehmann. I am
senior fellow, editor-in-chief, and co-founder of the R Street
Institute. R Street is a think tank based here in D.C. that
seeks to promote free markets and limited effective government.
Our insurance project highlights the crucial role that
competitive private insurance markets play in helping society
evaluate, mitigate, and manage risk. Unfortunately, despite
reforms passed by this committee and ultimately signed by
President Obama in 2012, NFIP premiums still do not reflect the
full risk of loss. The program is not sustainable in its
current form, as evidenced by its $25 billion debt.
To prepare for shifting risks, to ensure that markets
function properly and to protect taxpayers from the exploding
costs of disaster assistance, we believe it is essential that
we begin to transition to a private, risk-based insurance
market for floods.
Shifting flood insurance to the private sector will mean
bringing powerful catastrophe models to bear, to more
accurately segment and price property-level risks. It will mean
having companies compete to fashion products that are more
attractive to policyholders and that better meet their needs.
Progress has already been made in the area of reinsurance.
The NFIP historically relied on the Treasury whenever its
losses exceeded its resources. But earlier this year, FEMA
executed its first private reinsurance transaction and we are
pleased to see that the legislation would incorporate
Representative Luetkemeyer's proposal to require FEMA to use
reinsurance to lower taxpayers' direct exposure to catastrophic
loss.
The legislation also makes changes to better capitalize the
NFIP's reserve fund which can be used to buy reinsurance. We
support those changes, but we think reserve fund charges should
be based on the risks posed by each individual property. The
current assessments, which are based on a flat percentage of
total premium, actually serve to magnify inequities between
properties that pay subsidized rates and those that pay full
risk rates.
When it comes to primary flood insurance, the private
market currently is only about 12 percent of the size of the
NFIP, but it is growing, and this legislation would address
several concerns that have so far hindered its growth. It would
remove the restriction that prohibited write-your-own insurers
from selling standalone coverage outside the NFIP. We are
pleased also that it incorporates the Ross-Castor bill to
clarify that private coverage can be used to meet the mandatory
purchase requirements.
One area where we think it does fall a little short is in
granting NFIP claims data access. ZIP Code and Census bloc-
level data isn't sufficient for insurance underwriting.
Property-level data is essential. We understand that there are
privacy concerns, but we think that those can be resolved
through nondisclosure agreements.
There has been the concern raised that a more active
private market would destabilize the NFIP by allowing insurers
to cherry-pick low-risk policies until it was left a high-risk
pool. But the program already serves as a high-risk pool. Only
a relatively small number of homeowners buy flood insurance.
Compare that with the United Kingdom where flood insurance is
sold privately, 95 percent of homeowners have flood insurance
coverage. The vast majority of existing NFIP policyholders
reside in 100-year floodplains. That is a high-risk cohort.
There are, by and large, no cherries to pick.
Reducing the size of the program reduces its overall
exposure and the potential burden it can place on taxpayers.
The single-biggest impediment to a larger private market
remains the fact that the program does not completely charge
risk-based rates, both subsidized policies and grandfathered
policies. We support moving to risk-based rates for all NFIP
policies over time with an understanding that lower-income
policyholders may need assistance. Such assistance should be
targeted, limited, means-tested, and executed outside of the
rate structure of the NFIP. And we support the draft
legislation's proposal to authorize States to begin crafting
affordability programs.
We oppose the legislation's proposal to decrease the cap on
annual rate increases. And we strongly oppose the $10,000 hard
cap. While we understand that this will affect very few
properties, the concern is, once it is introduced as a
statutory mechanism, it could be lowered by a future Congress
or even potentially by an Executive Order. And in addition, any
premium relief, we believe, has to be conditioned on some form
of disaster mitigation.
So in closing, I would like to reiterate our support for
the broad contours of the proposed legislation. Making the
transition to private flood insurance or at least more private
flood insurance is complicated, but not nearly as complicated
as continually rebuilding flood-prone communities.
And I would be glad to answer any questions the members
might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lehmann can be found on page
73 of the appendix.]
Chairman Hensarling. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes for
questioning.
So, Mr. Ellis, it appears we have had testimony before that
bringing in private market competition, which apparently some
oppose, can have the effect of actually lowering rates. I
believe it was last year we heard from the Pennsylvania
insurance commissioner, Ms. Miller, who cited several different
cases where one Pennsylvanian was charged a $7,500 annual
premium under NFIP, but found private coverage for $1,415.
Another homeowner was quoted a $6,000 annual premium by NFIP,
but found a surplus line for only $900. She went on to cite
several other examples, yet we have a very small private
market. So why do we have such a small private market?
And I think also in previous testimony, you addressed the
situation in Florida. Could you elaborate on capacity and the
ability of the private market to help drive rates down?
Mr. Ellis. Sure. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. The
simple fact is, the only reason why someone would leave the
NFIP to go to a private policy is if they got a better rate or
they got a better product or both. And so we are just giving
consumers choice. And certainly, that would be a way to drive
down rates. Also, they could bundle that coverage. There is a
company in Wisconsin that is doing that, that makes it part of
the overall homeowner's insurance. Certainly, that was what Mr.
Lehmann was referring to in the U.K.
And then in Florida, what we saw with their citizens
program was that actually when they did a take out of insurance
policies from their wind pool there that actually the insurance
companies took out policies from all across the different risk
spectrum. It wasn't simply just lower-risk properties.
Chairman Hensarling. If I could interrupt, another witness
mentioned the threat of cherry-picking. So are you saying that
the empirical evidence in Florida is otherwise?
Mr. Ellis. Correct. It was a study done by the Reinsurance
Association of America that showed that, no, they want to--
because one is, is that is where you are going to be able to
make more money, quite frankly, is the higher risk and that is
what insurance companies are in the business of doing. But then
also it is that they need to diversify their portfolio and
there are a lot of different reasons why an insurance company
would want to necessarily have higher risk and then could lay
off that risk in other parts of the world through reinsurance.
It is a simplistic view to just think about it as cherry-
picking. It is not really the way the business would approach
it.
Chairman Hensarling. Mr. Saks, I don't want to put words in
your mouth, but I thought I heard you say that we need
affordability through mitigation instead of subsidies. Is that
the essence of what you stated?
Mr. Saks. Yes, sir.
Chairman Hensarling. So could you expound a little bit on
your organization's preferred method of mitigation and why that
is preferable to subsidy?
Mr. Saks. We believe that whenever a community can take
steps to mitigate on the community-wide level, whether it is
through natural features, which is best, or through levees or
seawalls or other things like that, you are going to do the
most to keep people's rates low. And we prefer that because at
times it will provide the actions we like as opposed to
continuing to provide subsidies.
Chairman Hensarling. This is one you endorse? Did I
understand you to endorse the Royce-Blumenauer bill as part of
your testimony?
Mr. Saks. That is correct.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay. So this would be the essence of
what you are trying to achieve?
Mr. Saks. The Royce-Blumenauer bill will push communities
to take a long-term view of planning how to mitigate flood
risk. And we support that notion.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay.
Ms. Berni, Ms. Sternhell, if I heard your testimony
correctly, you do not advocate premium increases for current
NFIP holders, is that correct?
Ms. Berni. Yes, sir, Mr. Chairman. We would advocate that
the committee leave the current rate structure.
Chairman Hensarling. And I understand. So you would like
the current rate structure left as is. We have correspondence
from CBO saying the program is running at a $1.5 billion
actuarial shortfall a year. So it has an actuarial need for $5
billion, but it is only bringing in $3.6 billion. We have
similar information from GAO and FEMA. So are you advocating,
Ms. Berni, as I understand it, that this should be a continued
subsidy, that it is the taxpayer who should make up this
shortfall? Is that correct?
Ms. Berni. No, sir. I think we would argue that, as I
mentioned in my verbal testimony, flooding does affect every
State across the Nation and so this is a program that does
benefit citizens.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay, but who is supposed to make up
the shortfall? If it is not ratepayers, then it is taxpayers.
Who else is there? Am I missing somebody?
Ms. Berni. We have some premium information from 2004 to
2016 that shows the NFIP, with the exception of Hurricanes
Katrina and Sandy and the 2016 losses, that the program
ultimately does break even with the exception of a few
catastrophic loss years.
Chairman Hensarling. I have to tell you, that is not what
CBO has said, it is not what GAO has said, and it is not what
FEMA has said. And if I have the data correct, 3 of the 6
costliest flood events have happened in the last 6 years.
Mr. Saks, does your organization see flooding events
becoming less severe or more severe with the passage of time?
Mr. Saks. Mr. Chairman, flood events are happening more
often and they are more severe.
Chairman Hensarling. Okay, thank you.
I am out of time.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I really
wish I had time to deal with two of the issues that have been
identified by our witnesses. The private insurers, for example,
I recall they left the market following Katrina and I guess
every disaster. But I remember Katrina very vividly because I
was in Mississippi and New Orleans and the private market
abandoned those communities. So I don't have time to get into
it.
But on this mitigation, I believe in mitigation, too.
However, there is not a dollar in the chairman's bill for
mitigation. So where is it going to come from?
Let me go on with some of the other things I want to deal
with. I hope some of the other Members will take up these
issues of private insurers and mitigation.
The Republican bill attempts to respond to affordability
challenges in the NFIP, but I am concerned that on the whole,
the proposal does not meaningfully address affordability, and
in some cases may actually make matters worse.
On the whole, are you concerned that policyholders may
actually be worse off with the increased costs called for in
this bill? What should we do instead to keep premiums
affordable? And this question is for Ms. Sternhell.
Ms. Sternhell. Yes. We are concerned about affordability.
And certainly raising the floor plus the 1 percent of reserve
fund, which effectively is a 50 percent increase, so rates
would have to go up 9 percent annually, basically, where they
are currently escalating year-over-year at about 6 percent,
does nothing to help the affordability situation.
And in addition, we have long advocated, especially with
the RAND report, to have an affordability program that utilizes
means-tested vouchers or credits. The program proposed here in
the legislation actually imposes additional surcharges to pay
for that, so you are sort of taking with one hand and giving
with another. So that, while well-intentioned, and we would
gladly work with the committee to develop something else, isn't
really going to get us as far as we need to towards the
affordability.
Ms. Waters. Well, you alluded to it. Adding all of the
various premium increases, surcharges increases, reserve fund
assessment, increases in calls for increased cross-
subsidization, you are saying that it seems that the
policyholder is going to be paying much more in flood insurance
under this bill.
Can you talk a little bit about what that will mean? I was
one of the authors of the Biggert-Waters insurance program
which had all of the unintended consequences that I worked very
hard to undo because we saw the premiums rise substantially.
And some folks had premiums that matched their mortgage and
they wouldn't be able to afford those kinds of premium costs.
Could you share with us the other kinds of problems that these
increases would cause the average homeowner?
Ms. Sternhell. Certainly. And one of the ones we are
already starting to see is distortion in real estate markets
where people maybe want to get out of the floodplain and want
to move, but nobody wants to buy that home because of the
property value and because of the insurance costs affiliated
with that property. So that affects not only that individual
homeowner, but also you start to have community-wide level
effects; I think it is down in Virginia where you are seeing
this, where there are recurring floods and people would like to
get out, but there is not an effective mechanism to do it or
one where they can financially afford to even leave and start
over somewhere else.
Ms. Waters. I would like to just ask--I had not planned on
asking this question or talking about it, but I believe that we
absolutely should forgive all of this debt. And, of course, the
chairman adamantly disagrees with that.
Does anybody agree with me, have you taken a look at the
debt and the interest that we are paying on this debt? Do you
have any thoughts about it?
Mr. Ellis. Congresswoman Waters, we are opposed to
forgiving the debt at this time. We want to see more
significant reforms in the program and think that is an
important means to concentrate the mind on those reforms. If
sometime in the future, I think that it would be reasonable.
Ms. Waters. Before my time is up, give me one significant
reform that would reduce these premiums.
Mr. Ellis. I think it is about mitigation and about
reducing risk through--
Ms. Waters. There is no mitigation in the bill.
Mr. Ellis. --reducing rates through reducing risk.
Ms. Waters. How should it be done in the bill? How should
it be identified? Mitigation, what are you talking about?
Mr. Ellis. I am talking about what Mr. Saks referred to,
which is community-wide mitigation is a better tool than even,
like, individual homeowner mitigation.
Ms. Waters. What is community-wide mitigation?
Mr. Ellis. Pardon me?
Ms. Waters. What are you talking about with community-wide
mitigation? What are you talking about?
Mr. Ellis. I'm talking about restoring wetlands. I am
talking about removing structures, doing buyouts in certain
cases. That type of approach is going to be more beneficial to
the remaining homeowners than other ones.
Ms. Waters. So you think communities should get together
and come up with some money to pay for this kind of mitigation
that you are talking about?
Mr. Ellis. We do have pre-disaster mitigation programs. We
have programs through the Army Corps of Engineers.
Ms. Waters. No, not the Army Corps of Engineers.
Mr. Ellis. We are supportive of creating a loan program
with the FHA.
Ms. Waters. Okay, reclaiming my time.
Mr. Ellis. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Waters. You are alluding to the nonexistent. And so
until you can identify, and this chairman, where the money is
going to come from for mitigation, I don't think it is a
credible way by which to talk about reform.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Duffy, chairman of our Housing and Insurance Subcommittee.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wasn't going to go here either, but let us stick on the
$24.6 billion debt. If that $24.6 billion was forgiven, would
the program then be solvent next year, the year after, 5 years
from now? Or is the CBO correct in that we will run a billion-
plus-dollar deficit every year from this point forward?
Mr. Ellis. That is correct, Congressman. And actually, one
of the largest loss years in the program's history was just
last year where really the only storm that people really think
about is Hurricane Matthew and some other flooding events. And
so certainly, this program, while it does sort of teeter on the
brink of solvency, these larger events are going to drag it
down inevitably.
Mr. Duffy. So forgiving the debt doesn't make the program
solvent, it is going to continue to run deficits, even if the
debt was forgiven. Is that a fair enough point, Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, Congressman Duffy.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. I want to just quickly talk about
grandfathering, Ms. Berni.
And welcome, it's good to see you here.
Ms. Berni. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy. On grandfathered properties, is it only poor
people who own grandfathered homes, or are there poor people,
medium-wealth people and wealthy people who have properties
that are grandfathered?
Ms. Berni. So we would define grandfathering as any
property that was built to code at the time of construction.
Then when a new map is introduced in their community, that
property would be able to retain credit for building according
to code. And so that is what we want to program.
Mr. Duffy. Right. So it is not just poor people whose
properties have been grandfathered, it is wealthy people who
have also been grandfathered in as well, right?
Ms. Berni. Correct. It is people who did everything that
they were told to do from FEMA.
Mr. Duffy. That is the right answer. So it is rich people,
medium-wealth folks, and poor people who are grandfathered. And
who in the program subsidizes those wealthy people who are
grandfathered in the program? Isn't it all other ratepayers? So
don't you actually have poor people who are paying an
actuarially sound rate, those who aren't pre-FIRM or
grandfathered? Aren't they actually paying higher rates to
subsidize rich people who have been grandfathered?
Ms. Berni. So about the grandfathered properties--
Mr. Duffy. Yes or no?
Ms. Berni. --if you have built to base flood elevation and
you have built to that standard, then FEMA considers you as
mitigating the risk against having to pay a claim.
Mr. Duffy. But you could be making a million dollars a year
and you could have your home that is grandfathered in and you
are getting a subsidized rate that a poor person in Louisiana
who is paying a higher rate to subsidize that wealthy
individual. That is correct, isn't it? I am not wrong on that
point.
Ms. Berni. I would respectfully disagree. There was a
property that we often used as an example last time around--
Mr. Duffy. Does anyone else disagree with me on that point?
Mr. Ellis, am I right on that point?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, I agree with you, Congressman.
Mr. Duffy. We have poor people subsidizing rich people in
the current status of this program.
Mr. Ellis. And the Government Accountability Office has
documented massive cross-subsidies in the program, yes, sir.
Mr. Duffy. Mr. Saks, do you agree with that? Am I wrong?
Mr. Saks. No, you are not wrong.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you.
Mr. Lehmann?
Mr. Lehmann. That is correct. And in addition, we don't
actually, at this point, know how many grandfathered properties
there are. FEMA is still studying that issue and is not
expected to have a complete report until late next year.
Mr. Duffy. I find that to be outrageous, that we have a
program where poor people can actually subsidize rich people
who can afford to pay an actuarially sound rate.
Let us go to another point. In our bill--
Ms. Velazquez. It happens every day.
Mr. Duffy. What is that? I'm sorry, I missed that.
If we can look out to 4 years from now, 4 years from the
enactment of the bill, we are going to remove million-dollar
homes from the program if your State commissioner certifies
that a private market exists. Now, not multi-family units, we
are talking specifically replacement costs for an individual
home of a million dollars or more. Does anybody think that is a
bad policy, on the panel?
Ms. Sternhell. I do.
Mr. Duffy. Why is that?
Ms. Sternhell. Because setting that threshold doesn't
consider the costs of construction in a lot of different
regions. And the example I will give here is where you have
attached homes and the engineering itself to actually rebuild,
if you need to do that, can actually cost a million dollars.
Because defining single-family homes is actually one to
four families within a given property. So if I have my home and
we rent out the top two floors because that is how we can
afford to stay in our home, it may cost a million dollars or
just over to actually rebuild that property. It is not that I
am so rich necessarily, but that property, which is where my
family has lived and we have rented it out to be able to live
there, it may cost that much and now I am no longer able to
obtain NFIP coverage and will be forced to go to the private
market.
Mr. Duffy. So if you have a home that has a replacement
cost of a million dollars or more, it is your testimony that we
should not, if a private market exists, move that property into
the private market, we should actually keep them in the NFIP
and potentially they could be grandfathered and they could be
subsidized as well?
Does that make sense to you, Mr. Lehmann?
Mr. Lehmann. No, we support the--
Mr. Duffy. Mr. Saks, does that make sense to you?
Mr. Saks. Our view is that all properties need to be
insured at a risk-based rate; it doesn't matter who provides
the insurance.
Mr. Duffy. Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. I agree with my colleagues.
Mr. Duffy. Can I just ask one quick question? We are moving
from 31 percent on the write-your-own commission to 25 percent.
Does anyone disagree with that provision of the bill? Do we
have agreement there?
Ms. Berni?
Ms. Berni. Yes.
Mr. Duffy. Okay. I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Cleaver, ranking member of our Housing and Insurance
Subcommittee.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ellis, I may have misunderstood you, and I looked for
it in your written comments, and you didn't have it, but I
thought I heard you say that the private sector is clamoring
for greater participation.
Mr. Ellis. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cleaver. What private sector? Insurance or some other?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, the insurance industry. Certainly, some of
the members of SmarterSafer are insurance companies and
reinsurance companies. They are advocating for reforms to
actually be able to compete in the market.
Certainly, Mr. Ross and Ms. Castor's legislation is
supported by many insurance companies because they want to
actually write in the flood insurance market. And we have seen
after Biggert-Waters a lot of companies started interests in
New York and in--
Mr. Cleaver. Okay, thank you. That is different than what
you said. It is different because you threw the statement out
and you didn't add anything to it. The truth of the matter is
they are not clamoring for it unless there are reforms. And one
of the reforms, the lengthening of the reauthorization, giving
them more time to look at what is at risk and all components of
insurance, including reinsurance.
The other question that I have for Mr. Saks and you, is you
mentioned that more people would be at risk as time moves on.
Why?
Mr. Saks. From an environmental perspective, we are seeing
tremendous sea-level rise, we are seeing land loss, we are
seeing more frequent and more severe storms. And simply by not
stepping up to provide mitigation and a response, the risk will
continue to grow.
Mr. Cleaver. You are absolutely right. I wish I had been in
Paris with you giving me those comments.
I was reading an article in National Geographic, which says
that by 2021, between 4 million and 13 million more Americans
will be at risk, from New York to South Carolina to Florida to
California as a result of climate change.
So, Mr. Ellis, you and I may have disagreed on something
else earlier, but you also said the same thing. So climate
change is having an impact on national flood insurance, is that
right?
Mr. Ellis. Yes, I would agree with that. Yes, absolutely,
Congressman.
Mr. Cleaver. Okay. Thank you very much for getting that
information out.
The other question that I have is, somebody had mentioned
grandfathering earlier. Who was that?
Ms. Berni. I spoke about that.
Mr. Cleaver. Okay. So are you aware that FEMA actually
doesn't even keep records of grandfathering?
Ms. Berni. Yes, sir, because they define the policy as
actuarially rated when it is written.
Mr. Cleaver. In your opinion, is that the appropriate--
Ms. Berni. Yes. We believe this policy should be maintained
so that anybody who did as they were told and followed the
advice of the Federal Government and built according to the
strong standards that FEMA sets out in their maps should be
provided with protection and should be given credit for doing
as they were told.
Mr. Cleaver. Okay.
One more question, I will do this quickly. But I agree with
increasing policyholder participation in the NFIP program,
especially when you see we had a colleague, Cedric Richmond,
who represents Baton Rouge, and I think 80 percent--80
percent--of the people who were adversely impacted did not have
any kind of flood insurance. What would you suggest as a means
of addressing this problem?
Twenty percent of all of the flood claims came from
individuals who didn't have insurance.
Ms. Berni. Yes, thank you for that question. You raise an
important point. The Baton Rouge event that happened last
August, as you referenced, about 80 percent of folks didn't
have flood insurance. And I am sure that is hard for you all to
understand after everything that has happened in Louisiana in
the last 12 years, but Baton Rouge is about 100 miles away from
the coast. This was a riverine backwater event. It could have
happened anywhere. And so we have really tried to think about
ways to get people to buy more insurance.
As Mr. Saks mentioned, flooding is happening with more
frequency and greater severity.
Mr. Cleaver. Why?
Ms. Berni. Because of climate change.
Mr. Cleaver. Oh, my goodness.
[laughter]
Ms. Berni. And so we believe that encouraging people to buy
more flood insurance both brings revenues in line with costs
and will provide for greater protections for the taxpayer down
the line as well. Ultimately, the NFIP was formed to put some
of the people in flood-prone areas to have more skin in the
game rather than just having it all funded directly from the
taxpayer.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Luetkemeyer, chairman of our Financial Institutions
Subcommittee.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome to all the witnesses this morning.
Mr. Ellis, I want to start with you this morning. There are
several things I want to get to here. Reinsurance, mitigation
and rates are the things I want to talk about quickly here.
With regards to reinsurance, to me it seems like it is very
important. We have had the discussion already this morning
about the fact that we have had these major catastrophes that
accumulated $24.6 billion worth of debt. And while the FEMA
NFIP program has the ability to purchase reinsurance, it has
not done so until recently when they found out that we are
going to try and force them to do it. Now they are starting to
have a little pilot program where they are starting to nip
around the edges on it.
So I guess my question for you is, do you think it is a
good idea to put the private sector on the risk for this
excessive occurrence that would happen rather than the
taxpayers?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman. I think that it is
important to lay off that risk on the private markets and then
the private markets can lay off that risk all around the world
or use catastrophe bonds or other means. And that is what
insurance companies do to mitigate the risks rather than just
simply borrowing more from taxpayers.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. Is there enough capacity in the
system that you see?
Mr. Ellis. My understanding was that the most recent
issuance was oversubscribed, was that there was more companies
wanting to sell reinsurance to the NFIP than were actually able
to.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Lehmann, I see you nodding your head.
You are apparently in agreement with that?
Mr. Lehmann. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Very good, thank you.
With regards to mapping, I have a kind of unique situation
from the standpoint that I have the Lake of the Ozarks in my
backyard. And the Lake of the Ozarks is a man-made lake as a
result of a dam. It is a hydroelectric dam that produces
electricity for a local utility. And because of topography of
the area, you have 1,150 miles of shoreline, which is more
miles of shoreline than the State of California. And because it
is not a core lake, you can build right down on it. So as a
result of this, I have a flood insurance problem in my
backyard, which is where I live, the size of the State of
California. So to me, mapping is extremely important.
And I offered a bill to try and improve the ability of FEMA
to be able to do something with their mapping process. Because
in testimony in this committee some time ago, the director made
the statement that--I asked him the question, how often do you
think you are going to get back to be able to map these
properties around the country? So, an average of 7 years. That
means anywhere from 5 to 12 years before you are going to get
to some of these properties probably. He said, yes, that is
true.
So what we did in our bill was say, if at the end of 3
years you haven't been able to get back to these properties,
the local folks should be able to remap their own things. And I
will give you an example. At the Lake of the Ozarks, for
instance, there are 27,000 people with a piece of property
around this lake and that means you have 300 or 400 letters of
map amendment (LOMAs) every year that cost $300 or $400 or $500
a piece. This is ridiculous. So if the communities wanted to
get together to do this to be able to remap their communities,
it seems to me like they should be able to do that.
What do you think of that idea, Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. I think as long as there are adequate safeguards
and standards that meet what the Technical Mapping Advisory
Committee is laying out currently for FEMA, that makes sense. I
also noted in my testimony that the State of North Carolina,
for instance, took mapping money and actually used aircraft to
do LIDAR elevation data in their higher-risk counties. So that
is certainly an area where they took the bull by the horns and
did a better job for their consumers and actually made all that
information available online.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Ms. Berni, would that be helpful in your
area, to allow the local communities to be able to remap
everything to make sure they are accurate?
Ms. Berni. Yes, absolutely. One of the big things we have
advocated for is greater local stakeholder involvement. We have
seen, though, that a lot of times local communities oftentimes
don't even have the funding to appeal the maps. So we would
request or respectfully request that the committee just
consider funding for additional mapping increases. But yes, we
would support this proposal and additional local stakeholder
input in mapping.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much.
With regards to the replacement cost rates, we have had a
discussion in this area a little bit, but it seems to me and
one of the things that we did, I have offered a bill with
regards to this, and basically it takes the Florida model which
shows that it can be done and done successfully. But what we
are doing is the average home is $167,000 and basically people
under $167,000 are supporting and subsidizing those above it
when you have one rate across-the-board.
It would be like if you had a $167,000 house, but yours was
only $50,000 in value versus $250,000 in value, but you are
charged one premium across-the-board. To me, this is nuts. This
doesn't take into account the value of the property. So I think
it is very important that we get back to replacement cost
values.
Mr. Lehmann, what do you think about that? I know you had
some testimony with regards to the risk-based rates.
Mr. Lehmann. Right. My understanding is that FEMA's current
methodology uses a sort of national average for replacement
costs as opposed to property-level replacement costs or even
local replacement costs. There would have to be a process. I
know there are contractors who provide that data, data and
analytics firms.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. It would seem to me that it would also
make the rates more competitive.
Mr. Lehmann. Absolutely. And currently, there is no doubt
that a property that is more expensive to repair is--
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Yes. So if you have lower-income folks who
have a $50,000 house, even though we would restructure the
program, they are going to get a break on this premium.
Mr. Lehmann. That is correct.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Mrs.
Maloney, ranking member of our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to first of all thank the City of New York
and Mayor de Blasio's office for commissioning a RAND study of
flood insurance for New York, which examines a number of
different policy options to ensure that flood insurance is
available and affordable for middle-class families.
And I would like to ask unanimous consent to place in the
record the RAND report.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you very much.
First of all, I would like to ask Ms. Sternhell, section
two of the Flood Risk Mitigation Act would penalize communities
with more than 50 repetitive loss properties or more than five
severe, repetitive loss properties if they don't have a
community-wide plan for addressing these specific properties.
And my question is, does it make sense for entire
communities to have to develop a plan to deal with just five
properties and to potentially be kicked our of the National
Flood Insurance Program if they don't make sufficient progress
on this plan? And aren't these thresholds way too low? What is
your opinion?
Ms. Sternhell. On having a plan? Absolutely, yes, I agree
we should. On being kicked out? Absolutely not. And on the
thresholds? Yes, they're far too low, especially when you
consider the size of some of the communities. New York City's
floodplain, based on the pre-FIRMs that are undergoing revision
right now, has over 70,000 structures. So it is one thing if
you have a few hundred structures and say, okay, five very bad
apples and you need to deal with this. It is another thing if
you have over tens of thousands of structures.
Moreover, sometimes these properties aren't located in
contiguous regions. We have the five boroughs, for example. We
could have problems in Staten Island, two opposite sides of the
island, a property in Queens and then two in Brooklyn miles
away from one another. We are happy to develop plans, but at
what cost then to deal with these and to remedy these? And what
then becomes available to us?
Would the committee be suggesting we utilize eminent domain
or something that severe to remedy these properties? And with
what funding available, given pre-disaster mitigation funding
is not hugely available and it is not nearly robust enough to
meet the need of the Nation?
Mrs. Maloney. And do you think it is fair for entire
communities to be sanctioned under this provision?
Ms. Sternhell. No, I don't. And FEMA already has some
authorities to suspend communities for failure to manage their
floodplains properly. I don't know why we would need these new
additional sanctions or provisions to kick whole communities
out. Certainly, again, we absolutely endorse developing new,
rigorous floodplain management plans, but not such that we
could eventually be kicked out because we are trying our best.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Now, I would like to ask you also about
section eight of the National Flood Insurance Integrity
Improvement Act, which would prohibit these policies altogether
after 4 years for new structures that are either in special
food hazard areas or that have a replacement cost of more than
a million dollars. Even if FEMA temporarily waives this
prohibition, which you can only do for 1 year at a time and
only if private market insurance is not available, there will
be a 10 percent surcharge on these policies for these new
structures.
How would this provision affect New York City?
Ms. Sternhell. It would create real problems in terms of
redevelopment on the floodplain and three issues really. First,
the one from the taxpayer perspective of whether you will have
an NFIP versus depending on whether the State goes ahead and
makes the case. It is entirely possible that there is 10
percent market penetration in one part of the City, but not
elsewhere. But now that person and that homeowner is foreclosed
from accessing the NFIP. So that gets to choice. And
foreclosing on the choice, we do not object to people going out
and getting private insurance. If they get a better rate, go
ahead. But foreclosing the option of the NFIP is a real
problem.
Mrs. Maloney. Now, do you think it is fair for homeowners
to be penalized really for the private market's failure?
Ms. Sternhell. No, I don't. Not at all.
Mrs. Maloney. It is not available usually, Okay.
Ms. Sternhell. Certainly, some development can actually
help make communities more resilient even. Taking over a
parking lot and putting resilient housing there can actually
protect a neighborhood.
Mrs. Maloney. And as you noted in your testimony, in some
ways, flood insurance is very different in New York City. For
example, some mitigation options that are available in other
communities, such as elevating the house, is simply not an
option in New York City when you have tall buildings 50 stories
and even higher, you can't do that. And the mitigation options
that we do have in New York don't get enough credit in the
current program.
So do any of these flood insurance bills address this
issue?
Ms. Sternhell. Not to the degree we would like to see.
Mrs. Maloney. And could more be done to make sure that the
mitigation options that are available to large urban areas,
like New York, get the credit they deserve for lowering risk to
the National Flood Insurance Program?
Ms. Sternhell. Yes, if I may very quickly answer.
Chairman Hensarling. Quickly.
Ms. Sternhell. Yes. If we could actually look and see that
mechanicals are a big part of every claim, let us lift the
mechanicals and then let us reduce the premium because we got
things out of harm's way.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Missouri, Mrs.
Wagner, chairwoman of our Oversight and Investigations
Subcommittee.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for appearing today to discuss the
reauthorization of the flood insurance program which is, as we
all know, set to expire this year in September. This is an
important issue for the St. Louis region and, in particular, my
2nd Congressional District which has seen two major floods, in
fact two 500-year floods in less than 2 years.
With the NFIP being $24.6 billion in debt, as has been duly
noted, it is important to make sure that there are reforms to
the program necessary to keep it solvent and continue providing
coverage for those who live in the areas that truly need it.
To help offset this burden on the NFIP, I believe a strong
private market is important for offering consumers more than
one choice and giving them flexibility and options at
oftentimes greater affordability in the coverage they are
seeking.
Mr. Lehmann, when the NFIP was created in 1968, the belief
was that the private insurance markets lacked the data and the
ability to assess flood losses. What has changed in terms of
data, technology, and the market's ability to assess risk since
then, sir?
Mr. Lehmann. So there are a couple of aspects. There is the
issue of the modeling is the first major answer. Modeling was
introduced in the 1980s and has progressed significantly since
then. Also in the 1960s, you still had a lot of smaller
regional insurance companies that had solvency risk and not the
deep reinsurance markets that we have today. So the market has
changed significantly and larger companies, it is a global
industry where risk gets sort of segmented and chopped up and
sent around the world, which is a good thing. And keeping risk
on our shores is not something that we want to encourage.
Mrs. Wagner. Do you believe, sir, that private capital
would retreat from the market in those cycles where there are
significant floods, for instance?
Mr. Lehmann. There is a noted, in the property casualty
insurance industry, cycle of capacity expanding and rates
dropping and capacity shrinking and rates increasing. So that
is normal, but it is a cycle. When rates go up, that attracts
more capital and brings rates back down again. So we saw that
after Hurricane Katrina. We certainly saw it after September
11th. We have been in a soft market for some time, so even
Hurricane Sandy did not have the effect of making capital
retreat. It has stayed soft all through that.
Mrs. Wagner. Interesting. Your testimony refutes the notion
that private sector cherry-picking the lowest-risk properties
will destabilize the NFIP, which is something we hear often, to
be perfectly honest. Can you provide more detail on that?
Mr. Lehmann. I would not dispute that subsidized properties
are unlikely to be moved out of the NFIP until they pay risk-
based rates. That is true. But it is not the level of risk.
There are subsidized properties that are higher and lower risk.
There are high-risk properties that pay relatively a lot for
the risks that they face. And there are low-risk properties
that don't pay enough.
So it is a question of, does the risk match the premium?
Those where the premium exceeds the risk will be the first to
go, but that is not the same thing as cherry-picking. The
program itself is a high-risk program and every policyholder in
that program presents a potential cost to the taxpayers, which
is why on an annual basis it is not actuarially sound.
Mrs. Wagner. Will private insurance companies need to take
on higher-risk properties in order to kind of chase the yield?
Mr. Lehmann. They will take on high-risk properties where
the high-risk property presents an appropriate return for them.
I live in Florida, and that is something we have seen in
Florida, in the citizens depopulation program, that high-risk
properties, particularly in south Florida, are among the most
attractive to the private market.
Mrs. Wagner. Which barriers with the NFIP prevent private
insurance from entering the market? And how do these
legislative drafts today help solve some of those problems, Mr.
Lehmann?
Mr. Lehmann. There remains some confusion about what counts
for the mandatory purchase agreement. The Ross-Castor language
looks to address that. We do think there is still some
confusion, even with that bill, in that the Federal banking
regulators have not weighed in yet, and we don't know when they
will. And so in the interim, we would like that language to be
self-executing so that where a State insurance commissioner
decides, determines that a policy is appropriate, that it will
meet the mandatory purchase requirement. That is the top.
Mrs. Wagner. My time has expired. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Velazquez.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And let me take this opportunity to thank you and my
colleague, Mr. Duffy, for working with me to address so many of
the claims processing problems New Yorkers faced after
Hurricane Sandy. I was pleased to see many sections of my bill
were included in the discussion drafts we are reviewing today.
While I have concerns with portions of these discussion
drafts, it is my hope that we can continue to work in a
bipartisan manner to address these concerns and pass a long-
term reauthorization of the program.
Ms. Sternhell, as you know, New Yorkers were devastated by
Hurricane Sandy, particularly my Congressional district.
Following the storm, there weren't enough qualified, licensed
engineers available to assess homeowners' damage, exacerbating
many of the problems homeowners faced after the storm.
Can you please speak to the importance of having qualified,
licensed engineers participate in the assessment of storm
damage?
Ms. Sternhell. Certainly. I think it comes down to trust
and trusting that what you are being told is fact and you can
trust and rely upon what they are telling you as you proceed
not only to rebuild, but to pursue your claim.
We dealt with an analogous situation with the rapid repairs
program. We needed licensed electricians and plumbers
immediately available to come and do work so we knew work was
being done correctly. And that was such a big part of the
claims process and the frauds where you would have individuals
who maybe weren't engineers and maybe were assessors, but
didn't necessarily have skills or weren't equipped to deal with
the certain situations they were presented with. So we would
absolutely endorse this provision.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Ms. Sternhell, in your testimony you suggest that a
provision be included in the NFIP policy contracts that
notifies policyholders that they cannot waive the right to
appeal, litigate or review documents in a contract. Can you
explain why inclusion of such a provision is important to a
homeowner pursuing a flood claim?
Ms. Sternhell. Certainly. When people are in a vulnerable
state, we would like to ensure that they preserve their rights.
They may not need to exercise them, but they retain those
rights. And so we would not want to see a situation where, by
virtue of signing an insurance agreement or maybe even having
an assessor or adjuster, anybody can come by and ask you to
sign a waiver of some sort, you no longer have the remedies you
are entitled to under this legislation.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
And, Ms. Sternhell, the National Flood Insurance Program
Policyholder Protection and Information Act of 2017 requires
the FEMA Administrator to consider the differences in
properties located in coastal and inland areas when calculating
annual premium rates. What would this provision mean for
policyholders living in the coastal areas of the U.S., many of
whom already pay higher premiums than most other NFIP
policyholders?
I know that there was an exchange previously, but I would
like to offer this opportunity for you to expound on how it is
going to impact those who live in coastal areas.
Ms. Sternhell. Certainly. What is confusing a little bit
about this provision is that coastal residents already pay V
zones. And so there is already a mechanism within the program
to actuarially rate coastal properties with the V zone
designation. So that already is present within the NFIP
program.
Ms. Velazquez. What will this provision mean for the
residents of New York City, specifically?
Ms. Sternhell. To be honest, Congresswoman, I am not
exactly sure. What I would hate to see is that further
divisions that aren't based on sort of accurate mapping or
actuarially principles further creating a divide. Not only do
we have coastal V, but we also have riverine communities, so we
have the full gamut and understand the spectrum of rates and
zones that can be available.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga, chairman of our Capital Markets Subcommittee.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I am going to try to--I have a lot of material, so I
will try to move along quickly.
And I am going to start with you, Mr. Ellis. As pointed out
by Chair Wagner, in 1968, we might not have had the ability to
do what we can do today as far as data collection and all those
things. But how would you gauge the private sector's appetite
for entering the flood insurance marketplace? And how much of
what currently is in that public space do we estimate that they
could absorb?
Mr. Ellis. As I indicated in my testimony, Congressman, and
this kind of gets to the comments about clamoring, that
actually under the current provisions of the flood insurance
program, so with no further reforms, we have about 20 companies
that are writing first-dollar flood insurance in the State of
Florida and they are writing in all the various risk profiles.
That is where 40 percent of the NFIP policies. So, clearly,
there is an interest there.
And it also would get to I think one of the questions about
getting more people with flood insurance. The more we normalize
the flood insurance experience, that is it part of a rider on
your existing homeowner's policy, more people are going to be
insured. And that is what we should be trying to get is more
Americans actually having flood insurance than do today so you
don't have what happened in Baton Rouge where you don't have so
many people actually only getting a few thousand dollars in
disaster response instead of getting, in that case, $87,000 in
flood insurance payments.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay. And do consumers benefit when there is
only one choice?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman. And as I said before,
the only reason why anyone would opt for a private policy is
they got a better price or a better product or both.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
Ms. Berni, we have learned a lot, hopefully we have learned
a number of things since 1968. I am curious what you believe
has changed in terms of data, technology, markets' abilities to
assess risk. And since 2012, what happened with the development
of a private flood insurance market?
Mr. Lehmann. Since 2012, a lot of it did start with
Biggert-Waters and the acknowledgment that subsidized rates
were going to start to recede and that grandfathered rates,
that was--
Mr. Huizenga. Was that pun intended, receding on the
flood--
[laughter]
Mr. Lehmann. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga. Just curious.
Mr. Lehmann. There would be risk-based rates, that we would
be gradually moving to risk-based rates did begin to interest
private insurers in writing much more than they had been.
Among the things that have changed that has brought in more
private capital is simply the fact that home prices have
increased. So we have a $250,000 statutory limit, and so you
have much more umbrella coverage, excess coverage. Private
insurers are writing that, they are becoming comfortable with
the risk. They are buying reinsurance for it. And once they get
to that level of comfort, they are ready to write it at the
first dollar.
Mr. Huizenga. You believe that consumers should be involved
and engaged in this, right?
Mr. Lehmann. Absolutely.
Mr. Huizenga. Okay.
How about local entities, local governments?
Mr. Lehmann. Certainly, yes. We support Mr. Saks, his
proposals of community-based mitigation. We think that is
appropriate and, of course, in addition to hardening
properties, elevating and so forth.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. I think that is what a lot of us are
concerned with. I grew up in a flood zone, in a floodplain. We
had to lobby our local county road commission to change a
bridge that they tried to say removed as much water, and
clearly it didn't because we haven't been flooded or my parents
haven't been flooded.
Ms. Sternhell, we did just pull Mayor de Blasio's executive
budget, $82.2 billion. My understanding is the RAND
Corporation, the most aggressive mitigation grant and loan
estimation was $100 million of that. And as I do the math here,
I think that is .00121655 percent of the entire New York City
budget.
Ms. Sternhell. I will take your word for it.
Mr. Huizenga. And it seems to me, at some point or another,
we have to have our local entities step into that gap as well.
And with that, my time has expired.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Meeks.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I, too, want to thank you and the ranking member, and
Mr. Duffy, and Mr. Cleaver, for working on this bill and trying
to make it a bipartisan bill, for surely when we talk about
these floodwaters, I believe as a result of global climate
change, this is an area that we need to figure something out
because it comes to all regions of the country. It affects all
parties and all individuals. So I am hopeful that we can
continue in that same vein and working together and ultimately
come up with a product that is good for everyone.
With that, I was intrigued in listening to some of the
conversation and the questions and answers going back and
forth. And I come from a district that was devastated by
Hurricane Sandy. And this whole issue of grandfathering is
extremely important to me.
If you look at the communities in my district, especially
those in Nassau County and along the Rockaway Peninsula, you
find individuals who are--many of them are not rich. Many of
them are not poor, but they are middle-class, hardworking
individuals who are trying to live the best that they can and
the American Dream. They made sacrifices to own their home.
So I would like to ask Ms. Kagan Sternhell first about
these grandfathering provisions and what happens if they were
removed. Because when I talk to my constituents, some will just
talk about how their premiums will increase by thousands of
dollars and then they couldn't afford the homes because they
are paying day-to-day, struggling day-to-day to pay their
mortgage, et cetera. Then what happens to these hardworking,
middle-class Americans?
So may you elaborate on the value of grandfathering and the
implications removing grandfathering would have on the
affordability of a house for a hardworking, middle-class
family?
Ms. Sternhell. Yes. And, to what Caitlin has elaborated on
an others, we believe grandfathering is important because where
you have built to code and done as you have been told, you
should not be penalized as the world changes around you
necessarily. Now, that is not to say that the communities and
the City itself is undertaking a number of mitigation measures
and certainly around your district with the Rockaway hardening,
but for a lot of these individuals that is part of the reason
we commissioned the RAND study to look at what this means and
develop the thing called a pity ratio which looks at sort of
the cost of carrying a home, independent of just necessarily
home value or income, certainly factoring income in, but
whether your insurance-burdened, which actually hits at some of
these middle-class individuals and these homeowners to say,
okay, by virtue of these insurance rate increases or 1 percent,
2 percent, what have you, it becomes unaffordable to even live
in your home.
And so that is why grandfathering was sort of highlighted
in that report as one of the most effective tools. And then one
of the even more cost-effective tools was actually means-tested
targeted vouchers or credits to help individuals stay in their
homes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
And I want to stay with you, Ms. Sternhell, because I think
in your testimony you noted that proposals to disallow the
National Flood Insurance Program coverage for new construction
and special flood hazard areas are misguided, I think that was
your word. And from what I have read, I think I agree with you
considering that approximately 400,000 New Yorkers live in
these areas. And a smart alternative would be to require
sustainable construction in high-risk communities, I believe.
For example, in New York we saw new construction in New
York City communities, including Battery Park and Arverne by
the Sea, emerged relatively unscathed from Hurricane Sandy
because they were built for resiliency.
Could you provide an alternative proposal that would
protect taxpayers from risks, yet maintain NFIP's accessibility
to homeowners in flood-prone areas like Nassau County and the
Rockaways?
Ms. Sternhell. Absolutely. So for individual homeowners,
the City immediately changed its building code following
Hurricane Sandy such that any new construction has to be built
to what the current FEMA standard is plus additional feet of
freeboard. And so that if anything is going to be rebuilt, you
have to be building to a more resilient standard and one that
considers the environment.
So there are sort of City-level things we can do in
addition to the Staten Island sea wall and programs like the
Staten Island Bluebelt, which are actual wetlands that we have
built that do ponding and where you can't actually have great
drainage. They will actually feed in, absorb water and drain it
out to the sea, further protecting communities, just as Mr.
Saks has talked about. So we absolutely endorse the green
infrastructure options.
And again, sort of general routing and with an eye to new
construction codes, continuing to make sure that if we are
going to put things within our floodplain, that we do so in a
smart manner and with ways that truly consider what is going to
happen in the next 10, 15, 20, years.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Ross, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for having this hearing
today. I think this is something that is long overdue, and
especially in light of the expiration of the NFIP by the end of
September. We have our work cut out for us.
And as we go back over the last 50 years since the NFIP was
created in 1968, a time when we were trying to put men on the
moon and technology was at its infancy as we know it today, we
also saw that there were limited building codes, limited zoning
restrictions, urban sprawl and, therefore, a market that just
did not want to particulate in the flood insurance arena and
so, therefore, we engaged the Federal Government with warnings,
knowing that if we did so for very long, it would create a
moral hazard, which we are at today.
So my concern, and I will start with you, Mr. Ellis, is in
1968, one of the underlying reasons for the National Flood
Insurance Program was that there was not available technology,
mapping and data that would justify being able to accurately
assess the risk and, therefore, we couldn't place it on the
market. What has happened since then? Have we seen an
advancement that might make it a little bit more realistic as
to what the risk may be?
Mr. Ellis. I would venture, Congressman, that my iPhone
probably has about as much computing power as a whole room did
at that time of computers. And so I think that we have moved
dramatically, technological advances in modeling, and Mr.
Lehmann referred to some of these earlier, in that we are in a
much different place, and then also just the way the insurance
industry has changed dramatically in that timeframe and about
being able to lay off risk worldwide. And so we are just in a
different place where it makes sense to shift more of the risk
to the private sector.
Mr. Ross. And we have seen greater capacity, would you not
agree? That there is sufficient capacity out there in the
private sector to come in and take a sizable, if not all of the
risk that is being borne by the NFIP.
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, and probably beyond that, hopefully,
as taking on more and more people get flood insurance.
Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Ross. But the barriers that have been created over the
last 50 years have allowed us to kind of limit the involvement
of the private sector except for what has come back since 2012.
So my purpose here today is to, quite frankly, talk about the
Insurance Modernization and Parity Act that I filed last year,
that we passed overwhelmingly in this House.
And my concern is that we desperately need to have the
ceding of risk to private capital in order to make a viable
market that is competitive and good for the consumers. Would it
not be a good first step to make sure that we allow for those
barriers of private capital to be broken down to allow the
State regulators to do what they do best, not only in terms of
solvency, but consumer protections, and at the same time allow
to exist as it has been for the last 50 years, the safety net
of the NFIP so if those consumers out there feel prejudice,
they won't be?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman. You actually undersold
your bill. It wasn't just overwhelmingly, it was 419 to zero,
which is not very many substantive pieces of legislation pass
unanimously in the House, and so absolutely. This is just a
common-sense approach that there is never an intent that people
couldn't buy private flood insurance, there is no prohibition
that you shouldn't be able to buy flood insurance. And this
just says, all right, as long as you get something that is
comparable, you can actually have that and meet your mandatory
purchase requirement.
Mr. Ross. And as a result, we created a subsidy, a
subsidized market that, in effect, flies in the face of the
laws of economics because, Mr. Lehmann, as you pointed out,
there may be a spike in rates, but it is not rates that create
the problem, it is the return on the investment of that capital
that is at risk.
So in other words, if you have capital that is at risk, but
you can reduce that risk, you can get a higher rate of return,
but yet have a lesser rate that you are charging the consumer.
Is that not true?
Mr. Lehmann. That is absolutely true.
Mr. Ross. The only way that happens, though, is if you
bring that capital in to assess that risk. So instead of having
the NFIP out there saying we are going to just do a one-size-
fits-all policy premium, we actually invite those carriers to
come in and do what they do best, and that is put their capital
at risk and manage that risk. And if we are going to make this
change to where we want people to feel as though they have not
only the comfort of knowing they are insured, but also to know
that they are going to be able to find it at an affordable
rate, we have to open up the markets.
And so my next question, and I would offer this to the
panel is, what significance is mitigation? We have housing
stock out there that has been built for years, we have no
aggressive policy to try to make these more resilient, to
remediate them. Who would like to just in 30 seconds address
mitigation?
Mr. Saks. Congressman, if I could, I would like to say of
course mitigation is the key to affordability. It is also an
essential right now. And we have had a lot of discussion about
grandfathered properties and subsidized rates. And I would say
one of the troubles with properties like that is that they are
not sending a market signal that is encouraging people to take
matters into their own hands and take pre-disaster, mitigative
action.
Mr. Ross. Which is absolutely necessary and maybe we should
do it through tax incentives, maybe we should do it through
private/public partnerships with some of our building supply
companies that can come in there and allow them to finance at
zero or no rate to be able to do this mitigation that is so
necessary.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
My major concern is making sure that those families who are
most at risk can obtain affordable flood insurance. And that,
Mr. Chairman, if I might say a word to you on that, is what is
missing in this bill.
Let me just give you an example of what I am talking about.
In this bill, my Republican friends have put into this bill
what is referred to as a voluntary buyout program. And my
understanding is that it is to discourage repetitively flooded
properties from rebuilding after flooding. But there is no
money there. If we ever had a glaring example, Mr. Chairman, as
to why we need to enlarge this.
It is important that we have a bipartisan flood insurance
bill and I believe we are going to have one. But I want to make
this point. FEMA has declared that for every dollar that we
spend on flood insurance to help people, we save the taxpayers
$4. I think that is gone from here and I am very perplexed by
it. But there is in this bill a buyout program. Now, how can
you buy something out when you don't have money attached to the
program?
Can I get the panel to address this?
Mr. Saks, let me start with you because I enjoyed your
commentary. You talked about mitigation. You talked about not
increased funding, but you did talk about affordability and
mitigation. Here you have this program and I think it has some
promise, it is a good program, but how can you have a buyout
program and you don't have any money attached to it to do the
buyout?
Mr. Saks. Thank you, Congressman. And I do believe that the
committee should find more ways to invest in mitigation. And I
offered some solutions to that in my testimony.
With regard to the buyouts, I believe the intent is that
would draw on existing programs that currently pay for buyouts
and this would target people into it, but I am not sure of
that. But there is existing money currently for buyouts in the
flood program.
Mr. Scott. And there is my point. Because let us be
realistic here. Where are the buyout possibilities? Where is
the greatest impact of this? Do you know where it is? It is in
the lower-income areas, it is where developers went in without
adequate mapping, built housing on the lower plain, and you
know who moved into those? It wasn't your wealthy people. They
have money and they have enough sense to know that, why am I
going to buy a house in a low-plain area?
So my point is, what I want from you all is to share with
the chairman and with this committee that we need to do more
mitigation, affordability, and if we have a great program like
this for voluntary buyouts, understand that the greatest impact
we can make for FEMA's investment return of every dollar, they
get $4 for the taxpayers, we have to look at it the fact that
it is the lower-income people who don't have that choice, who
see a home develop there and boom.
I am a living witness to this. Three years ago, Atlanta's
whole metro area was flooded. Six Flags Over Georgia is in my
district, and you all saw it. We went and got Vice President
Joe Biden who flew down with us, and looked at it. And you know
who lived in those areas? They were lower-income people. They
can't do it.
So I think in our haste to, and I am very hasty in saving
the taxpayers money, but a return of $4 for every $1, helps us
get to that point and we will have a bipartisan bill.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all so much for being here. This is an important
discussion and something that we have to get done, we have to
make sure that there isn't any type of lapse.
And I think there is basically among most of us a shared
commitment that we want to make sure that who need flood
insurance, can afford it, but also that we, as best as we can,
make sure that taxpayers aren't on the hook, that we get
markets working again. And that is really what I want to see
happen.
So I thank you for the information that you have given to
us and the important steps that we are taking and hopefully we
can move this forward quickly and get some important work done
so that markets are not disrupted at all, and this can keep
flowing.
My district is just west of Chicago, but many of my
constituents live in floodplain areas along the Fox River or in
the lake country which is kind of in the northern counties of
Illinois. In fact, Illinois has the Nation's largest inland
system of rivers, lakes, and streams. And 12 percent of the
entire land area in Illinois is mapped as floodplain.
What is important, though, for all my constituents, whether
they live in a high-risk area or not, is to understand the
risks of their own property and also that they are empowered to
make responsible decisions of how to manage that risk.
I remain eager to hear ideas about how to reform what I
think most of us would agree is a broken flood insurance
program, $25 billion in debt and growing; it just isn't
sustainable. It is irresponsible government and it is unfair to
taxpayers. We also have to make sure, though, that flood
insurance remains available to those who need it and choose to
use it responsibly.
I want to address my first question to Mr. Ellis. In your
testimony, you say, ``Masking subsidies with lower rates
prevents policyholders from understanding their true level of
risk.'' I wonder if you could expand on the moral hazards that
subsidies create. And would a change to how this subsidy is
delivered help consumers make more informed decisions regarding
flood insurance?
Mr. Ellis. Thank you, Congressman. And I would argue that
the fundamental, basic responsibility of government is to
protect their constituents, and yet you have this program where
people are being subsidized to live and continue to live in
harm's way. And that is one of the things that bewilders me
somewhat in talking about artificially holding down rates
rather than doing other things to make flood insurance more
affordable.
And also, the other thing that I would point out is that
the discussion draft that was provided did have a bunch of
transparency measures so that we actually have an effective
risk communication, that people understand that they are at
higher risk, which could incentivize them to mitigate their
risk and have a better understanding.
Mr. Hultgren. That is great. That is absolutely what we
want, is where possible to make sure that good decisions are
made to mitigate risk. I think it also just drives us crazy
when we see these repeat offender properties that so much money
is poured into. We have to continue to figure that out and deal
with that.
I wonder, Mr. Saks, if I could jump to you. One of the
provisions in the draft legislation, which was also included in
Ranking Member Waters's proposal, would prohibit the NFIP from
selling new policy coverage to future structures built in
today's highest-risk areas. By limiting future risk into the
NFIP, what effect would this have on the fiscal health of the
program? And is this a risk the private market would be willing
to take on?
Mr. Saks. First, I will answer in reverse order. I believe,
yes, the private market would take this risk on and they have
said as much.
I think for the view of the National Wildlife Federation,
our interest has always been that rates send a market signal to
slow development and we continue to support that notion.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay.
I am going to finish up with Mr. Lehmann. I wonder if you
can go into this, and maybe open it up to others as well, but
one of the most fundamental aspects of the National Flood
Insurance Program and for all flood insurance is reliable data
and accurate mapping. And it has been one of the, I think,
greatest frustrations for many of my constituents and other
folks in Illinois, frustration that the maps just don't really
reflect the risk. Despite dramatic developments in flood
modeling and mapping technology, the average map is 35 years
old, according to the Association of State Floodplain Managers.
How can the entire flood insurance system, private and non-
private entities, better utilize the available technology? And
I wondered if you could maybe talk a little bit about your
views of the value of LIDAR technology, light detection and
ranging technology.
Mr. Lehmann. Sure. And that has been mentioned by other
witnesses before. We know about North Carolina's experience
with LIDAR. We think that is a valuable tool. We think FEMA
should be required to use it, LIDAR and other modern methods,
to get property-level data, which would also help with many of
the subsidized properties that currently don't have flood
elevation certificates. Ninety-seven percent of them don't have
flood elevation certificates.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you all so much.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Crist.
Mr. Crist. First, I want to thank Chairman Hensarling and
Ranking Member Waters for holding this important hearing today.
And I want to thank our witnesses for taking the time to be
with us and share your expertise.
As my Florida colleagues can attest to you, our State is
the biggest player in flood insurance in the country. And
within Florida, my home, Pinellas County, St. Petersburg,
Clearwater, is ground zero. We are literally a peninsula.
Pinellas County is on the peninsula of Florida. We are
surrounded by water. My constituents rely on the National Flood
Insurance Program for economic security as well as peace of
mind, which is why it is so important that we reauthorize this
program on time and why I am concerned to see that some of
these drafts don't contain legislative language that would do
that, because I think that is our number-one priority. It is my
hope and my belief that this will be remedied very quickly.
It is also my hope that we can work together to address
some of the affordability concerns that I have and others
share. It is clear that these bills propose several changes to
address both affordability as well as solvency.
Ms. Sternhell, taken together, do you believe that these
bills will decrease or increase the costs for policyholders?
Ms. Sternhell. I believe ultimately they will increase the
cost to policyholders. The City's position is that if you can
get a private flood policy, please go ahead, and we do not
object to individuals and the private market being able to
count as part of your mandatory purchase requirement.
But what that will then do is start to encourage,
especially if the non-compete agreements fall away, as
currently presented in this legislation, individuals to come
in, private entities to come in and take the less risky
policies. They may be located in a V zone, but it may not be a
risky policy.
And as Mr. Lehmann himself as testified, it needs to make
market sense, they need to make a profit. And even in the study
of the Reinsurance Association, cited by a number of the
panelists here today, they even note that for policies to come
out of NFIP and to make sense, they have to be profitable for
the private insurance industry.
NFIP was created because there was a market failure, and so
by its very nature it has high-risk policies and people who
could not necessarily get coverage in the private market. What
this is trying to do and by forcing people to private coverage,
it may not be affordable for them by foreclosing the option of
NFIP and not leaving that as an option, but the alternative
only being private. It may become more unaffordable for them
and for that we are very concerned.
Mr. Crist. Thank you.
Ms. Berni, would you agree?
Ms. Berni. Forgive me, yes, I would agree. As Ms. Sternhell
mentioned, between the floors going up from 5 percent to 9
percent and also the increases in the surcharges, we are very
concerned that this would overall increase the cost of the
policy for folks across America.
Mr. Crist. Thank you. In my home of Pinellas County, 69
percent of all policies in the special flood hazard area are
non-waterfront and have home values of just $170,000 or less.
This is the middle class, these are working families. This is
the American Dream for them.
We have the power and the moral responsibility to help
these folks. But if our committee puts flood insurance out of
reach for the middle class, those families in my district and
elsewhere would have done everything right, but they could lose
it all. I am certain that it is not the intent of this
legislation and that we can work together to produce a strong,
timely, and affordable reauthorization of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
I yield my time back, Mr. Chairman. And thank you again.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to each of you for your testimony today and your
good thoughts and counsel.
Chad Berginnis, executive director of the Association of
State Floodplain Managers, mentioned in his testimony in March
of this year the term ``freeboard,'' which means the committee
has adopted a building standard that is higher than the base
flood evaluation for 100-year floodplain. What would be the
impact of a national standard requiring all newly constructed
properties to meet this freeboard standard?
We will start with you, Mr. Ellis.
Mr. Ellis. We haven't taken a position on national building
standards. We think that we have done some things and
advocating disaster relief that States that actually do have
stronger building standards that that would make sense.
Also, we have supported basically that any Federal
investments actually go to having a higher freeboard, but we
haven't talked about it for homeowners; they are all
developments.
Ms. Berni. If I may, we also, in the City of New Orleans,
have an additional foot of freeboard that is required in our
building codes. And we are working very hard to make sure that
we are increasing mitigation and increasing standards and
making our community more flood-resilient as well. And so we
are taking the steps proactively.
Mr. Saks. I would say that it is an important part of
reducing flood risk, but it's only one part of the puzzle. And
many of the other mitigation steps I talked about today also
need to be included.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Ms. Sternhell. I would say from New York City's
perspective, within months of Hurricane Sandy hitting, the city
council went ahead and changed the building code and we now
require two feet of freeboard for new development.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Mr. Lehmann. And I would just echo Mr. Ellis's comments.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
In North Carolina this past year, we suffered an enormous
flood, a thousand-year flood from Hurricane Matthew. Much of
that was in my district. I have a very rural district that
includes two of the counties that were hardest hit in the
State. It was devastating. I was there for the third time going
over that region just this last week with our sheriffs.
I had interesting conversations with the mayors and the
sheriffs of each of these towns. And these small towns--
Laurinburg, Fayetteville, Hope Mills--saw all of the homes
being abandoned. And I asked them the question, what is our
responsibility in our government toward the NFIP relative to
people building in new construction? One is a Democrat, and two
are Republicans, so it wasn't a Republican issue, but it is a
moral concern to me of the obligation that we have as
legislators and representatives of the taxpayers.
And to a person, they all said, well, we really believe
that there should not be an engagement for new construction
because that is something that seems it would incentivize
people to continue the same obligation and losses.
What are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Ellis. Certainly, one of the things that was brought up
when Congressman Meeks was talking about or doing his
conversation was about the development in New York City and
denying flood insurance to some of these high-risk
developments, future developments. To me, if they are building
appropriately, if they are building to mitigate the risk, the
private sector is going to come in, it is going to be something
that is affordable and it is something that is going to be
interesting to them. And so--
Mr. Pittenger. So say it is affordable and it is a prudent
investment and a business opportunity for private insurance,
then do we really need NFIP?
Mr. Ellis. I think that we are going to have to have the
NFIP, at least in some form, in the near term and we are
eventually, hopefully, transitioning to having more Americans
buying flood insurance and having a more robust private flood
insurance market.
Mr. Pittenger. Do you understand the moral obligation we
have of causing this issue to continue, exacerbating the
problem?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely. And as I said before, one of the
fundamental responsibilities of government is to protect their
constituents, to protect their people, and yet we have a
program that subsidizes and encourages people, not to just
build in harm's way, but to remain in harm's way, to keep them
at risk.
Mr. Pittenger. And just to the point, we do have a
responsibility to protect the taxpayer.
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Pittenger. And apparently, there hasn't been enough of
that since we are $24 billion in debt.
Does anybody else have any more comments? We have 20
seconds.
Ms. Sternhell. I would just add that, with regard to the
floodplain and disallowing the NFIP to participate, as Mr.
Ellis said, with new, resilient construction, we continue
talking about greater choice, greater choice, so leave the NFIP
in as a choice.
Mr. Pittenger. Again, that is the backdrop and obligation
of the taxpayer for people continuing to build in areas that
are floodplain areas.
Thank you very much.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Washington, Mr.
Heck.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Saks, I would like to walk through a door that
Congressman Cleaver unlocked, if he didn't crack open a little
bit. If I read the website of the National Wildlife Federation
correctly, it would be that the organization subscribes to the
scientific consensus that in fact planet Earth is experiencing
climate change, it is having consequences and will continue to
so in an increasing amount. Is that a fair characterization?
Mr. Saks. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Heck. I also read this line on your website,
``Scientists have concluded that most of the observed warming
is very likely due to the burning of coal, gas, and oil. Other
reasonable explanations, most notably changes in the sun, have
been ruled out.''
So can I fairly infer, therefore, that the National
Wildlife Federation believes that climate change is primarily
caused by human activity? Is that fair?
Mr. Saks. That is correct.
Mr. Heck. I also read other language that led me to
conclude that the organization believes that one of the
consequences of climate change is increased extreme weather
occurrences, like drought and fire danger and hurricanes,
hurricanes which result in flooding. Is that correct, Mr. Saks?
Mr. Saks. That is correct.
Mr. Heck. Is it also true, by the way, that the
organization is advocating that Members of Congress voice their
opposition to the President's withdrawal from the Paris
accords?
Mr. Saks. That is correct.
Mr. Heck. Do you see the connection between my line of
questioning and our subject here today?
Mr. Saks. I do. And I agree. I would also make the point,
though, that primarily when I come to work every day and think
about this program, I think of it as a land-use program first
and foremost before I think climate. Climate, of course, is an
exacerbator and a driver here, but--
Mr. Pittenger. And indeed, the primary cause of
exacerbation.
I have another line of questioning if I may, for any
members of the panel. I am not exactly sure who would be most
appropriate. I was actually reading through section eight of
the National Flood Insurance Program Integrity Improvement
Act--it would be the biggest mouthful to name a proposed bill
imaginable--which excludes certain types of property from NFIP
coverage, but allows State insurance regulators to waive those
exclusions if they find a market contraction.
I am going to put aside for the moment whether or not that
is good policy and focus on the conditions under which a State
regulator can issue a waiver because, well, frankly, to me,
they seemed needlessly complex. I would invite you to check on
pages 29 and 30, the conditions under which a State regulator
could indeed issue a waiver. I find them confusing. I find them
basically duplicative. I find my characterization of them just
now a gross understatement in that regard.
And frankly, to me, it seems like we should either say we
trust the State regulators and their knowledge of conditions in
the market that they know best, and after all they are, in most
States, elected or appointed and it is the repository of deep
expertise in this regard, and we defer to them about whether to
exercise a waiver like this.
Or if we decide to be more prescriptive about what we want
States to do, be forthright about that, be upfront about that,
be clear about that, be less confusing. This section seems like
it is trying to have it both ways, giving State regulators
waiver authority and then making them jump through a lot of
confusing hoops to use it that serve, in my opinion, no useful
purpose.
So my question to any of the witnesses is, why all this
complexity? Why not just say, again, we trust the States, we
trust the State regulators, and have a simpler, more
straightforward waiver?
Ms. Sternhell, I am calling upon you because you grabbed
your microphone.
Ms. Sternhell. Fair enough, sir. I would agree, and part of
what gives us concern about this is the year-to-year nature of
this, that I can be somebody who has new construction, we have
been granted a waiver, I have NFIP, now there are hearings, I
don't know if next year I have to have it or if I need to seek
out a private policy now. And what this does, if somehow that
coverage lapses because there is ambiguity in the system and
now I no longer have maintained continuous coverage or there is
an event when I am sort of in that doughnut hole.
And there is also the concern that some people may not be
able to get private coverage. And so there may be sufficient
penetration elsewhere, but not where I am located. And based on
how my State has defined it, I am now sort of in a doughnut
hole of no coverage available to me.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Rothfus.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lehmann, in your testimony, you expressed support for
Chairman Luetkemeyer's Taxpayer Exposure Mitigation Act which
has been incorporated into our package. As you know, this bill
would require FEMA to use reinsurance and other risk transfer
tools to reduce taxpayer exposure to catastrophic losses.
You testified, ``As FEMA gains more experience buying
reinsurance and as reinsurers gain more experience absorbing
risk from the NFIP,'' you anticipate that future risk transfers
could be significantly larger.
As you know, under our proposal, private insurers will
begin to take a greater share of the flood insurance market as
well. Can you describe the role that reinsurers will play in
the flood insurance market as the private sector's share
increases?
Mr. Lehmann. Sure. I would say there was some discussion
earlier about whether insurance companies are clamoring for
flood risk. In the reinsurance market, there is no question
that they are. The reinsurance market has been a soft market
for quite some time. There is more capital than there is risk
and they desperately want more risk to take on. So reinsurers
are very eager.
The first reinsurance transaction this year was
oversubscribed. There were many companies that wanted to take
part that weren't able to. So I think that reinsurers will be
taking the lead in a lot of cases and providing capacity and
that the primary insurers will follow. Once there is available
reinsurance for private primary flood insurance, more will
enter the market on that side as well.
Mr. Rothfus. Okay. Can you talk about how this would impact
consumers?
Mr. Lehmann. We think it is unquestionably a good thing for
consumers because you would only be buying a private policy if
you have a better deal, if you have a better product or you
have a cheaper product. For taxpayers as well, reinsurers
participating in taking out risk from the NFIP means that we
should have less examples of the sorts of borrowing that led us
to a $25 billion debt.
Mr. Rothfus. You also mentioned in your testimony about the
U.K. as an example of a place where a healthy private flood
market has taken root. Can you talk a bit about how the U.K.
and perhaps other countries have been able to foster a private
flood insurance market?
Mr. Lehmann. So in the U.K., flood insurance is included as
a part of homeowner's insurance. It is actually required. That
is not an approach that we at R Street would necessarily
endorse in the United States, but on a State-by-State basis,
States will determine whether an all-risk policy is something
they think is appropriate. And it has been proposed many times
in the past.
We think that moving in the direction of more private flood
insurance makes that a possibility, but it is one among a menu
of options.
Mr. Rothfus. Mr. Ellis, I want to talk a little bit about
some State issues here. As you know, some have expressed
concerns about consumer protections for homeowners who purchase
insurance through surplus lines.
My own State's insurance commissioner, Teresa Miller,
testified before this committee in support of Representative
Ross's bill last Congress and expressed a high level of comfort
with not admitting carriers. Is there evidence to show that
State insurance commissioners or State regulators have not
protected consumers, particularly with policies sold through
non-admitted carriers via surplus lines?
Mr. Ellis. Not to my knowledge, Congressman. And this is
sort of the natural wave of evolution of an insurance product
is to go through surplus lines and then to admitted carriers.
Mr. Rothfus. Would you agree or disagree that insurance
products sold to non-admitted carriers via surplus lines brings
much-needed insurance products and services to consumers?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Rothfus. Mr. Ellis, in your testimony you discussed the
GAO's finding that large cross-subsidies are built into the
NFIP and that they are largely benefiting high-income
homeowners. I know Chairman Duffy talked a little bit about
this earlier. But can you talk a bit about why the program's
current structure creates this dynamic and how the committees
may address this problem?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman. And actually, the exact
figures from the Government Accountability Office is that 78
percent of subsidized properties in the NFIP are located in
counties with the highest home values, so the top 3 deciles,
while only 5 percent of subsidized properties are in counties
with the lowest home values, the bottom 5 deciles.
And so what has happened is that a lot of these are these
grandfathered properties, these pre-FIRM properties that are
staying here and that are getting these subsidies, whereas when
there is some new development, they are paying the full freight
and disproportionately subsidizing those wealthier homeowners.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts,
Mr. Lynch, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, I would like to ask for unanimous consent to
enter into the record some letters expressing concern with the
draft bills from various stakeholders, including housing,
insurance and consumer advocates and lenders.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Just for the record, there are statements from
the National Association of REALTORS; the Council of Insurance
Agents and Brokers; the Consumer Federation of America; and the
Credit Union National Association, all concerned about
provisions of the bill.
So, Ms. Berni and Ms. Sternhell, in reading this bill,
there is sort of a pattern that emerges, and that is that the
burden and the cost shifting seems to go from the national
level really to fall on the States and local governments. There
is no money at all for mitigation.
So any mitigation that is going to be done in accordance
with this bill will have to be done by the City of New Orleans
or the town of Scituate, Massachusetts. It will fall on those
localities actually to take those mitigation steps, as well as
a voluntary buyout program, but there is no money, there is no
money on the Federal level for that.
So I would imagine that New York, after a Superstorm Sandy
situation, or New Orleans or Florida would have to come up with
that. So it seems to be taking the burden off of the Federal
taxpayer and putting it on the locality.
And as well on the commercial properties, it introduces the
opportunity for cherry-picking which would, again, shift costs
to a smaller group of people away from the larger group of
people.
And I am just wondering, the whole principle behind
insurance is to really spread risk and this bill seems to have
the opposite effect. It actually concentrates the risk on a
smaller number of people who are more vulnerable. And I just
wanted to get your opinions, Ms. Sternhell, and Ms. Berni, am I
wrong on this?
Ms. Berni. Respectfully, sir, we would agree with your
assessment. We are supportive of improvements to the program,
but not in a way that destabilizes the NFIP.
With regard to mitigation, it has been a leading policy
area that we have advocated for. And we have included in our
written testimony some potential ideas for increasing funding.
One additional idea could potentially be to freeze just the
interest accrual on the debt for the duration of this
authorization. That is about $400 million a year to provide for
greater funding for mitigation. That would provide greater
benefit rather than just moving money from one Federal
Government pocket to another.
And then another concept we will mention is just increasing
program participation. Again, it will reduce taxpayer exposure,
reduce the risk of flood losses, and potentially bring in more
revenues from healthy premiums that are being paid into the
NFIP. And so we think those should be some additional proposals
the committee should consider ahead of reauthorization.
Mr. Lynch. Great. And the idea of going for private
insurance, that lowers the level of participation in the NFIP,
right?
Ms. Berni. Yes. We support the private market coming in as
long as it is done alongside a healthy and sustainable NFIP.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
Ms. Sternhell?
Ms. Sternhell. I wholeheartedly concur with that. That was
why the approach the City has offered is one that can dispel
fears or validate them--
Mr. Lynch. Right.
Ms. Sternhell. --about what the private market would do to
the NFIP and its ability to pool risk appropriately.
Mr. Lynch. One other provision that I notice in this bill
is that ostensibly it lowers the maximum mandatory rate from 18
to 15 percent, but on the other end it increases what is now
probably around a 5 percent average rate of contribution and
bumps that up to 8 percent. When you look at FEMA's numbers, no
one is paying 18 percent.
Ms. Sternhell. Correct.
Mr. Lynch. No one is paying 18 percent, so that is kind of
fake. So no one really benefits from that, but a whole lot of
people who are paying between 5 and 6 percent are going to be
bumped up to 8 percent and that is the real impact of the bill.
Is that how you see this?
Ms. Sternhell. Yes. And we would even argue that it is 9
percent with the additional charge on the service--
Mr. Lynch. That is right, I forgot about the surcharge.
Yes, good point.
Ms. Sternhell. I agree.
Mr. Lynch. Okay.
I think my time has just about expired, so I yield back.
Thank you for your testimony.
Chairman Hensarling. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
MacArthur.
Mr. MacArthur. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My home is in New Jersey, so we know all about flood and
flood insurance. I had to smile earlier when there was talk
about the mapping. We built a home some years ago and when I
got the flood map, my living room was in one flood zone and my
bedroom was in a different flood zone. It is not that big of a
house, but that is the way the mapping was.
But my questions are on other subjects. We are one of the
States with the highest participation in the NFIP. And we also
were hurt the most by Sandy. Half of all New Jersey Sandy
losses occurred in my district, so this is very important to
me.
And I wanted to ask, do any of you know how many Americans
live in coastal communities, coastal counties, counties that
abut the ocean? Anybody?
Mr. Lehmann. It is about half, I believe.
Mr. MacArthur. It is about 140 million people. How does it
affect, beyond the homeowner who has had a flood loss, who else
is affected by flooded communities in general? I will take a
brief answer from anybody.
Ms. Sternhell. You can look at a State's economy. If you
have the Jersey shore where you have the boardwalk and a
tourism economy, you have social networks. Apart from a
homeowner trying to rebuild, kids being able to go to school,
infrastructure more broadly to rebuild.
Mr. MacArthur. Yes, so other businesses, State and local
taxes get affected, Federal taxes get affected by business
decline and that is exactly what I have seen back at home.
I want to be clear, I absolutely support the reforms in the
bill because the reality is the program won't be sustained if
we don't fix it. We can't just keep running in arrears, we have
to fix this. But I want to make the point that this is much
bigger than the individual policyholder.
And in fact, if we have less policyholders, those are the
very people and businesses that will be at the front of the
line to get FEMA grants and we will be spending Federal dollars
without having gotten the benefit of individual premiums paid
in for that. So we have to get this right.
I have questions in just a couple of areas. The first is
new construction, this elimination after 4 years. And I do
support lifting up a private market. I have spent my whole
career in insurance and there should be a more robust flood
market out there.
I want to ask, though, the 10 percent threshold, that if
there is 10 percent market penetration by uninsured, and I
think, Mr. Ellis, I will start with you on this, is it possible
that you could have 10 percent, even 50 percent, even a higher
market penetration, could you have that, but have an individual
not be able to find flood insurance on their particular risk?
And bear in mind, these are homes that probably are older
if they are being torn down and now they would be subject to
more rigorous zoning restraints, they would be more flood proof
properties. But is it possible an individual could find no
access to insurance in an otherwise robust private market?
Mr. Ellis. I am assuming it could be possible, although for
the exact reasons that you outline, Congressman, about the
zoning and the new development and then also the fact that a
developer is going to want to sell that home to somebody and
part of getting that home is going to have flood insurance.
Mr. MacArthur. Is it possible, and I have spent 30 years in
insurance and I spent some of those years in the flood market,
but it has been a while since I have rolled around in that
industry. Do any of you think it would be reasonable to require
agents, because they are agents of the flood program, require
them to either provide an alternative private market quote or
certify that none is available? Would that be a practical
requirement of agents?
Mr. Lehmann. I don't know that you could get agents to--you
have a certain number of appointments and there could be a
conflict there regarding are you representing your company or
are you representing NFIP.
Mr. MacArthur. I am running out of time, so I have one more
question. It is for Ms. Berni. You said in your opening remarks
that the 8 percent floor hurts more than the 6 percent ceiling.
We do have to get people toward risk-based rates. We have to
for this program to be sustained. What would you suggest would
be an appropriate floor for premium increases?
Ms. Berni. The Biggert-Waters Act required that subsidized
properties go to full risk rates. And the 2014 law maintained
that. And so we feel that the 5 percent floor is sufficient,
especially when considering that last year, FEMA increased
premiums 5.4 percent on the base rate, but 6.3 percent when
including fees.
Mr. MacArthur. My time has expired. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Kustoff.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here this morning
and now this afternoon to testify.
If I could, regarding the flood mapping, and, Mr. Ellis, if
I could address this to you, we have heard today that reforms
are desperately needed to the NFIP. And to me, there is
probably no statistic that is any more glaring than the fact
that the program is almost $25 billion in debt.
But as we look at the flood mapping reforms, I could share
an example with you that recently I met with a constituent of
mine who owns a house that was built in the 1970s. The home is
not located near a major river, it is not located near a
tributary, and FEMA has never required the individual, the
owner, to purchase flood insurance. Even during the 100-year
flood of the Mississippi River in 2011, the home did not
sustain any flood damage.
However, 2 years ago in 2015, FEMA determined that a
portion, not the whole house, but a portion was located in the
flood zone and the owner was mandated to purchase flood
insurance. My question to you is, how after 45 years of owning
a home is it suddenly designated as being located within a
flood zone without having any history of flooding?
Mr. Ellis. Congressman, and I obviously don't know the
exact circumstances of this situation, you outlined them, but
certainly, because of other development patterns, because of
other changes, a home could move from being not in a flood zone
to actually being in a flood zone. It could have been just
outside of it or whatever. I don't know the exact circumstances
here.
But it does get back to, again, that it is in the
homeowners' interests to have a better mapping program, to have
more confidence in the mapping program, because if you don't
have confidence then we are just going to continue to have
these fights about, am I in the floodplain or not in the
floodplain? And if you are just barely outside of the
floodplain, you still have a significant amount of flood risk,
Congressman. And certainly the people in Baton Rouge found that
out, that they may not have been required to purchase flood
insurance, but they sure wish they had.
Mr. Kustoff. If a property owner wants to dispute the
decision by FEMA, can you describe the process for doing so?
Mr. Ellis. Normally, they have to get, particularly if it
is a grandfathered property, which I am assuming this house is
built in the 1970s, probably was before the flood insurance
rate map was done, that they have to get an elevation
certificate, which can be several hundred dollars, which,
depending on who the person is, could be a huge cost.
And that is why we have really pushed to follow things like
North Carolina has done, where the State took their mapping
money or took the mapping money and did LIDAR for all the
higher-risk areas and actually provided that information to the
public, and I think that is the more responsible way. And that
is why we are pushing for FEMA to have more granular data in
this reauthorization.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lehmann, if I could, my district or part of my district
runs along the Mississippi River. And I am interested in how we
calculate premiums for inland properties as opposed to coastal
properties and specifically properties that are protected by
levees and dams. Can you explain how FEMA differentiates
between inland and coastal properties when assessing that risk?
Mr. Lehmann. That is not my area of expertise. I couldn't
tell you that.
Mr. Kustoff. Okay. Do any of the witnesses know?
Mr. Ellis?
Mr. Ellis. They have certain higher designations, like, for
instance, if you are at risk of storm surge and things along
those lines, you have the V zone, which is going to have a
higher premium than you would have in a coastal area.
Also, NFIP, if you are behind a levee and the levee
provides a hundred-year level of protection or more, you are
considered not to be in the special flood hazard area anymore.
I would argue you still have a residual risk. It is probably
still in your interest to purchase flood insurance. It would be
cheaper because of that level of protection, but they are
supposed to take that into account.
Mr. Kustoff. And looking at those rates and the NFIP
program for authorization, the draft, do you believe that the
premium rates will be lower for inland property owners?
Mr. Ellis. Generally, depending on whether they are there
has certainly been significant flooding on the Mississippi
River. I first got into this whole area when I was in the Coast
Guard and Base St. Louis flooded in 1993 and I was out there
for that. So, there would be some risk, but it would be less
than for some of the higher-risk coastal areas like Florida.
Mr. Kustoff. When the consideration is being done for
premiums, should the inland properties located within the flood
protection structures, like levees or dams, should they be
assessed differently?
Mr. Ellis. My understanding is that they are currently,
Congressman. They take into account the level of protection.
And again, though, my concern would be that there is some
residual risk. We certainly have seen levees fail in areas and
that is something where those people would be flooded just like
they were in the regular floodplain.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Tenney.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just have a couple of issues. I come from upstate New
York, where we don't really have any what you would think major
flooding, but we have had major flooding. A lot of it I would
like to place on the fault of government in some cases.
I would like specifically just to quickly mention something
as I think it is something that we can address on the Federal
level, having to do with the Department of Environmental
Conservation in New York State. And unfortunately, what has
happened is a lot of the intervention from the State and
Federal side of it has prevented our local governments from
being able to protect themselves from really just heavy rains,
not necessarily what we have termed hundred-year floods.
And I just want to point out one thing that is particularly
difficult for an area like where I live, which is a small city,
suburban area. Article 15 of the Department of Environmental
Conservation Regulations talks about protections of waterways
and streams. And it names as its three goals relating to water
policy is the establishment of regulations compatible with
protections and enhancement of the present potential values of
the water resources, to protect the public health and welfare,
and that are consistent with the reasonable economic and social
development of the state, including protecting the human
environment.
This article has been interpreted to protect,
unfortunately, the fish environment, I might add, for lack of a
better term, in the middle of a human environment where an area
that was once industrialized, we are seeing an inability of the
local governments to be able to even participate in managing
the streams and waterways because we are creating, let us put
it this way, artificial trout spawning areas in the middle of
former industrial areas where basically the trout don't make it
too far down the stream.
But toward that, it has caused an imbalance in our water
table and caused a lot of flooding in areas that have not
received flooding in many, many years. Just the high incidence
of rain has caused us to have massive flooding and massive
requests for aid from the Federal Government.
And this brings me to two big issues that I wanted to have
possibly Ms. Berni address since you are in that area. One is
on the ability of the local governments to be able to map what
true flood zones are and the ability to participate and get
assistance from FEMA in areas where these--we can't correct
these areas immediately dealing with the Department of
Environmental Conservation, but allowing FEMA to be able to
come in and say the local governments can determine where flood
zones are to drive down the costs of flood insurance, to have
the availability of flood insurance through NFIP and with the
fiscal idea in mind of eventually bringing NFIP's fiscal shift
to the taxpayers back in line.
So maybe, Ms. Berni, you could address this issue as to
your experience in an area which is truly in a flood zone.
Ms. Berni. Yes, absolutely. So in south Louisiana since
Katrina, we have worked, several local governments have taxed
themselves in order to generate more money to build local flood
protection features. And we have had to work very closely with
FEMA through the development of new maps to get those locally
built flood protections, levees, drainage, improvements
included onto the map.
We had a lot of trouble when the first iteration of maps
were redone for several parishes because they didn't take those
locally built flood protection features into account. Several
communities in Louisiana are now part of a pilot program called
the Levee Analysis Mapping Procedure, LAMP process, which was
established to essentially help give credit for some of these
local flood protection features.
And so we are working very closely and it has certainly
been our experience that local governments and local levee
districts and local floodplain managers have the most and need
to really be involved through the mapping process as well.
And so I believe the Technical Mapping Advisory Council is
getting more engaged toward this as well. But local
governments, when they are able to provide maps, deliver
ultimately a better product working with FEMA.
Ms. Tenney. Great. So this is something that you think is
feasible that we could do, provide to New York. Because really,
we technically really aren't in a flood zone, but we have
created such a disastrous scenario in our very rural inland
region of the State that we actually do have problems. We have
had massive flooding. I would love to see us roll back the
cost, obviously make the National Flood Insurance Program more
affordable, reduce the burden on the taxpayers and taking the
risk on this.
But I appreciate your comments. And just wanted to--I think
I am losing my time here. But I want to say thank you, that I
hope that we can find a resolution here that would give our
local governments the opportunity to protect themselves since
our State Government doesn't seem to be interested in allowing
them to protect themselves and our taxpayers and the value of
our properties.
Ms. Berni. Absolutely.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you so much.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentlelady has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Hollingsworth.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Good afternoon, thank you all for being
here. I really appreciate all of the great testimony.
I wanted to put a bit of a face on the flood insurance
program and flooding. As the chairman said, I represent
Indiana, and in a small, rural community we had a flood a
couple of weeks ago. But the story starts far before that.
Brooklyn Bush started her American Dream on June 1st of 2015.
She opened a small hair salon. Her mom had owned a hair salon
before that. And she opened it on Water Street, which, by the
way, isn't in a hundred-year floodplain.
And then on May 19th of this year, because of 30 minutes of
really, really hard rain where more than 6 inches fell during
that 30 minutes and in the previous few hours before that, her
entire hair salon was flooded, not flooded by 6 inches, not
flooded by 12 inches, but flooded 5 feet deep in her hair
salon. And so her American Dream ended that day and she is
struggling to get back on her feet.
Now, somewhat lost in the conversation about how we help
individuals get flood insurance who are in hundred-year
floodplains are those that we need to ensure have access to it,
because one of the things that she talked about was, I would
have bought flood insurance, but no one talked to me about
flood insurance. I am outside the hundred-year floodplain.
And I think one of the things we need in terms of a private
market participation is more people understanding and pushing
this product and helping people understand their risks.
Mr. Lehmann, I think you talked about this earlier with the
high percentage of people outside of the hundred-year
floodplain or the percentage of the population that purchases
inside the hundred-year floodplain, but not outside of it,
while there is still risk there.
Can you talk a little bit about how we might expand the
program because of the access to private capital and the access
to private insurers?
Mr. Lehmann. Sure. I would like to expand who buys, expand
take-up, write, whether it is in the NFIP or in private
insurance. We prefer that more risk be shifted to private
insurance.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes.
Mr. Lehmann. If there are private products that agents can
make some money selling, they will definitely do their best to
market it to a broad range of people.
Historically, it has basically been tied to your mortgage.
If you were required to get it, that is who got it. And that is
who was ever told about it.
There have been efforts--FloodSmart is a pretty good effort
to try to spread the word beyond that cohort. It is not
terribly successful. I couldn't tell you if the ROI was worth
it for the government to spend that money, but it is a public
good.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Ultimately, I think what you said I
really latch onto, is that if we align the incentives for
individual sellers of this product to sell private products to
individuals, then those individuals would be more likely to
purchase it and we will see up-take, not only in the hundred-
year areas, but also in other areas. And I totally believe what
you are saying.
I think Mr. Ellis talked about this a few minutes ago with
Baton Rouge--I believe you brought up the example of people who
would have liked to have purchased it, but might be outside the
hundred-year floodplain?
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely, Congressman. As a matter of fact, I
have the numbers right here. After the Baton Rouge flooding,
the average NFIP payment was $86,500. If you didn't have flood
insurance, the average individual disaster aid payment was
$9,150. And so really, you want to have more people getting
flood insurance.
And I sympathize with Ms. Bush, your constituent. What we
are hoping is that you develop a greater private flood
insurance market so that the insurance agents, the people who
sold her her other business insurance, are going to understand
this better, are going to say, hey, here is this other product,
you are not in the higher-risk area, you are not in the
hundred-year floodplain, so it shouldn't be that much more
expensive. But if you do have a disaster, which they do happen,
then you are going to be covered.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right. And I think that stems from
getting more and more private players into the market, more and
more opportunities.
Mr. Ellis. Absolutely.
Mr. Hollingsworth. The other thing that came up in this was
how vanilla the current product is and how we need more private
players in the market so that we can develop different policies
that cover different types of people.
And one example was also some apartment dwellings were
flooded, and the contents inside, and while the structure may
have been covered, the contents inside weren't. And we have to
make sure that we develop those policies. And I think that
comes through more private players, being able to develop
different types of products that ultimately people will or
won't buy and those that they will buy are successful over the
long run.
Any comment on that, Mr. Lehmann?
Mr. Lehmann. Yes, certainly. On the commercial side, NFIP
doesn't provide much in the way of business interruption
insurance.
On the personal residential side, if you need to stay in a
hotel while your home is being worked on, there isn't coverage
for that.
These are the sorts of things, product features that you
would expect in the private market.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right. In a private market where people
begin to decide what they want and what they don't want. And
companies are incentivized to offer more and more products,
just like we see in other insurance products. Companies develop
gap measures to be able to account for what people need.
The last question I wanted to ask you, Mr. Saks, was, Mr.
Heck had brought up some of the maybe increasing challenges
associated with climate change and other reasons why the risk
may be increasing for flooding around the country. I guess what
I think about it is, if the risk goes up, but we fail to make
any changes to the pricing on the policies, wouldn't we expect
the program itself to be less and less actuarially sound over
time?
Mr. Saks. I think that is correct. I would add one point to
what you were saying before, which is we encourage that FEMA
map beyond the hundred-year floodplain, not necessarily the
purchase. But Ms. Bush should have known she had flood risk.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right, thank you so much.
I appreciate it and I yield back.
Chairman Hensarling. The time of the gentleman has expired.
For what purpose does the gentleman from Massachusetts seek
recognition? Unanimous consent requests?
Mr. Lynch. Yes, I do, Mr. Chairman. I ask unanimous consent
to place in the record a letter from Mitch Landrieu, Mayor of
the City of New Orleans, citing concerns regarding the lack of
affordability and the flood mapping process and lack of
mitigation.
Chairman Hensarling. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you.
Chairman Hensarling. There being no other Members in the
queue, I want to thank each of our witnesses for coming to
testify today. We are most appreciative.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:09 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 7, 2017
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
