- EXAMINING RESULTS AND ACCOUNTABILITY AT THE WORLD BANK

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING RESULTS AND ACCOUNTABILITY

AT THE WORLD BANK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MONETARY

POLICY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 22, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-8

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-249 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PETER T. KING, New York              MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California              Member
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            BRAD SHERMAN, California
BILL POSEY, Florida                  GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             AL GREEN, Texas
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 BILL FOSTER, Illinois
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
MIA LOVE, Utah                       JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DENNY HECK, Washington
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JUAN VARGAS, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade

ANDY BARR, Kentucky, Chairman

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Vice          GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     BRAD SHERMAN, California
MIA LOVE, Utah                       AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DENNY HECK, Washington
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 22, 2017...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 22, 2017...............................................    27

WITNESSES
Wednesday, March 22, 2017

Berger, Elana, Social Inclusion and Accountability Program
Manager, Bank Information Center...............................    10
Chavkin, Sasha, Reporter, International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists......................................     5
Ensminger, Jean, Edie and Lew Wasserman Professor of Social
Science, California Institute of Technology....................     6
Morris, Scott A., Senior Fellow, Center for Global Development...     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Berger, Elana................................................    28
Chavkin, Sasha...............................................    33
Ensminger, Jean..............................................    69
Morris, Scott A..............................................    77

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Moore, Hon. Gwen:
Letter to Dr. Jim Yong Kim, President, World Bank Group,
dated July 14, 2016........................................    81
Written statement of Oxfam America...........................    83
Memorandum from Admiral James Stavridis to the Secretary of
the Treasury, dated July 25, 2011..........................    84
Memorandum from CDR USTRANSCOM and CDR USCENTCOM to the
Secretary of the Treasury, dated May 10, 2010..............    86
Ensminger, Jean:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Barr........................................    87

EXAMINING RESULTS AND

ACCOUNTABILITY AT

THE WORLD BANK

----------

Wednesday, March 22, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Monetary
Policy and Trade,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy Barr
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Barr, Williams, Pittenger,
Love, Hill, Emmer, Tenney, Hollingsworth; Moore, Sherman, Heck,
and Vargas.
Ex officio present: Representatives Hensarling and Waters.
Chairman Barr. The Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and
Trade will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Examining Results and
Accountability at the World Bank.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
I welcome members to our hearing today. This year is
especially important for the World Bank as Congress will be
considering the 18th replenishment of the International
Development Association, or IDA, the Bank's lending mechanism
for the world's poorest countries. Since IDA replenishments
occur on a 3-year cycle, 2017 is a rare opportunity for
Congress to discuss appropriate resource levels for the Bank as
well as any needed reforms.
As the World Bank's largest shareholder, the United States
has a leading role in the Bank's governance. If we take that
role seriously, we must hold the Bank to the highest standards,
demanding accountability for its projects and ensuring that it
remains focused on poverty alleviation.
I am concerned, however, that internal incentives at the
Bank may prioritize lending over producing real results. Such
incentives have been criticized for literally decades, yet the
Bank's own evaluation office has indicated little has changed.
Let us be clear. No one claims that the Bank's officials
will always get things right. But its incentives appear
designed to elevate lending at the expense of learning from
past mistakes. As the Bank's Independent Evaluation Group, or
IEG, concluded in a 2014 report, ``This continuing push to lend
increases the opportunity costs of dedicating time and effort
to learning and knowledge-sharing and distorts the metrics of
performance in favor of inputs and short-term outputs rather
than on results and development solutions.''
The evaluation office added, ``IEG interviewees indicated
that senior management should give knowledge the same status as
lending in management attention, monitoring, and promotion.''
Well-designed incentives should focus our attention more on
the lives of Bank beneficiaries, not on loan amounts approved
by the board. Such incentives will place more value on the
poors' rights and freedoms without which long-term economic
growth is unlikely. As Nobel Prize-winning economist Angus
Deaton has written, ``World Bank officials have long moved on
to other things by the time the effects of their handiwork
become visible. There is no responsibility of member-country
shareholders to the recipients of their aid.''
Indeed, the Bank's projects in IDA countries have, at
times, harmed their intended beneficiaries or emboldened
regimes that are more committed to personal enrichment than
they are to their citizens' futures.
Today, we will learn about some of those projects, and how
their failures, some of which reflect lapses in basic project
management, can spur improvements at the Bank. Of course, the
Bank is not new to reform initiatives. Its recent history has
seen the introduction of matrices, scorecards, frameworks, task
forces, and other well-intentioned ideas. In the end, however,
this committee expects to see genuine reform, not the branding
of reform.
Such reform will, of course, hinge on the Bank's own
leadership. I am therefore concerned by reports from within the
Bank that senior officials may not appreciate what is at stake.
In the Bank's 2015 employee engagement survey, a mere 38
percent of respondents indicated that senior management clearly
communicates strategic priorities, while only 26 percent
responded that management ``creates a culture of openness and
trust.'' Only 34 percent of respondents had any confidence that
the Bank would take action on these findings.
The Executive Committee of the World Bank's Staff Group
Association called these results, ``sobering, humbling,
embarrassing, humiliating, appalling, and a number of other
adjectives that could be added to the list.''
If the Bank is to be successful in its goal to eliminate
poverty, then business as usual is not enough. The World Bank
may have the best of intentions, but we must call on the Bank
to deliver results, not simply look for new ways to push money
out the door.
In addition, the Bank is involved in a number of countries
whose economic prospects are key for U.S. security interests.
If the Bank cannot design and execute projects effectively,
then not only could the world be less well off, it could be
less safe.
I want to thank the witnesses again for testifying today.
And I look forward to hearing their thoughts on how we can make
the World Bank more accountable and more results-driven.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Gwen Moore, for 3
minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And good
morning, colleagues.
I want to welcome our very distinguished panel and thank
them for their time.
I do see a familiar face, a former staffer of this
committee, Mr. Morris. You are proof that there is life after
Congress and you inspire me.
Let me jump right into it. The World Bank is the flagship
development bank in the world. And it is my intention to keep
it that way. As a matter of fact, as we were going over
material last night, we saw testimony from former
Representative John Kasich, now the Governor of Ohio, who was
the ranking member of the Budget Committee, and spoke
passionately on behalf of the World Bank.
I consider myself as well to be a staunch advocate of the
Bank, its mission, and I do believe that the moral authority
and the involvement of the United States has led to a safer and
more just world. And I am also aware of areas where the Bank
has fallen short.
I pushed hard to get the best, most comprehensive
safeguards in place for exactly the reasons that we have seen
in Uganda. Doing development in economically depressed areas
means almost by definition that you will operate in areas with
limited judicial capacity, questionable rule of law, and a
desire to get the job done that could lead to a certain kind of
myopia of money. It is why a strong social and moral grounding
is very critically important.
I sent a letter with then-Subcommittee Chairman Huizenga--
and without objection, I ask unanimous consent to place it in
the record--that made quite clear my disgust for what happened
surrounding the Bank projects in Uganda.
I have met with the Bank about it since. And I get the
sense that lessons learned have been lessons applied. Now, we
have stronger safeguards, and I am happy about that. And I hope
my Republican colleagues are pleased about that as well.
In fact, I would love for our private U.S.-based
institutions to mimic some of the social and environmental
impacts of projects. I wish that more financial institutions
were as responsive to this body as the Bank has been. And even
as we fund the World Bank, we back our banks as taxpayers found
that we did in 2008 and 2009.
If there is something that comes out of Uganda at this
hearing, I hope it is that safeguards are not only important,
but meticulously observed, even in the difficult position of
when the pressure to finish the project is on.
I yield back my 2 seconds.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
And we will reserve the opportunity for the ranking member
of the full Financial Services Committee, Ms. Waters, to give a
2-minute opening statement, but for now, I am going to go ahead
and introduce the witnesses here.
First, we welcome the testimony of Mr. Sasha Chavkin, who
is the lead reporter for the International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists (ICIJ's) ``Evicted and Abandoned''
investigation, which analyzed Bank projects across the world
and their unintended impact on the poor. He has previously
written for ProPublica, Columbia Journalism Review, and The New
York World. Mr. Chavkin has reported from countries including
Ethiopia, South Sudan, Honduras, and Sri Lanka, and his work
has been recognized by the Society of Professional Journalists,
the Society of Environmental Journalists, and the Sidney
Hillman Foundation.
Second, Dr. Jean Ensminger is the Edie and Lew Wasserman
Professor of Social Science at the California Institute of
Technology, and is a past president of the Society for Economic
Anthropology. Dr. Ensminger has conducted several decades of
research on Africa, and her current research focuses on
corruption in development and decentralized government.
Third, Mr. Scott Morris is a senior fellow at the Center
for Global Development, and a director of the U.S. Development
Policy Initiative. Mr. Morris also served as Deputy Assistant
Secretary for Development Finance and the Debt at the U.S.
Treasury Department during the first term of the Obama
Administration.
And finally, Ms. Elana Berger is the Child Rights Program
manager at the Bank Information Center. She is a human rights
lawyer with significant experience working on education and
childrens' rights at the international level.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.
But before we turn to our witnesses, I would like to give
the ranking member of the Full Financial Services Committee,
the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, an opportunity for
a 2-minute opening statement. The Chair now recognizes Ranking
Member Waters for 2 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I would like to welcome our witnesses here today to discuss
one of the very important issues within our jurisdiction, which
is oversight of U.S. participation in the multilateral
development banks, including the World Bank.
There is by now widespread agreement that poverty in the
developing world is one of the major challenges facing the
world today. While the success of some countries over the past
50 years has shown that development is possible, the failures
elsewhere have shown that it is not inevitable.
I believe that the criticism of the World Bank that you
will hear today should be understood within a context that also
recognizes the great deal of progress the Bank has made in many
areas over the past few decades, in large part due to pressure
from civil society, from individual governments, from
parliaments, including the U.S. Congress, and in particular
from this committee itself.
Over the years, this committee has successfully insisted
upon much more transparency and disclosure of information from
the World Bank. Many years ago, we conditioned U.S. support for
the Bank on the creation of the Inspection Panel, an
independent accountability mechanism that would investigate
allegations by citizens of the Bank's failure to follow its own
policies and procedures.
Working in a bipartisan fashion, we successfully pushed for
debt relief, and then for better and more effective debt relief
for impoverished countries. We have also pushed for less
burdensome conditionality and more attention to the social
dimension that must be present when decisions about development
assistance are made.
I welcome both the criticism and the recommendations that
our witnesses will make today, which, in my view, means that
you will also be making the case for strong U.S. leadership
within the Bank, and for more vigorous congressional oversight,
and for this committee, in particular, to take a more active
role in helping to shape the development policies that have
helped make the World Bank the preeminent development
institution that it has become.
I would like to thank the Chair, as well as Ms. Moore, for
all of the work that she has done to help us make sure that we
give the kind of support to the World Bank that is needed.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired.
Each of the witnesses will now be recognized for 5 minutes
to give an oral presentation of their testimony. And without
objection, each of your written statements will be made a part
of the record.
Mr. Chavkin, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SASHA CHAVKIN, REPORTER, INTERNATIONAL CONSORTIUM
OF INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISTS

Mr. Chavkin. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Moore, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify about the World Bank.
I am a reporter for the International Consortium of
Investigative Journalists, or ICIJ, a nonprofit news
organization that conducts investigative reporting on global
issues of public interest. We work through large collaborations
with media outlets around the world, such as our project last
year, ``The Panama Papers.''
I was the lead reporter in a global ICIJ investigation
entitled, ``Evicted and Abandoned,'' which was published in
April 2015, and examined forced displacement caused by projects
financed by the World Bank. Our team included more than 50
reporters from outlets in 21 countries. We reported on the
ground in 14 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
And we analyzed more than 6,600 World Bank documents that
tracked what the Bank calls involuntary resettlement associated
with projects. We found that over a decade, spanning from 2004
through 2013, projects financed by the World Bank physically or
economically displaced an estimated 3.4 million people around
the world. That means that these people either lost their
homes, their livelihoods were damaged, or they lost some or all
of their land.
The figure was drawn from the Bank's own documents tracking
resettlement and includes projects funded by the IDA and IBRD,
but not the Bank's business lending arm, the IFC.
We also found that the Bank regularly failed to follow its
own safeguards for protecting displaced communities. These
commitments include resettling communities in equal or better
conditions than they lived in before, restoring lost
livelihoods, and avoiding violent evictions.
We found instead that the Bank repeatedly funded
governments that not only failed to adequately resettle
communities, but in some cases were accused of human rights
abuses such as rape, murder, and violent evictions associated
with Bank projects. We found in several cases that the World
Bank continued to bankroll these borrowers even after evidence
of these abuses came to light.
One of the most significant cases we examined was the
Bank's support for a health and education initiative in
Ethiopia called the Protection of Basic Services Project. We
investigated allegations that some of this money was diverted
to an Ethiopian government program called Villagization which
violently evicted a minority tribe called the Anuak from their
traditional farmlands which were then turned over to investors.
I met with Anuak refugees from Ethiopia in a camp in South
Sudan. I encountered a devoutly Christian community whose
members described being beaten, raped, and seeing family
members killed by Ethiopian soldiers who were driving them from
their land. I also spoke to the former Ethiopian governor who
was in charge at the time of the evictions, now living in exile
in the Philippines, who described to me how he personally
diverted $10 million in World Bank funds to the Villagization
program.
Despite the evidence presented by refugees, human rights
groups, and others, the World Bank refused to acknowledge that
their funding had supported these evictions. Last year, the
Bank announced an extension of a similar initiative in Ethiopia
under a different lending mechanism that now makes it
impossible for communities to file complaints to the World Bank
ombudsman.
There are three findings from our reporting that seem most
relevant to the work of the committee today. One is that the
World Bank has serious problems with enforcing its safeguards
and holding its borrowers accountable for following its rules.
The second point is that the Bank can be responsive to pressure
in the form of negative publicity and the influence of donor
countries, particularly the United States.
Shortly after ICIJ shared its findings with the Bank, the
Bank announced a resettlement action plan that boosted funding
for safeguards enforcement by 15 percent and hired 11 new
safeguard specialists. The resettlement documents and ombudsman
report that allowed ICIJ to conduct our investigation existed
because the Bank had previously adopted an open-records policy
and created an ombudsman, the Inspection Panel, at the
insistence of the United States and members of this committee.
Finally, the failures in safeguard enforcement do not
negate the fact that the same projects may also have positive
effects on development. In Ethiopia, for example, the Bank said
that its investments helped slash child mortality in half in
less than a decade.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chavkin can be found on page
33 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Dr. Jean Ensminger, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEAN ENSMINGER, EDIE AND LEW WASSERMAN PROFESSOR
OF SOCIAL SCIENCE, CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Ms. Ensminger. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Moore, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is an honor to
have been invited here to testify.
In 2007, based upon my research experience in Kenya, I
asked the World Bank to investigate corruption in the Kenya
Arid Lands Project. INT is the World Bank's integrity vice
presidency and it has sole responsibility for investigating
corruption in World Bank projects. In its investigation of
28,000 financial transactions from the Arid Lands Project, INT
concluded that 62 percent were suspected fraudulent or
questionable. The Arid Lands Project was then shut down.
The Arid Lands case tells us something about the
effectiveness of routine monitoring systems at the World Bank.
For 14 years, this project was rated ``satisfactory,'' despite
the monitoring of the World Bank's task team leader, external
supervision missions, regular financial management reviews, and
audits. In 2007, it was even referred to as ``exemplary'' and
served as a model for a new project.
Two of Arid Land's biggest problems were lack of
transparency and excessive staff discretion over the selection
of project recipients. Control of future funding provided
leverage to silence beneficiaries who complained about project
corruption. Most troubling to me is that I see the same
patterns on the ground today in World Bank projects.
Recently, a villager asked the regional head of a current
World Bank project in his area how much money his region was
budgeted to receive from the project. The head of the project
refused to tell him. Two weeks ago, I made the same request of
that project's two World Bank task team leaders. I have
received no response.
Fortunately, not all World Bank projects are as poorly
designed and implemented as Arid Land's. The original
Indonesian Community-Driven Development Project is deservedly
often cited as the great success story.
The Indonesian project was specifically designed to bypass
the major centers of government corruption. Private firms were
used to hire many project staff rather than seconding them from
corrupt government ministries. The tone at the top of the
project was inspiring and this attracted reform-minded job
applicants.
The Indonesian project used a democratic and competitive
selection process controlled by beneficiaries to allocate
funds. In striking contrast to the secretive nature of Kenyan
projects, the Indonesian project also aggressively encouraged
uncensored media coverage and academic research by third
parties to shine a spotlight on problems like corruption.
What the Indonesian case teaches us is that development aid
can work to better the lives of the poor. But when projects
don't work well, as was the case with Arid Lands, sanctions are
necessary. This is where INT comes in. My concern is that INT
has moved away from intensive forensic audits in favor of a
concentration on debarment cases.
Since the Arid Lands forensic audit 5\1/2\ years ago, INT
has posted 48 investigation reports on its website; 45 of the
48 are investigations of companies. The vast majority of these
cases involved one company that was found guilty of fabricating
documents in order to qualify to bid on a contract.
Company debarment is important work. The problem is that
corruption in many World Bank projects is not limited to a few
rogue contractors. In systemically corrupt countries like
Kenya, it is common for World Bank projects to be captured by
the government ministry cartels from which the project staff is
seconded. Failure to undertake these investigations leaves a
vast segment of the World Bank's portfolio exposed.
There is an inherent conflict of interest between the
mandate of INT to fight corruption and operations' goals to
keep the money flowing and client states happy. INT is in the
political crosshairs.
In my written testimony, I list some specific
recommendations for reforming INT and transparency policy. The
first is to move INT's direct report out of operations and over
to the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Regarding transparency, while the new disclosure policies
of 2010 are laudable, they specifically exclude access to
project financial data. These are precisely the data that
beneficiaries and third parties need to fight corruption.
Thank you for your time, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ensminger can be found on
page 69 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you.
Mr. Morris, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT A. MORRIS, SENIOR FELLOW, CENTER FOR GLOBAL
DEVELOPMENT

Mr. Morris. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Moore, thank you
for the opportunity to testify this morning on the World Bank's
work in low-income countries.
The World Bank is a leading provider of development
assistance in the world, working in nearly 150 countries
globally. But by ``leader,'' I don't just mean that the Bank is
the largest. The World Bank consistently appears as the most or
one of the most effective development institutions globally on
key measures of cost efficiency, project outcomes and policy
influence.
These were the findings of aid reviews conducted by
governments like the U.K., Australia, and the Netherlands; by
independent organizations like mine; and by an extensive survey
of developing country leaders conducted by Aid Data, a U.S.-
based research organization.
This broader context is important for considering questions
of World Bank reform and instances of project-level failures. I
would like to briefly address how to think about cases of
failure in the Bank, three areas of reform I think deserve
consideration, and finally the degree to which the United
States can continue to exercise effective oversight in this
multilateral institution. I elaborate further in each of these
areas in my written testimony.
Risk of failure is inherent in the work that the World Bank
does, particularly operating in difficult environments, whether
in very poor countries like Uganda, or countries beset by
conflict like Afghanistan. Zero risk would essentially mean
zero activity for the institution.
The key questions are, how does the Bank manage risk and
promote effectiveness? And how well does it learn from its
failures when they do occur, as they clearly did in the three
cases highlighted by the other witnesses this morning?
The Bank has multiple areas of monitoring and checks aimed
at promoting effectiveness and guarding against corruption. The
Bank's investigative arm, the INT, typically finds that
substantiated cases of fraud and wrongdoing are associated with
about 3 percent of the Bank's active projects.
In these cases, the INT office uses measures such as
debarment of firms, and works with local authorities to pursue
prosecutions. Separate from the INT, the Bank also has an
independent complaints mechanism, the Inspection Panel, as we
heard, with origins in this committee.
There is broader evidence that the World Bank does learn
from its failures, but let me point to two examples that
followed directly from the Uganda case.
The Bank's Board of Directors just recently approved a $230
million road project in Bolivia in which risks similar to the
Uganda project, associated with a large influx of labor, were
actively identified and mitigated as part of the project
design.
More systematically, the Bank has also launched a Gender-
Based Violence Task Force which should, in part, help to
address a longstanding problem within the institution in the
sense that lessons learned in one region or sector are overly
siloed and are not readily taken up in other regions.
But how can the Bank do better? I offer three ideas aimed
at promoting effectiveness and guarding against corruption.
First, greater reliance on results-based mechanisms, like the
Program for Results. Under the program, the Bank and the
country agree at the outset on appropriate standards of
oversight and a set of desired outcomes, such as an increase in
literacy rates in an education program. And the Bank only
disburses money if the outcomes are achieved, rather than
simply disbursing money to pay for project inputs.
Second, we would have a stronger overall evidence base for
the Bank's performance if INT had the capacity to conduct
randomized audits of Bank projects each year, so not just
responding to signs of corruption, but proactively reviewing a
random selection of projects.
Third, the Bank could move more aggressively toward
adopting new technologies to improve project accountability and
performance. For example, recognizing the remarkable degree of
smartphone coverage, even in the poorest countries, the Bank
could be deploying apps that enable whistleblower-type
reporting as well as more transparent, community-level rating
of Bank projects.
The last point I would like to make relates to the role
that you play. As the largest cumulative donor to the World
Bank's IDA since its founding, the United States, and
particularly the U.S. Congress, has effectively leveraged these
resources to set policy in the institution. U.S. commitments
also enable the World Bank to engage effectively in situations
that are critical to our interests, such as supporting Jordan's
hosting of a massive influx of refugees from Syria, efforts to
contain Ebola in West Africa, and just this week a $1.6 billion
commitment to address unprecedented famine in countries like
South Sudan and Yemen.
With recent financial reforms to IDA, every dollar the
United States contributes now leverages nearly $25 in
assistance to low-income countries each year. But steering the
Bank's work requires active engagement, which in turn continues
to rely on a strong U.S. pledge to IDA and a commitment to
honoring that pledge.
Finally, my time is up, but I do want to encourage you as a
committee to consider participating in some kind of process
that is looking broadly at our aid toolkit through a formal
review process, whether a multilateral aid review or one that
encompasses the bilateral programs, too.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Morris can be found on page
77 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you, Mr. Morris.
And now, Ms. Berger, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELANA BERGER, SOCIAL INCLUSION AND ACCOUNTABILITY
PROGRAM MANAGER, BANK INFORMATION CENTER

Ms. Berger. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Moore, thank you
for inviting me to testify this morning.
I manage the Social Inclusion and Accountability Program at
the Bank Information Center, or BIC. BIC is an independent,
nongovernmental organization that works to ensure that projects
implemented by multilateral development banks work for the
communities they are meant to serve. BIC became involved in
advocacy around the Kamwenge-Kabarole roadway, part of the
World Bank-funded Uganda Transport Sector Development Project
in the summer of 2014.
Joy for Children, a Ugandan civil society organization,
alerted us to the fact that the project was leading to sexual
exploitation of young girls along the roadway construction. The
project had created a boom-town effect, where there was a large
influx of construction workers into what had been a somewhat
isolated, rural community. These workers were sexually
harassing, exploiting, and raping teenage girls. Higher rates
of teenage pregnancy, HIV/AIDS, and girls dropping out of
school soon followed.
The residents had wanted this roadway to be built and
recognized the significant economic benefits that would result
from its construction. Even when the project started resulting
in harm, the residents supported its continuation. They simply
wanted the harm to their families and communities to be
addressed.
Months of attempts to convince the contractor carrying out
the project to take measures to prevent the harm was fruitless
as the contractor made clear that they did not see the
community's problems as their responsibility. Efforts to seek
assistance from the Ugandan government were similarly
unsuccessful.
When the community first brought their concerns around this
project to the World Bank, the immediate response was denial.
It was only when the community filed a request with the
Inspection Panel, the Bank's independent accountability
mechanism, that the Bank took the communities' concerns
seriously, ultimately taking the extraordinary step of
canceling the project.
However, the significant delay between the community
raising concerns and the Bank addressing this harm meant that
there was a 9-month period during which several additional
girls reportedly became pregnant, dropped out of school, or
contracted HIV.
In our experience, it is profound failures at the Bank that
lead to the most significant reforms. And we are seeing that
now.
After the Inspection Panel released its report from the
investigation, Bank management took the unusual step of putting
together a document analyzing lessons learned to look at the
broader institutional failures behind the harm suffered by this
community.
In this document, the Bank noted several critical gaps that
allowed these failures to occur, including the lack of
expertise within project teams to properly assess, prevent, and
monitor gender-based violence (GBV), and a failure to
adequately listen to communities and civil society. To remedy
these issues, the Bank established a GBV Task Force.
The World Bank has also used its considerable influence to
seek reform within the Ugandan government. The Bank has
provided ongoing capacity-building support to the Uganda
National Roads Authority, aimed at strengthening its ability to
monitor and supervise contractors' compliance with
environmental and social standards and to reduce corruption
within that agency.
Going forward, to ensure that the Bank comes out of this
experience stronger and more able to prevent and respond to
serious negative impacts from Bank projects, it is absolutely
essential that the Bank fully implement all of the reforms
discussed in the lessons-learned document, along with all of
the recommendations made by the GBV Task Force.
The Bank must also improve its social assessments to
identify risks to children and other vulnerable groups who are
least likely to have a voice in the process.
Additionally, the Bank must prioritize genuine citizen
engagement. It must seek out ways to listen more effectively to
communities and local civil society organizations. The Bank
must be prepared to swiftly address reports of sexual abuse,
involving trained experts in any investigation.
In closing, we would like to note that throughout the
Bank's history, the U.S. Government has been a critical leader
in reforming the institution, which has led to lasting changes
across the development finance landscape. In this case
specifically, the U.S. Government played a leadership role at
the World Bank Board to encourage broad institutional reforms
aimed at preventing similar failures in the future.
Today, continued U.S. leadership is needed to ensure that
proposed reforms are implemented. We appreciate the committee's
interest in this case, and we look forward to working together
to advance reform at the World Bank.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Berger can be found on page
28 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you to all the witnesses for your
testimony and your recommendations on how to reform and improve
the operations at the World Bank.
The Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
In the past, we have seen U.S. national security officials
make a case for the multilateral development banks, arguing
that economic support for our allies serves key interests.
Given the downsides to some of the Bank's assistance that we
have heard about from our witnesses here today, I wanted to ask
our panel, particularly Mr. Morris, what effect does support
for oppressive regimes have on our national security interests?
Are we resigned to working with governments that may help us in
the short term, but whose long-term impact on their citizens
creates potential security risks further down the road? What
are the tradeoffs here?
Mr. Morris. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is really
an important question and points to the underlying challenges
that an institution like the Bank actually faces, and
particularly working on behalf of the interests of the United
States as its largest shareholder. The Bank is engaged in some
very difficult environments with client-country governments
that, in some instances, would not meet our standards of
democracy and freedom.
But it is also in those very instances where the United
States is pushing the Bank to be engaged because it is often
situations where we have troops on the ground and we need the
Bank there doing things like road projects that are directly
supporting our efforts.
But you are right, there is a broader challenge of the
sustainability of that kind of engagement if we don't have a
credible client-country government partner. And this is just an
ongoing challenge. I think in some instances, the United States
has been very good at pushing the Bank to pull back in the face
of clear problems of governance. But frankly, in other
situations where we have direct strategic interests, we may be
pushing in the other direction.
Chairman Barr. Thank you.
And for the other three witnesses, I wonder if we could
make or should make the link between the Bank's activities and
national security more explicit. For instance, if the World
Bank takes on the issue of refugees, what should the Bank be
doing to prevent extremism or radicalization within those
communities? Alternatively, should the Bank refocus some of its
lending to regions and countries where extremism, radical Islam
is a particular problem?
Would any of the other witnesses care to chime in on that?
Mr. Chavkin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that what the
Bank needs is more of an ability and willingness to walk away
from the table when serious abuses are occurring. I am not a
national security expert, but what I can say is that there have
been a number of cases in recent years where there have been
repeated, credible claims and evidence that has emerged of
governments and companies that have received support from the
World Bank group engaged in human rights abuses or corruption.
And that cases like the project in Uganda where the Bank pulls
back are vaninshingly rare.
And obviously, lending is an important source of leverage
for the United States as well. But it seems that often, as you
mentioned before, the desire to lend tends to outweigh an
ability to draw a firm line when it comes to governments and
companies using Bank projects to commit abuses.
Chairman Barr. And Dr. Ensminger and Ms. Berger, when you
answer this question, when the World Bank works with a
government or an education system within the government, if the
goal of the World Bank is alleviation of poverty and economic
growth, what responsibility does the Bank have to work with
education systems to undermine ideologies that are incompatible
with freedom and growth?
Ms. Ensminger. I don't have a ready answer to that
question, but I can address your previous question. Would that
be all right?
Chairman Barr. Okay, sure.
Ms. Ensminger. I think you hit the nail on the head
regarding long-term interests versus short-term interests
regarding national security issues. And it speaks directly to
when and whether we cut off a country. It also speaks directly
to corruption.
In the case of Kenya, for example, we cooperate a great
deal with Kenya on national security issues regarding fighting
Al-Shabaab across the border in Somalia. So it is in our short-
term interests to cooperate with Kenya. How much license will
we give them in terms of corruption and other abuses before we
are in a position to cut that country off? We have undermined
our own bargaining power on those issues.
Chairman Barr. And my time has expired. Thank you for your
answers.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Ms. Moore, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And I have really learned a lot and really appreciated all
of your testimony here.
One of the things I really find to be very, very
frightening to think about is these young women and young girls
who have been raped and taken advantage of in these countries.
When I talked with the World Bank, it is so pathetic to think
about some of these Ugandan girls--one of these workers would
give them 15,000 shillings, worth about $3, and a 14-year-old
saw that as evidence that they loved them and cared for them.
I guess one of the things that I want to get clear before I
ask some more questions is, I heard correctly, didn't I, that
there is nobody on this panel who thinks that the World Bank is
not important to engage, that they continue to support the
United States paying their dues and being engaged and involved
in the World Bank? Am I clear on that, that there is no one who
thinks we need to just bow out?
Mr. Chavkin. As a reporter, I am not here to make policy
recommendations.
Ms. Moore. Okay, I understand.
Mr. Chavkin. But certainly, none of our findings suggested
that United States contributions and engagement were a part of
the problem.
Ms. Moore. Okay, thank you.
Ms. Berger. And in our case, we found that U.S. engagement
actually was incredibly important to gaining redress for these
girls.
Ms. Moore. Right.
Ms. Berger. In fact, the U.S. executive director would go
into meetings with Bank staffers bringing representatives of
other U.S. agencies like USAID and the State Department. And
because the United States was the only board Chair to do that,
the United States was able to ask the Bank very specific,
nitty-gritty questions about how the Bank was redressing the
harm to these girls, and the United States was able to put
pressure on the Bank to remediate this harm in ways that other
governments did not do. So I think the U.S. contribution and
the U.S. leadership was critical there.
Ms. Moore. Thank you.
Since we talked about counterterrorism, I guess I want to
talk a little bit about, not only is it my understanding from
all of your testimony that not only was it the corruption of
these countrys' governments sometimes or the fact that the
governments would not necessarily address the problems, but it
was also a problem of the contractors. In the case of Uganda,
it was a Chinese contractor who did not do their due diligence.
So I ask this question or maybe just to make a statement:
We have just this session, through the Congressional Review
Act, eliminated Section 1504 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which
requires that there be oversight over extractive industries
where American companies are going in, taking the oil and
minerals and stuff out of the country, that they disclose these
contracts and relationships. And so the potential for
corruption will be spawned by this.
Mr. Morris, do you have an opinion on this?
Mr. Morris. Sure, Ms. Moore, thank you for that. I would
say that one of the mandates of the Bank is, as an institution,
to be pressing for transparency in the work that it does and as
providing sunlight in these situations, that it does guard
against corruption.
If I can make two quick points related to the issues you
raised, on the Uganda case, it is also, I think, worth stepping
back and recognizing if you don't have the World Bank or
institutions like it making the direct connections between road
projects being associated with the terrible failings we saw in
this case, it is not clear to me that other sources for
financing these projects will do that. I think it is a mandate
for the Bank to make those connections in ways that--
Ms. Moore. Reclaiming my time, with others, like the
Chinese Development Bank and some of the other banks around the
world, there won't necessarily be that accountability and
transparency. They will just pick up the slack if we were to
disengage.
I'm sorry, Mr. Morris, you can continue.
Mr. Morris. Yes, that is absolutely correct. And I think
that is also the broader perspective on the financing landscape
is that it is no secret that in Sub-Saharan Africa in
particular, Chinese financing has become dominant in--
Ms. Moore. Reclaiming my time, Mr. Chairman, I would like
to put three things in the record, without objection: an Ex-Im
statement for the record; the letter that I referred to with
former Chairman Huizenga; and a third statement from--what did
I do with it?
Chairman Barr. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. Moore. Without objection, those three things will be
placed in the record, as soon as I find the third one.
Chairman Barr. Very good, without objection, those will be
placed in the record.
And the Chair now recognizes the vice chairman of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At a hearing last Congress, one of our witnesses, Dr.
Martin Ravallion from the Center for Global Development, and a
former long-time staff member at the World Bank, told us that,
``The reality is, bank staffs are assessed by the volume of
their lending, dollars of money lent. And that is just a poor
indicator of impact on poverty. You have impact on poverty
sometimes when you don't lend at all.''
Dr. Ravallion echoed an argument that has been made at the
Bank for decades. Moreover, a recent report by the World Bank's
Independent Evaluation Group confirmed that even after all
these years, the pressure to lend that is felt by staff
inhibits learning and takes the focus off development outcomes.
So, Mr. Chavkin, I would ask you this question: What has
been your experience with the World Bank staff's commitment to
project results? And is that a high priority for them, do you
think?
Mr. Chavkin. I am not in a position to speak to whether
projects delivered on development goals.
Mr. Williams. All right.
Mr. Chavkin. If it is helpful, what I can say is that I
believe the pressure to lend has been an important factor in
failure to follow safeguards. For example, for quite a while,
there was actually a system in which safeguards officers would
be reporting to project managers whose responsibility was to
get loans approved. The Bank has now improved that system to
some degree in providing greater budgetary and organizational
independence to its safeguards officers.
Mr. Williams. Okay, thank you.
Ms. Ensminger, is effective management important to staff,
do you think? And do they already have the tools to preempt
some of the failures we have heard about today, or are they
simply in over their heads?
Ms. Ensminger. There is tremendous pressure to push money
out the door. It has been talked about for decades. It has not
been adequately resolved. There are many wonderful team task
leaders (TTLs), in the Bank who would like to do their job
better. Because of the pressure to move money out the door so
quickly, they are stinting on design elements, not out of
desire, but because of the pressures on their time, and
cutbacks on their budgets. They are not capable of doing
adequate supervision.
For the same reasons, we see a conflict of interest
regarding aggressive measures on corruption as well as
operations interference on INT investigations.
Mr. Williams. Thank you.
Ms. Berger, what more could the Bank do to incentivize its
staff, in your opinion, to care about these elements of a
project? How can the United States change the Bank's culture?
Ms. Berger. One of the things that the United States has
already done is, in the lessons-learned document that the Bank
put together after this project, it talks about the staffing
issue. And it said that there was a need for social and
environmental safeguard specialists to be involved in the
project throughout the project cycle. And this is something the
United States really pushed for in that document.
Because if you have those social specialists involved, not
only during the project design, but also during the project's
implementation and the monitoring and supervision phase, you
have someone with the training to pick up on potential problems
like the ones experienced by the girls in this case. And as
soon as they see risk factors for sexual exploitation, they can
put in place measures to prevent that.
Mr. Williams. Thank you.
Mr. Morris, why has the critique of Bank incentives endured
for so many years, in your opinion? Why can't the Bank get it
right when even the staff knows incentives are misaligned?
Mr. Morris. I think the pressure to lend is a real issue.
And the critique over the years is genuine. On the other hand,
it is a bank, and its core model is to lend, so that is going
to be with us absent some fundamental restructuring of the
institution.
The chairman mentioned the views of Angus Deaton in his
opening remarks, and I think Professor Deaton offers a
thoughtful critique, that one of the challenges of being overly
reliant on lending is it does crowd out other types of
activities, doing long-term research and development work. So I
think there are ways in which structurally, the Bank could be
shifted toward a wider range of activities, which would also
have the effect of dampening some of the negative incentives
around lending.
Mr. Williams. Okay, quickly, also to you, what would the
Bank have to do to shift staff incentives toward project
results and knowledge generation?
Mr. Morris. I think the Bank has frankly made a lot of
progress in this way. I think we do see much more emphasis on
actual project outcomes, not just success being defined by
closing the deal. Certainly, there is always more progress that
could be made in that area. But I do think we see a more
outcomes-oriented institution today than what we saw, say, 20
years ago.
Mr. Williams. Okay, thank you for your answers.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
And now the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Washington,
Mr. Heck.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
For anyone on the panel who knows the answer to this
question, is there a more current rating of the quality of
official development assessment of the IDA since the one for
2014 in which the IDA was found to rank in the top 10 of all 4
of the metrics of effectiveness and quality?
Mr. Morris. Congressman, I will answer that, because
actually that work was done by my colleague at the Center for
Global Development, Nancy Birdsall, along with colleagues at
the Brookings Institution. That is the most current rating that
was done through the so-called QuODA exercise. And as I said in
my statement, it is consistent with other kinds of reviews
which attempt to compare institutions like the World Bank to
other development institutions. And it is frankly remarkable
how consistently the World Bank appears at the top or among the
top in those kinds of ratings.
Mr. Heck. Perhaps for you as well, Mr. Morris, one of the
concerns about the IDA that has been expressed is whether or
not its role is duplicative in the broader scheme. And I am
wondering if you would characterize any way in which the IDA is
unique in terms of how it contributes to World Bank mission and
that of its corollary partners?
Mr. Morris. Certainly from a U.S. perspective, I think--
Mr. Heck. Aside from--pardon the interruption, sir--obvious
quality, given the ranking of the assessment, is there any way
in which it is unique?
Mr. Morris. Sure. And beyond quality, I think for the
United States it is hugely complementary actually to our own
toolkit. If you look at our bilateral programs, which are
almost exclusively grant allocations in areas like humanitarian
assistance and global health, what IDA does, again, is lending-
based, much more focused on big infrastructure projects. So in
that way, it is, as an extension of our own assistance tool
kit, a great complement.
And in the face of actors like China, which through their
bilateral programs are doing massive amounts of infrastructure
investment, I think it is important from a U.S. perspective to
see the value in IDA's work in this broader approach to
economic development.
Mr. Heck. Mr. Morris, is it generally the case, as I have
been led to believe, that when China engages in bilateral
development ``aid,'' there are often conditions with respect to
continuing economic relationships and concessions given to
China with respect to, for example, access to mineral resources
and the like?
Mr. Morris. Congressman, one of the challenges of
evaluating China's investments is that there is not a lot of
transparency in the relationships.
Mr. Heck. What is your impression?
Mr. Morris. My impression is that the Chinese themselves
would not characterize most of these flows as aid. They are
doing it for their own direct economic interests, commercial
interests. And so I think that certainly affects the kinds of
agreements that they strike, both in terms of the sectors they
are investing in, and the kinds of concessions that they would
get. I think that is a reality of it.
I think it still comes with some benefit for these
countries, but it certainly raises concerns of the type to
which I think you are alluding.
Mr. Heck. And so, in effect, in the effort to cultivate
good relationships, which indirectly if not directly contribute
to our security, we come to the world stage offering these
loans in a transparent way and without conditions, but are in
very real competition with China which seeks to extend its
influence as well. Is that an accurate reflection?
Mr. Morris. Congressman, I think that is correct. I would
say on the question of conditions, I think to the degree that
the World Bank does attach conditions in its engagements, they
are broadly aimed at an effective relationship. They are
certainly not about creating advantages for any one country.
Mr. Heck. Quickly, in my limited time left, I could not
find it in the material, are you familiar with the default rate
of the IDA, what the default rate of the IDA is and how that
compares to its peers?
Mr. Morris. As a general matter, countries do not default
on the World Bank. And there is the issue that the Bank has so-
called preferred creditor status. It is not in the interests of
any country to default. There have been countries that have
been suspended from Bank assistance because they are in
arrears. But over the long term, countries pay back their
money, which is evidenced by the AAA rating that the Bank has.
Mr. Heck. I yield back the time I no longer have available,
with gratitude for your answer and for the Chair's indulgence.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
And now, the Chair recognizes the gentleman from Indiana,
Mr. Hollingsworth.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Good morning. I am glad that all of you
came out today and I really appreciate your testimony this
morning.
My question is really about mission creep and better
understanding about what we believe the mission of the World
Bank to be specifically and to what extent we think they are
serving that specific mission.
It is my understanding that the genesis of the World Bank
was really to help countries who couldn't access international
credit markets to develop in a manner that would enable them to
do so.
Certainly, that has changed over time, but something that
my constituents continue to worry about, not only with this
institution, but with institutions more broadly, is that we are
continuing to develop an approach where we try to be all things
to all people in all places and we end up not doing any of them
exceptionally well.
To what extent do each of you think that perhaps an overly
broad mission focused on middle-income countries as well as
extreme poverty in low-income countries, focused on health as
well as development and infrastructure, has led to some of
these failures, and a more specific mission and a clear-cut
mission would enable them to do better at what we want them to
do?
Left to right.
Mr. Chavkin. Thank you. I am not really in a position to
comment, particularly if we are looking at IDA replenishment.
The performance of IDA seems separate in some ways from the
performance of IBRD, which is the middle-income lending arm of
the Bank.
I am going to leave it at that.
Ms. Ensminger. I will speak again just directly to my
experience with IDA and particularly in Kenya, which I suspect
is very typical of other African countries. The problem as I
see it is not with mission creep, but the way in which the
mission is accomplished. So I am not seeing a problem
specifically in the IDA funds that have targeted Kenya, but
this may also be a function of my limited experience with some
of the other area's infrastructure projects, for example.
But from my own perspective, I would not put that down as
the number-one problem.
Mr. Morris. Congressman, look, I think you are absolutely
right. Certainly, defining the origins of the Bank, the
evolution, and then pointing to this as a potential challenge
of the Bank trying to do too many things in too many places.
But I would point out, in the full range of countries, look at
a country like India where, number one, the remarkable progress
globally in poverty reduction and then where we want to be
going forward, you really have to bet on India's success to
achieve what we want to achieve when it comes to eliminating
extreme poverty.
The Bank is a hugely important partner to India and what
the Bank is doing, which I think is entirely appropriate, is
not to say you no longer are eligible for IDA, therefore we are
done with you, but to shifting the nature of assistance so that
it is better leveraged, it is more cost-efficient for countries
like the United States that are putting money in.
So the relationship evolves, but the engagement is still
critical, I think, from our perspective of what we have in
terms of goals around the world.
Ms. Berger. When we talk about Uganda, I think the thing to
keep in mind is sort of the ``but for.'' What if the World Bank
hadn't been involved, right? Is the World Bank's involvement in
Uganda looking towards reducing poverty constructive? And I
think in this case, it really was, because the community really
saw this roadway as their way to reduce poverty by allowing
them to access markets, and sell their goods.
And so, that roadway was critical. And the World Bank's
involvement in that roadway was particularly important because
it was through the World Bank that the community was able to
get redress for their harms and was able to get changes made to
the project so that it was more responsive to the needs of the
community.
And I think absent that, if the road was being built
without the World Bank, you simply would have had the road, but
nobody would ever have addressed these sort of negative
repercussions, which means you wouldn't have achieved the aim
of reducing poverty because while you would have that access to
markets, you would also have all of these families with--
teenage mothers who weren't able to finish school and all of
these negative impacts that kept people in poverty.
Mr. Hollingsworth. All right, thank you.
I yield back the rest of my time.
Chairman Barr. Thank you.
Mr. Chavkin offered to introduce into the record three
articles, and without objection, those articles will be
submitted for the record.
The Chair now recognizes the distinguished ranking member
of the full Financial Services Committee, Ms. Waters from
California.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And again, I would like to thank our witnesses for being
here today.
As you know, when we hear some of the kinds of problems
that you have identified here today, it is disturbing. And we
don't feel good about it. But we really do feel good about the
fact that we are major players in these bilateral institutions
and that this country is doing its part in the world to deal
with poverty, and that we must do everything that we can to
support these projects. We must do everything that we can to
make sure they are operating in the way that they are supposed
to be operating.
And I see that the World Bank in many instances has taken
steps to deal with some of these problems. I want to know about
the Bank's report entitled, ``Lessons Learned and Agenda for
Action,'' which examined the issues and massive failures that
arose from the Uganda project. So did they issue a report of
some kind entitled, ``Lessons Learned and Agenda for Action?''
Ms. Berger. Yes, absolutely. And this was a unique thing
that the Bank did in the Uganda case, recognizing those
failures.
The Bank always issues an action plan after an Inspection
Panel case. That action plan, though, only addresses the harm
to a particular community. What is unique about this lessons-
learned document is it looks at failures across the institution
and the ways to remedy those failures.
And as I mentioned a moment ago, the U.S. Government, the
U.S. executive director's office at the Bank played a really
important role in strengthening that document so that the
recommendations for reform really hit at the issues that caused
problems in this project.
Ms. Waters. I am very, very pleased to hear that. And I
must share with my colleagues that I have visited Uganda and it
was for something different, we were looking at HIV and AIDS,
and I was so impressed with the will and the desire of people
in that country, despite the lack of resources and the poverty,
to get something done and to deal with that issue, a lot of
determination by folks who have very little. And so, I
certainly want us to continue to give support to these poor
countries to help eliminate poverty.
And I would like to also ask, what do you think--I don't
know how many participating countries visit these projects.
What good does that do? And should we take a look at visiting
more, showing up so people know that we are interested, that we
care about what is going on? What do you think about that?
Mr. Chavkin. I would like to say that showing up and seeing
what is happening on the ground is one of the most valuable
contributions that I believe that the committee and others
overseeing the Bank could make.
In reference to the Uganda report, as well as the
resettlement plan, I think what they show is that the Bank has
the capacity, when it wishes, to address some of these systemic
problems that arise.
In the case of the Bank's failures in enforcing its
resettlement policies, what we found, however, was that the
Bank had actually been looking into this for years and it had
issued internal reports. Those reports had essentially sat
buried until we began investigating and asking questions about
them.
And so what I think the issue for the Bank is, why does it
take a Uganda project or an Ethiopia project or a report in the
press for these reforms to be enacted? And I think that one way
to encourage the Bank to be more proactive and more forthright
about addressing the problems with its oversight would be going
to the ground and seeing what is happening for yourselves.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
And I would like to say to Mr. Barr and to Ms. Moore, I
think that is a challenge for us to get on the ground and take
a look.
Do you think that is a good idea, Ms. Berger?
Ms. Berger. Definitely. I think going and seeing the
context where a project is happening really helps you to
understand the problems faced by the community and the ways to
address them.
Ms. Waters. Thank you all so very much.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr.
Hill.
Mr. Hill. I thank the chairman and the ranking member for
hosting this hearing today.
I appreciate the witnesses being here to talk about an
important subject, not only to global development, but also to
American taxpayers.
I have some experience in my past government service of
working with USAID on the design of technical assistance in
foreign countries, so I have some personal understanding of the
challenges that come in working abroad and designing things
that work on the ground. And I also just returned from a trip
to the Republic of Congo where the systematic spreading of
concrete by the Chinese government across the whole country of
Congo was quite evident.
But the issue of corruption was discussed there as well, so
I really appreciate the witnesses today talking about the World
Bank and its work around the world.
The first question I have is, when we look at the fact that
the United States has a little larger percentage, contribution,
and ownership in the European Bank and in the Inter-American
Bank, are we more effective at guiding policy there versus the
World Bank? I would be interested in views on that.
Mr. Morris. Congressman, I will take a stab at that, and I
should note in answering that I served in the prior
Administration representing the United States across these
institutions. I guess my judgment would be that shareholding is
an important measure of our influence, but it is not the whole
picture. And I think we have different degrees of influence
within the different institutions.
And frankly, I think the World Bank, for reasons of long
history, for reasons of the fact that they reside here in
Washington, as many people noted, that the Bank has always had
an American president, I think it is pretty well understood
that the United States has a high degree of influence within
that institution, even though its membership is much broader
and our actual shareholding, as you said, is significantly
smaller than at the Inter-American Development Bank.
Mr. Hill. In that regard, I would like your views, Mr.
Morris and Dr. Ensminger, on--in your testimony, Dr. Ensminger,
you say, ``Neither Congress nor the USED's office have the
power to micromanage the World Bank's policies. Changes of the
sort I am suggesting would require significant commitment and a
great deal of sustained U.S. leadership to win support of a
majority of sympathetic board members.''
So how are we, as Members of Congress, who allocate the
resources to contribute to these multilateral institutions,
supposed to enhance the sustained U.S. leadership to get those
sorts of changes?
Dr. Ensminger, this is your testimony, so I will let you
start on that.
Ms. Ensminger. As I understand it, you do have leverage
over the Treasury and the Treasury has leverage over the USED's
office. You also have an American president, an American-
appointed president, who has recently demoted the reporting
status of the vice president for INT. I don't understand the
reasoning behind that. I think it sends a very bad message. And
as I have suggested in my testimony, I think there is undo
influence on the part of operations over INT's investigations.
I experienced this firsthand in the Arid Lands
investigation. And I might also add, although it is not
directly relevant on this point, I have not been impressed with
the follow-through and the lessons learned from the Arid Lands
case, in contrast to what is obviously a very different picture
here in other arenas.
Corruption continues to be a huge problem. And I think the
role of INT is also continuing to be perhaps moving in the
wrong direction. So I would hope that you can exercise extreme
leverage on that issue because I think it is extremely
important.
Mr. Hill. Mr. Morris?
Mr. Morris. Congressman, I would just encourage you both to
be directly engaged with senior management of the Bank and
through senior U.S. Treasury officials. I think both are really
important channels of influence that you have.
And I want to correct slightly, because I think it is often
mischaracterized that the United States is not in a position to
appoint the president of the Bank. The United States nominates
a candidate to be president of the World Bank. Through an
election process, the outcome has consistently been the
American candidate.
Mr. Hill. I think we need to use that leverage to the best
of our ability. And it is really hard for Members of Congress
on both sides of the aisle to justify continued U.S. financial
commitment to institutions that have such a poor track record
in many ways, even though they do good around the world. There
is no doubt, I am not excusing the good that they do. Because
in facing a $20 trillion debt, we have a lot of pressure on us
to make sure that taxpayer resources are spent wisely and that
we get the best bang for our buck.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank each of you for your dedication and work in
this important area.
And in the spirit of Congressman Hill's comments and
questions, I would like to ask further, as we are all aware,
the multilateral development banks are sitting on enormous
equity from loan repayments to the tune of hundreds of billions
of dollars. And these loans were made initially from
appropriations by the Congress.
Do these MDB shareholders have a claim to that equity? And
if so, if the loans are repaid back to the banks, should the
proceeds go back to the Treasury, especially where the United
States does have this $20 trillion debt?
Mr. Morris. Congressman, the United States as a shareholder
does hold equity in the institution. Frankly, one of the things
that has enabled the World Bank to be effective over many years
and has lessened the burden on U.S. contributions over the
years is that the Bank can retain that equity, that the
proceeds on loans have actually allowed it to grow without
coming back and asking for more capital on a routine basis.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir, I respect that. Then if that is
true, why should Congress keep appropriating additional
dollars?
Mr. Morris. That is a fair question. So it is important to
recognize there are different channels of financing within the
institution. The so-called IDA is the arm of the Bank that is
serving the very poorest countries. Because it is serving the
poorest countries, the lending that it does is highly
subsidized. That subsidy is something that over the years
donors to the Bank, with the United States really in the lead,
I would say, they agree every 3 years to provide that.
I think it is important. And we are talking about $1.3
billion a year from the United States. I would never say that
is an insignificant amount of money.
Mr. Pittenger. No, sir, it is not.
Mr. Morris. It is real money. On the other hand, let us put
it in context. In terms of even the overall foreign assistance
budget we have of roughly $30 billion a year, I think that $1.3
actually gets us quite a lot in actual IDA programming.
Mr. Pittenger. I understand that, sir. And if anyone else
wants to chime in, they can. But in context then, let us view
the Pan African Union. Many of these countries are members of
the Pan African Union. I have many ambassadors who come into my
office and tell me of the pressure that they have to vote
against the interests of the United States in the U.N. and our
interests.
How do you bring that into clear focus in terms of our
American interests? I appreciate the work that we can do for
the needs throughout the world. And I am very sensitive to
that. I have traveled extensively back for 40 years when I
served with a Christian organization and spent a lot of time in
Africa. So I am not unaware of the concerns.
But I do in this job have a responsibility to the American
people and the American taxpayer. And in that regard, how do
you balance that when time and again, year after year, decade
after decade, the Pan African Union as a whole votes against us
on a pretty consistent basis in the United Nations?
Anyone who would like to respond to that. I don't blame
you. I wouldn't--
Mr. Morris. Congressman, if you don't mind, I will come in
again. But I would say that it is important to look at each of
these countries, and for the United States, its relationship
directly with each of the countries.
You are absolutely right. There will be cases where the
World Bank is engaging in countries where we have real
concerns. I would say even in those situations, I think there
is some value in the work that the World Bank is doing without
us being directly associated with it, that over the longer
term, it is the channel for U.S. influence, particularly if
they find ways to do effective projects.
Mr. Pittenger. Reclaiming my time, I do think, though, we
have a responsibility to this sovereign country to preserve our
interests and to make sure that assets that we participate with
work in our behalf. And the U.N. certainly has not been a
friend of our country for a long time. And the Pan African
Union has certainly been part of that.
I would like to ask Mr. Chavkin, if I could, do you see any
oversight process that we could have to prevent and deter some
of the human rights issues that you convey today? What more
could be done and how should that fit into our worldview of the
World Bank?
Mr. Chavkin. I would point to two areas. One is to ensure
closer scrutiny of individual projects as voted on by the
United States executive director. Often, when the United States
executive director has concerns, they will abstain from a vote.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
I will let you just finish your thought really quickly.
Mr. Chavkin. Okay, thank you. And the second is to ensure
independent oversight structures within the World Bank, both
safeguards specialists, and the Inspection Panel remaining
independent and having direct lines to Bank management without
being forced to go through operations or task team leaders and
projects.
Chairman Barr. Thank you.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, sir. My time has expired.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. One of the most important things America does
with our tax money is our foreign aid program, and particularly
in the new Administration we have to make sure that those
dollars, which will become even more scarce, are spent in the
most effective way. Those claiming that the World Bank is the
most effective way always argue for the multiplier effect,
``Hey, we put in a dollar and three other dollars, four other
dollars from other countries come in.''
Of course, other foreign aid programs also have a
multiplier effect. If we announce that we will spend another
billion dollars on malaria relief and eradication, I believe we
could cajole other wealthy countries to put in similar amounts,
perhaps just as great a multiplier effect.
So putting aside the multiplier effect or understanding
that all of our foreign aid can be used to generate a
multiplier effect, I wonder if the witnesses can identify any
better use of our foreign aid dollars than a contribution to
the World Bank.
I will go through the--yes, go ahead?
Ms. Ensminger. Not exactly an answer to your question, but
I want to raise the issue--
Mr. Sherman. I have a limited amount of time. If somebody
doesn't have an answer to my question, I will move on to
another question.
Ms. Ensminger. It is related to your question, but it has
to do with the research department at the Bank, which I believe
is one of the finest research departments in development
economics.
Mr. Sherman. But how do we weight contributing to the Bank
as opposed to health programs dealing with malaria? We could
put more in the Bank. Does anybody have a comparison?
Ms. Ensminger. It is directly relevant to that.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Morris? But I have to go on to another
question.
Mr. Morris. Yes, Congressman, I think you are--there is a
question of tradeoffs and it is a concern right now in the
foreign assistance budget broadly is under attack in what we
saw coming from the Administration. I think it is important to
recognize we have a diverse toolkit. All of the parts of our
foreign assistance--
Mr. Sherman. I know we have a diverse toolkit.
Mr. Morris. The other thing I would say is--
Mr. Sherman. I am going to reclaim my time because I want
to go on to--
Mr. Morris. The World Bank is hugely important--
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Morris, I am going to reclaim my time.
Because, as the gentleman from North Carolina pointed out, one
of the disadvantages of dealing with the Bank is that we don't
get to pick which countries get the money. Now, he is concerned
with countries that vote against us in the U.N. I am concerned
with countries that are developing nuclear weapons for the
purpose of destroying millions of Americans' lives.
I have been working on these issues for 20 years. And in
2002, we were told here in Congress that loans would not be
made to Iran, and then they were. And then we were told it
wouldn't be happening again, and then it happened again. And we
were told that the United States had the veto power to prevent
such loans, and then we didn't.
And the question here is, can we condition our future
contributions to the World Bank on having a U.S. veto power on
further loans to Iran? Does anyone have an answer?
Mr. Morris?
Mr. Morris. Frankly, I don't think you can legislate that.
I think that--
Mr. Sherman. Sure we can. We can say no money shall be
disbursed to the World Bank until the World Bank changes its
rules so that the United States has an absolute veto power on
further advances to Iran.
Mr. Morris. With the threat of--
Mr. Sherman. The question is, should we put that in--
Mr. Morris. But you cannot--the rules of the institution do
not support the United States.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. The question before us here is, should
we put that as a condition on the disbursement of American
funds?
Mr. Morris. I think you are right, it is perfectly
legitimate in cases like Iran where the United States has very
clear interests, to express those interests very clearly with
the Bank and expect--
Mr. Sherman. What would be the--does another witness have a
comment? What would be the reaction of the Bank if our next
tranche of funds was conditioned on a change of Bank rules that
would give the United States a veto power on or prevent further
loans to Iran? Does any panelist have--what would be the
response of the Bank? Would we get the change or would they say
keep your money?
Nobody has an answer. Because I know the World Bank is
adhering to U.N. sanctions on Iran, but none of those currently
prevent further loans to Iran. The World Bank has promised
Congress again and again, or the supporters of the World Bank
have promised Congress again and again it wouldn't happen and
then it happened.
Mr. Morris. Congressman, can I--
Mr. Sherman. Yes.
Mr. Morris. And you can correct me if I am wrong. But I do
believe that the last actual lending was--
Mr. Sherman. It was several years ago.
Mr. Morris. --during the Bush Administration.
Mr. Sherman. And you can be sure that such loans will
resume in the future unless Congress takes strong action. I am
not saying that necessarily happens this year or next year. But
if we don't act now, the culture at the World Bank is oblivious
to Iran's nuclear weapons program.
I yield back.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
And I thank the gentleman for his good line of questioning
there.
I would also like to thank our witnesses for their
testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:26 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 22, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
