- EXAMINING THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT-DISASTER RECOVERY PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT

BLOCK GRANT-DISASTER RECOVERY PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND INVESTIGATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 1, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-51

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

30-340 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2018

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah                       DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations

ANN WAGNER, Missouri, Chairwoman

SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado, Vice         AL GREEN, Texas, Ranking Member
Chairman                         KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
PETER T. KING, New York              EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina   JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
November 1, 2017.............................................     1
Appendix:
November 1, 2017.............................................    29

WITNESSES
Wednesday, November 1, 2017

Albert, Ms. Helen, Acting Inspector General, Office of the
Inspector General, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development....................................................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Albert, Helen................................................    30

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Green, Hon. Al:
Letter to the Chairman requesting a Hearing..................    51
Albert, Helen:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Wagner......................................    53

EXAMINING THE COMMUNITY

DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT-

DISASTER RECOVERY PROGRAM

----------

Wednesday, November 1, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ann Wagner
[chairwoman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Wagner, Tipton, Ross, Zeldin,
Trott, Loudermilk, Kustoff, Tenney, Hollingsworth, Green,
Cleaver, Beatty, and Crist.
Also present: Representative Velazquez.
Chairwoman Wagner. I think some members are still wandering
in here, but we will get started. The Subcommittee on Oversight
and Investigations will come to order.
Today's hearing is entitled ``Examining the Community
Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery Program.'' Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
subcommittee at any time. Without objection, all members will
have 5 legislative days within which to submit extraneous
materials to the chair for inclusion in the record. And without
objection, the members of the full committee who are not
members of the subcommittee may participate in today's hearing
for the purposes of making an opening statement and questioning
the witness.
The chair now recognizes herself for 4 minutes for an
opening statement.
When a terrible disaster strikes, the Federal Government
plays an important role when delivering much-needed emergency
aid. Today's hearing is about a related point upon which we can
all, I think, agree.
It is critical to ensure that taxpayer money being spent on
disaster relief is spent smartly, efficiently, and effectively.
Every disaster relief dollar that is diverted to an inefficient
or wasteful use is a dollar that is not going to help
individuals in need, and that is wrong.
The Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery
Program is comprised of relief funds which are designated to
allow communities to start the recovery process by helping
those communities and neighborhoods with limited resources to
rebuild critical infrastructure after a catastrophic event.
Today's hearing will focus on whether the Department of
Housing and Urban Development's administration of the CDBG-DR
program lives up to the ideals I mentioned a moment ago. It
will also, I hope, initiate a constructive dialog between
Congress, HUD, and the HUD Office of Inspector General about
how this CDBG-DR program can be reformed to increase oversight,
to increase accountability, and ensure disaster relief dollars
go directly and expeditiously to those who need them the most.
As we will hear today from our witness, the Acting HUD
Inspector General, Helen Albert, the HUD OIG has routinely
identified serious systemic problems with the CDBG-Disaster
Recovery Program. Money appropriated to this program often
failed to reach those who need it most and instead was diverted
to wasteful or inefficient uses.
As a recent example, a 2017 OIG report on Hurricane Sandy
revealed $450 million in questionable costs. The HUD OIG's
important work has also documented instances of grantees who
regularly failed to maintain proper documentation supporting
the cost of performed work, as well as awarding duplicate or
ineligible assistance.
HUD OIG's work also demonstrates that these problems have
occurred throughout the Nation. Even in my own home State of
Missouri, they have seen misuse of some of these funds.
The OIG's work also reveals another troubling trend: $11.5
billion of CDBG-DR funds appropriated for disasters, going all
the way back to September 11, remain unspent.
While rebuilding communities isn't done overnight and takes
time, at a certain point it appears that billions of dollars
are simply sitting lost or forgotten about in grantee bank
accounts. When put in context with the $7.4 billion Congress
recently appropriated to HUD in the first relief package for
Hurricane Harvey and Irma, Congress must do better, a better
job, recouping the lost money, so to speak, for future
disasters. Again, disaster funds should go to those who need
them most.
And I am so pleased to see that it is not just the HUD OIG
who recognizes that the Community Development Block Grant-
Disaster Recovery Program needs reforms to ensure disaster
funds reach disaster victims, but Secretary Carson understands
these problems exist and is open to working to address them. In
testimony before the full committee just weeks ago, Secretary
Carson noted that some of the things done through the CDBG-
Disaster Recovery Program have been, in his words,
questionable.
Ms. Albert, I look forward to hearing your testimony and
recommendations this morning.
And with that, I yield back the balance of my time.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, the
ranking member, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank the witness for
appearing as well.
Madam Chair, you can't be the Secretary of HUD without
being the Secretary of HUD. Let me explain.
It is an honor to have the witness before us today who will
talk to us about some of our needs. She will talk to us about a
good many issues related to waste, fraud, and abuse. She will
talk about procedures and processes.
But there are some things that we have to talk about that
relate to policy. As you indicated, the Secretary was here
earlier, and he made some comments that would lead me to
believe that he should return. It is my belief that the
Secretary should return to this committee and visit with us, be
prepared to answer questions about certain questionable
policies related to HUD. And I hope that he will come.
And such that he will not be surprised, I would like to
give some indication as to the areas of concern. The areas of
concern would include options for temporary and long-term
housing for victims after a national disaster. Types of
construction standards we should require for public housing in
areas where we have a history of severe weather or fires. We
need to know more about the loss of private housing stock as it
relates to Section 8 choice vouchers.
We need to know more about the devastation of the housing
stock in areas like Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands where we
have people who are suffering currently. What is happening in
Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands is shameful and sinful. We
need to know more about this.
Should low-, moderate-income ratio be waived in the wake of
disasters? The LMI is something that is set at 70 percent.
Should we lower this, given the lawsuits and settlements that
we have had in this area?
Protecting the housing of our Nation's senior citizens when
we have national disasters. Protecting the housing of the
disabled when we have national disasters.
We should talk about providing temporary housing assistance
to HUD-assisted families that were displaced by storms.
We should look at the cost, the estimated cost, of HUD
properties damaged. We need to know what we can do to repair
and replace properties.
These are some of the areas of concern that the Secretary
should be concerned with and should be prepared to address.
I believe that it is important for us to discuss waste,
fraud, and abuse, and my hope is that we will have a very
fruitful discussion today. But I also know that Mr. Long, who
is the FEMA Director, Mr. Long, Brock Long, FEMA Director,
appeared before the Senate Homeland Security Committee
yesterday for a hearing. And he will be appearing tomorrow at
the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.
This is important. There are many things about waste,
fraud, and abuse associated with FEMA that we can and should
discuss, and my hope is that they will be discussed in this
Congress.
But I also know that his appearance before these committees
has much to do with what is happening right now as it relates
to the storms that we have had to encounter. What happened in
Texas and Florida and the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico is of
great importance to us. And just as Mr. Brock Long is
testifying, the Secretary of HUD should be testifying as well.
I know that the request was made for this hearing, and it
has been set for some time. I am OK with that. But I do believe
that I shall now do something that is important, and that is
make a request for us to bring the Secretary of HUD before the
committee so that the Secretary can give some answers to
questions of concern.
I would also add this, that I would like, without
objection, to place a letter in the record requesting that the
Secretary appear, along with some of the areas of concern that
we would like for the Secretary to address.
I opened by saying, you can't be the Secretary of HUD
without being the Secretary of HUD. This means that you can't
secret yourself someplace at a time when your presence is
needed elsewhere. You have to appear and let the public know
where you stand, where HUD stands, and what some of these
policies are that we need to help you with.
If there are things that we need to correct, let's talk
about the correction process. If there are things that we
cannot correct and we should eliminate, let's talk about these
things as well.
But the point to be made is, we need to talk to the
Secretary of HUD. You can't be the Secretary of HUD without
appearing before the Financial Services Committee, which has
oversight jurisdiction, and this committee, this subcommittee
has specific oversight jurisdiction, and we do ask that the
Secretary appear.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back. And the
gentleman's letter will be submitted to the record, without
objection.
The chair now recognizes the vice chair of the Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee, the gentleman from Colorado,
Mr. Tipton, for 1 minute for an opening.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Chairman Wagner.
Providing relief to Americans impacted by natural disaster
is a critical function of Congress. Disaster relief can help
Americans and their towns put their lives back on track after
what are often life-altering disasters. While fulfilling this
critical function, however, we must also remember to fulfill
another charge: to be good stewards of taxpayer dollars.
In my home State of Colorado, Community Development Block
Grants for Disaster Recovery have been used for flood and fire
recovery programs. These programs addressing housing,
infrastructure, planning, and economic development needs have
proven to be effective tools in responding to the aftermath of
a disaster.
In Colorado, the Department of Local Affairs administers
CDBG-DR funding. I have confidence in the Department of Local
Affairs to faithfully distribute these funds.
I also believe that it is important that HUD have the
ability to be able to track these dollars down to the local
level, whether it be independently or working with State
agencies. It is crucial that taxpayer dollars allocated for
disaster relief are used for their intended purpose. And I look
forward to learning how Congress can create more accountability
in these programs here today.
Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
We now welcome today's witness, Ms. Helen Albert. Helen
Albert was appointed as the Acting Inspector General for the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development beginning in
June 2017. Ms. Albert previously served as the Deputy Inspector
General at HUD and the Assistant Inspector General for
Management and Policy.
Prior to joining HUD, Ms. Albert was Director of External
Operations at the Department of Health and Human Services,
Office of Inspector General, and spent a decade in the U.S.
Senate, where she served as chief investigator and professional
staff for two Senate committees, primarily focusing on
counternarcotics and fraud-related issues.
Ms. Albert is a native of New York City and received her
bachelor of arts from the State University of New York at
Binghamton.
Without objection, the witness' written statement will be
made a part of the record following her oral remarks. Once the
witness is finished presenting her testimony, each member of
the subcommittee will have 5 minutes within which to ask
questions.
Ms. Albert, on your table there are three lights. Green
means go, yellow means you have 1 minute left, and red means
your time is up.
With that, the witness will be now be recognized for 5
minutes to give an oral presentation of her testimony.

STATEMENT OF MS. HELEN ALBERT, ACTING INSPECTOR GENERAL, OFFICE
OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT

Ms. Albert. Thank you, Chairman Wagner, Ranking Member
Green, and members of the subcommittee. I am Helen Albert, the
Acting Inspector General of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Thank you for the opportunity to highlight our
perspectives of HUD's oversight of disaster assistance funding,
particularly in light of the immense challenges faced by this
Nation to respond to destructive hurricanes and fires.
This country has never he been hit by multiple hurricanes
as strong as Harvey, Irma, and Maria, with other hurricanes
hitting shortly after, in the same season in modern times. This
has been followed by devastating wildfires, which, like the
storms, have caused extensive destruction and loss of human
life.
As part of our initial response, our special agents, the
Federal law enforcement side of our agency, assisted in search-
and-rescue efforts in Houston, teamed with disaster medical
assistant units to be the first into the Keys, and helped
locate unaccounted-for HUD employees in all affected areas, and
delivered food and supplies to the elderly.
Additionally, our auditors and evaluators with our agents
are currently working to conduct quick capacity reviews to
determine the ability of local entities to administer funds.
I could not be more proud of the critical work our IG staff
is undertaking.
From 2001 til 2016, Congress appropriated more than $47
billion in funding to address long-term recovery to HUD in the
wake of a wide range of disasters, including the terrorist
attacks of 9/11, Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Hurricanes Ike and
Gustav in 2008, Hurricane Sandy in 2012, and Hurricane Matthew
in 2016. In comparison, from 1993 to 1999, HUD disaster funding
totaled less than $1.7 billion.
The States primarily use the funding to repair housing,
compensate homeowners, repair infrastructure, and provide
economic development. We note, for the last large disaster, now
exactly 5 years ago, approximately 50 percent of Sandy funds
are still unexpended.
Over the years, HUD has gained more experience and has made
progress with assisting communities, but faces significant
challenges monitoring funds provided to various grantees,
including States and cities.
Oversight is made more different due to the diverse nature
of projects and the fact that some can take 5 to 10 years to
complete. HUD must be diligent to ensure grantees have
identified timelines and are keeping up with them and goals are
met and expectations are achieved.
But it continues to face the following challenges in
administering these grants: ensuring that expenditures are
eligible and supportive; certifying that grantees are following
procurement regulations; addressing concerns that citizens
encounter when seeking assistance; and conducting consistent
and sufficient monitoring efforts on grants.
We have developed a series of integrity bulletins aimed at
providing the grantees with information to help safeguard
program funds and to ensure that communities get the full
benefit of funding. The benefits were sent to grantees over the
last few years and are posted on our website.
We also recently developed a fraud alert for homeowners,
which we hope that you will pass out to your constituents, on
how to avoid scams and where to go if they need help.
Additionally, our work in capacity studies has begun. We
are conducting these to bring awareness to potential areas of
waste, fraud, and abuse specific to the environments the
Department is about to enter.
Finally, lessons learned from over 15 years of oversight
activities lead us to an overarching recommendation to suggest
codifying a single disaster recovery program at HUD in order to
ensure a more permanent, formal framework, to reduce the volume
and provide consistency of notices used to provide informal
guidance for each disaster, and to mitigate time delays in
implementing guidance.
In conclusion, Chairman Wagner, the Department's role has
greatly increased, as it has had to deal with unanticipated
disasters and economic crises that have, in addition to its
other missions, increased its vital role in providing services
that impact the lives of our citizens.
My office is strongly committed to working with the
Department and Congress to ensure that the program operates
efficiently and effectively and is intended for the benefits of
Americans now and into the future.
I look forward to answering all of your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Albert can be found on page
30 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Wagner. The chair thanks the witness for her
opening statement. And the chair now recognizes herself for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Albert, I wanted to spend my time discussing action
plans submitted by States and how changes and revisions to
stated guidelines invite potential misuse of CDBG-Disaster
Recovery funds.
In your written testimony, you note that HUD has issued a
number of waivers and accepted an even greater number of
amendments or revisions to States' action plans. What are some
of the issues with allowing HUD and the States to very easily
revise plans to provide disaster recovery to victims?
Ms. Albert. The Department under the CDBG program actually
needs flexibility. It has to have the ability to do things and
allow localities, depending on the disaster, to be able to
react in certain ways.
However, when you allow these waiver upon waivers, and HUD
has, along with FEMA actually, has waived quite a bit, what
happens is, is you lose the intended purpose of the program.
Chairwoman Wagner. Can you speak up a little bit? You are
saying, lose the intended purpose? Yes.
Ms. Albert. The intended purpose of the program. So for
instance, in the State of Louisiana there had been a grant
program that was designed to elevate homes. A worthy program.
Moneys had already been given out to homeowners to renovate and
rebuilt. But in the flood zones they wanted those areas to try
and elevate so that if there was another flood they could
withstand it.
What happened in that instance was we went and did a sample
audit to see whether the elevation took place. It was about
$650 million that was given for this intended purpose. We did a
sample of about 199 homes, and when we went, 148 of the homes
had not been elevated.
Chairwoman Wagner. Wow.
Ms. Albert. So we had spoken to HUD and we had asked them
to actually recapture the funds, because, frankly, it wasn't
for the intended purpose.
HUD cannot recapture, it only can recapture from the
States, because it signs an agreement with the grantee. What
HUD did in that instance was they decided to change the intent
of the program. So they said: If you can prove to us that you
actually rehabilitated your home and/or elevated, we will
accept that, although the name of the program was Home
Elevation.
So then we went back and we said: Then show us the
documentation to show that the money was actually used to
rehabilitate, because they that received other moneys to do
that. They could not do that.
So after a variety of different changing of the intended
purposes, of waiving what had been put in the action plan to
begin with, we ended up closing down that evaluation because we
could not close out the finding and recommendation because it
kept changing.
Chairwoman Wagner. In your written testimony you note that
for Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, HUD accepted 66 amendments
from Louisiana for Hurricane Sandy--yes, for Hurricane Sandy--
accepted 17 amendments from New York. Are these extreme cases
or do States so frequently amend their action plans? And how
often does HUD reject action plans or ask States to revise and
resubmit them for review?
Ms. Albert. Sometimes they do reject. In one of the cases
that I know, Ranking Member Green mentioned, had to do with low
and moderate income. In the case of Texas, they actually did
reject southern Texas' action plan in the valley because it did
not meet some of the low-and moderate-income requirements.
There were lawsuits, as he mentioned, and other things that had
occurred.
But they don't tend to do that often. They tend to accept
the amendments. They believe that there is something called
maximum feasible deference, which means that the locality or
the grantee or the State, whoever is administering it, has
deference to do with it pretty much as they think they need to,
except in certain instances like LMI where they sought action,
but that is not typical.
Chairwoman Wagner. Ms. Albert, and I have so many more
questions, I will have to submit some for the record or do it
in a second round. But let me ask one final question.
Once a State has submitted an action plan and HUD accepts
it, should HUD require unused funds under the action plan to be
returned rather than have those dollars repurposed or the
action plan amended to allow for more spending for a new
purpose?
Ms. Albert. As a law enforcement agency and an auditing
agency, we typically see that it usually takes about 6 to 8
years for redevelopment to take place. As money ages beyond
that, that is when you start seeing more problems with the
funds, more improper uses, more repurposing, finding uses for
the money that is sitting there. There is $360 million still
sitting from 9/11, which is now 16 years ago.
Chairwoman Wagner. Wow.
Ms. Albert. At some point you have to say what was the
intended purpose? And that is a whole other story about the
action plans, whether HUD is going back and seeing that the
expectations were actually met.
But that is a very complicated issue, and we do believe
that some funding after a certain amount of time should be
either recaptured or repurposed.
Chairwoman Wagner. Recaptured or repurposed. Thank you very
much.
The chair now recognizes my friend and the distinguished
gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Ms. Albert.
My goal today is to hopefully get all of us thinking toward
making some corrections and some improvements. And I do think
that the HUD program for disaster relief has been successful
and is something that we don't need to discontinue unless we
find something better.
Here is the problem. When there is a disaster, particularly
in the Midwest, it is usually going to be a tornado, and in
some instances the Mississippi or the Missouri will come out of
its banks and we will have some flooding, nothing like what
happened on the Gulf Coast or Superstorm Sandy.
So what happens is that we have all of these nonentitlement
cities that will experience a major problem that devastates and
decimates the community, and then FEMA can't step in because
the threshold is $8 million. So you get a little town like
Orrick, which you probably never heard of, which is in my
congressional district. There are 800 people. You could wipe
out the whole town and not meet the FEMA threshold.
So what we have to do then is depend on the State, that the
nonentitlement dollars that come to the States would be
disbursed. That creates a problem if you are talking about
trying to respond quickly.
And the other problem is the entitlement cities, Kansas
City, largest, St. Louis, second, Springfield, Independence, I
think those are the only entitlement cities in the State. So
the money that goes to the State in Jefferson City began to
dwindle, and they are not--the State is not getting the dollars
at a level that the cities are getting anyway. So it reduces
the opportunity for HUD dollars to be used in the other small
towns.
So if you live in a small town, you get slapped with an
event, and then you get slapped because you have to go to the
State. And I think that is a problem. I think there is some
kind of way FEMA and HUD, we need to work this out so that we
don't discriminate against small towns, and that is exactly
what is happening right now.
Can you fix that? We have 2 minutes for you to fix it.
Ms. Albert. As the Inspector General, I will try to talk
about it in the framework of what I do.
It is interesting because Community Development Block
Grants for disaster recovery actually don't go to entitlement
communities, they go to--the normal funding goes to--
Mr. Cleaver. Yes, I know that. Maybe I wasn't clear. I know
it doesn't go--
Ms. Albert. Right.
Mr. Cleaver. That is not the problem. The entitlement
cities, they would probably go--as a former mayor, we probably
would go to our rainy day fund. And if there is some housing
issue, we would probably go to CDBG. So that is not what I am
saying.
What I am saying is, small towns get hit, if the damage is
$5 million, they are in trouble in terms of some assistance.
They have to go to the State. If they get the State money it is
reducing the State pot, which was not designed just for
disaster relief.
Ms. Albert. Right.
Mr. Cleaver. It is for all CDBG programs, including 108
funds and everything else. So small towns get hit. Is this
not--do I need to fix it some more?
Ms. Albert. Let me say this from the jurisdiction of HUD as
it relates to FEMA. One of the things that we are advocating is
actually a synthesization of more of the program, for at least
HUD's perspective, as a statutory codification. And these
issues could be talked about as HUD makes this a statutory
program: What type of funding from CDBG should go to what
areas?
So if there is an inequity between small and large and who
gets more. This is sort of the problem in Puerto Rico right
now, that the determination has been made that the power goes
to the larger cities, and so the smaller areas are not getting
it.
But these are things that Congress can get involved with it
if it takes up our recommendation, which is to codify the
program, put in statute some sort of language from HUD's
perspective, and then you can get those issues addressed.
Mr. Cleaver. We are on the same page. Maybe we will get it.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the vice chair of the Oversight
and Investigations Subcommittee, the gentleman from Colorado,
Mr. Tipton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Ms. Albert, for taking time to be here.
I wanted to follow up a little bit on one of the answers
that you had to Chairman Wagner. You made the comment that HUD
likes to see if the money was used for the intended purposes.
And we have noted in the State of Colorado that you have pretty
much the policy of maximum feasible deference to the State's
interpretation of the statutory requirement.
Would you see a benefit, from HUD's perspective, in terms
of being able to establish formal regulations for the CDBG-DR
requirements? Would that be helpful to HUD in terms of
executing the mission when it comes to natural disasters?
Ms. Albert. Absolutely. So at this juncture, after Harvey
and Irma hit, we really took a sort of a lessons learned inward
look, and we said this was an unprecedented time as far as
disasters, three hurricanes, fires, other hurricanes coming
that were also destructive, and at this time we felt we really
need to assess what needs to be done for the future. Because
for HUD, when I say it is a peripheral mission, I don't mean
that HUD uses it as a peripheral, but it is not part of its
core statute and not part of what it was founded on in its
authorizing language.
And so what HUD does is it responds to supplementals per
each disaster and it writes Federal Register notices, and this
is because Congress hasn't directed it to do so. For instance,
this happens to be Sandy's. There are 30-something Federal
Register notices. There are a lot of Federal Register notices.
It needs to have a codification, a core statutory mission. And
in that can be described some areas that we know have been
abusive and that need clarification and others where there is a
need for flexibility.
So what we do tend to find is with maximum feasible
deference there tends to be an overuse of it. And these are
things that we would hope, as they codify and look to
rulemaking, that they try to address. We do see that if you do
end up codifying the CDBG program that you will formalize it,
get away from these informal guidances, which sometimes are
inconsistent from disaster to disaster, and will eliminate some
of the delays in implementation.
The interesting point is, though, that when we did a
review, we did an audit of Sandy money with the entire IG
community that has been involved. The top eight IGs came
together. It was surprising that HUD actually surpassed FEMA
and other departments in the amount of money it disbursed. And
that being so, it really at this juncture needs to codify and
to accept the fact that, unfortunately, disasters are here to
stay for this Department and its mission.
Mr. Tipton. When you are talking about the money exceeding
what FEMA had even spent, are you comfortable that the dollars
were well-spent for the intended purpose?
Ms. Albert. For Sandy money, which is really the last big
disaster, which is now 5 years ago almost exactly to this
month, we note that of the $15.2 billion that HUD received from
Congress in the supplemental legislation, half is still
unexpended.
So like I said, in the beginning it can take 6 to 8 years
to redevelop, but half is a great number.
Mr. Tipton. Yes. I believe in the State of Colorado we had
$320 million of moneys that had come in. I believe right now
$130 million has been disbursed. They are anticipating that the
balance of that will be done by 2019.
I think we probably share--I have a little reluctance to
try and force it because you made the comment of overuse of
dollars. You don't want them to be directed where they
shouldn't be going.
Can you describe maybe your idea in terms of how we get
that accountability, make sure the dollars are going where they
need to and are expended in an appropriate period of time?
Ms. Albert. So I will pick a topic that is important,
although I don't seem to have a lot of time, and it is a
lengthy topic. Maybe we can get it with other members.
But one of the areas that we tend to see a problem is in
procurement. And procurement is a big area when you are
delivering moneys out in the supplemental to the States and
localities. We tend to see abuses with procurement that really
need to be fixed as we go forward.
Certainly, the experience that we have all read about in
the last week with Puerto Rico and the power contract that was
given there highlights what IGs across the government see. I
think without exception the top eight IGs that oversee this
program think that procurement in contracting is probably its
number 1 topic.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you. I yield back, Chair.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Ohio, Mrs.
Beatty, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Beatty. Thank you so much, Madam Chairwoman and
Ranking Member.
And thank you for being here as our witness today, Ms.
Albert.
We have spent a fair amount of time talking about the
disasters, and I noticed in the beginning of your written
testimony you acknowledge that the United States has never seen
a hurricane season like the one we just experienced.
And for the audience and those who are watching, you are
probably making reference to Harvey in Texas, that was a
Category 4, that was in August; and then Irma, that was a
Category 5, that was in September, hitting Florida, Georgia,
and South Carolina; and then Maria, of course, in Puerto Rico
and the Virgin Islands, Category 4 again, in September, just a
couple weeks apart.
I know in part how devastating that was. Right before Maria
hit in Puerto Rico, I was there about 10 days before that,
having an opportunity to be there and see the beauty of that
territory. And so you can imagine how devastating it was.
My executive assistant who works for me in my D.C. office,
that is his home, his parents are there, his grandparents, his
godfather, who is the health and human services director there
and a surgeon, and they have all been devastated by this. And
not to mention the Members of Congress who live in and have
families in those States that have been affected by Harvey and
Irma and Maria, and then, of course, Nate in Mississippi.
So where I am going with this question, when you talked
about how devastating financially this is, with that said, do
you think that HUD has enough resources within the Department
to adequately administer the CDBG-Disaster Relief Program, in
your opinion?
Ms. Albert. No, I don't think they have enough resources.
Mrs. Beatty. So in your role and being part of that team,
one of the questions when Secretary Carson was here a few weeks
ago, as you probably are aware, that he did a minus 15 percent
reduction request in his budget for this year. So one of the
questions I asked him--because at that time we knew about
Harvey and Irma and Maria, so if we don't have enough money, we
have been devastated.
As a personal note, for me, when I look at the $58 billion
that we recently passed for Texas, I also feel there are some
disparities when you start talking about how communities in
Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands are being treated with the
moneys that are there.
Just this morning I had an opportunity to listen to the
mayor of San Juan, and she talked a lot about infrastructure
and the dollars and what they need. So if you, as a part of the
team, recognize there is not enough money, I am going to be
like Congressman Cleaver, you have about a minute and a half to
tell me how we get the money and how we fix it.
Ms. Albert. I think there are certain things that can be
done first. We talked about the codification, which is an
authorizing issue, that is not an appropriating issue, and I
think that will create some efficiencies that need to be going
forward.
Along with that, once you do authorizing language, which
this is the committee of authorization, so it would have to
come from this committee, there will be certain aspects of it
as you go to codify the program within HUD that can be
discussed. Such as we really believe that there needs to be
something like a jump team, like something that you see in the
military and in law enforcement, where a team of HUD officials
come in that are dedicated, not from all these different
organizations, but that are dedicated in HUD to going into
these localities as these disasters happen.
There certainly needs to be funding for this. They will be
able to take some of it from their existing programs and put it
into that. But if you are going to have an amalgamated team
that is available to go at any minute, you will have to
discuss, along with that authorization, some funding.
Mrs. Beatty. But I am hesitant about making HUD pursue this
codification in the midst of this disaster effort, because I
don't know if they have enough resources to accomplish this.
My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Trott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Trott. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I want to thank the witness for her time this morning.
And before I get into a few questions, I want to just
respond to my friend from Texas' opening remarks regarding
Secretary Carson's appearance before our committee. He was here
about 4 hours. We have an awful lot of ground to cover. I would
agree that we need to have him come back.
But I found his testimony and comments to be some of the
more productive hearings we have had. He actually listened to
the questions and did his best to respond to our questions. So
I can't blame the Secretary for the problems we are discussing
today necessarily.
But I think it is important we have this conversation
because we are talking about a lot of money, these disasters
are occurring more frequently, and it is almost inevitable that
when a disaster does strike a community that the response is
almost always deemed to be inadequate and too slow, certainly
by the people that are affected by the disaster. So it is
important.
And with respect to this program, my concern is it is so
fragmented and there is a lack of accountability and a lack of
transparency. And I wonder preliminarily whether the maximum
feasibility deference standard really puts the Department in a
position where there is no adequate way to review the States'
performance.
Ms. Albert. Let me address the first part of your comment,
which is fragmentation. I do think that the overall disaster
scheme, schemata, actually, that has evolved over time with the
government response has evolved in a fragmentary manner. It has
evolved where programs were in the government and therefore it
was siloed within those programs.
Now, for instance, FEMA, this is their mission. This is all
they do. This is disaster response. It is emergency response,
emergency management. But for the other departments, some of
whom actually surpass FEMA in funding, such as HUD--and,
believe it or not, the Department of Transportation spends more
money than FEMA and gets supplemental money more than FEMA, at
least for Sandy it did--these are tangential missions and so
they fit within the tranches of whatever they come from.
When you discuss fragmentation, part of the issue is what
happens to the homeowner when they have to go to this type of
amalgamation and congealing of government agencies, and there
is confusion and there are delays.
For instance, I will give you one example. When you go to a
disaster recovery center that FEMA runs and you happen to be a
resident who has been flooded, you will get funding from FEMA
first--food, clothing, repairing your home, at least for you to
live in--and then you will go to SBA, to the Small Business
Administration.
There is an alphabet soup of government agencies that the
residents and homeowners have no idea about. And they then meet
with SBA. Now, you would think, as I did actually for the
longest time until my staff actually corrected me, that if you
got an SBA loan you were a small business. That is not true.
You can get a homeowner loan from the Small Business
Administration.
But here is the problem. If you do, you then are not
available because there is a sequence that HUD comes to meet
the unmet needs. You will not be able to get a grant from HUD.
And a grant is not repayable.
So there are these confusions that emanate from the
fragmentation of how the disaster program was set up, and they
really need to be addressed going forward. That is not to say
that the government hasn't gotten better at disaster response,
it has, compared to--I came into HUD from the HHS IG right
after 9/11, and compared to even Katrina, it is a lot different
now.
However, there are real confusions and inefficiencies that
really need to be streamlined and synthesized, because the
homeowner suffers when that happens.
Mr. Trott. So it was a great comment and goes to the heart
of my concern with this issue as we try and codify a solution.
So some poor homeowner doesn't get what they need from HUD, and
they go to FEMA. FEMA says: It is not our area of
responsibility, you need to call HUD, or you need to call the
SBA.
And I know one thing from my days in the business world, if
you have an important project or mission that is critical, you
need to have someone in charge. At the end of the day, someone
needs to be coordinating all of the efforts so that people
can't point fingers at each other.
Would you say that is a legitimate concern as we approach
this problem? Because right now, not only is the poor homeowner
confused by the myriad of agencies and departments, but there
is no one accountable.
Ms. Albert. When you are the homeowner and you go into
these initial disaster recovery centers--and some of them go
early. Sometimes going early, you can be penalized. Sometimes
you are better off waiting. Because the system right now is not
a linear system, it is actually a circuitous system. And
depending where you enter can affect where you end up. And
there is a lot of confusion.
So I think they have gotten better, but there needs to be
more done.
Mr. Trott. I appreciate your comments, and I am out of
time. But I am interested to hear about any instances of
criminality that you have discovered in the IG's office as it
relates to fraud.
But thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
And the chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York,
Ms. Velazquez for 5 minutes.
Ms. Velazquez. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Albert, in your answer one of the questions that Mrs.
Beatty posed to you, you said that more resources are needed to
HUD. What do you mean by that? Do you mean increasing
additional staffing?
Ms. Albert. Yes. I think if you could codify this program
like we are recommending--and don't forget, we have just come
to this recommendation.
Ms. Velazquez. So it is good enough. So one area where we
could make an improvement, in terms of your recommendations, is
increasing the staffing for HUD.
Ms. Albert. For this area.
Ms. Velazquez. For this area.
Ms. Albert. Yes.
Ms. Velazquez. So I am a Puerto Rican American and all my
family is in Puerto Rico. So what is happening in Puerto Rico,
there is no other way to describe it. I was just there this
weekend. The Puerto Rico that I know no longer exists. People
are dying in Puerto Rico because there is no power being
restored, 70 percent of the hospitals are operating with power
generators.
So my question to you is, I am all for preventing fraud,
waste, and abuse. I do not support putting people's lives at
risk when natural disaster strikes just for the sake of
preventing fraud and abuse. They need our assistance. The
Federal Government must show up.
So do you think that failure to document or the failure to
get an independent cost estimate should be justification enough
to withhold CDBG-DR funds from the citizens of Puerto Rico,
many of whom are facing life-threatening conditions, yes or no?
Ms. Albert. No. There has to be some reasonableness on any
efforts--
Ms. Velazquez. But that is the reality. As of yesterday,
the money from the supplemental has not been allocated to
Puerto Rico or Texas or Florida because they haven't been able
to make the estimates regarding Puerto Rico.
Ms. Albert. Right. So when HUD gets its supplemental
funding, it goes through a calculation of--my understanding, we
are not part of that, but from my understanding there are
internal meetings on how unmet needs are. Because HUD comes
after FEMA and SBA, it typically isn't there in the beginning,
although it assists, but it really comes into the unmet needs.
It will then make a determination based on Puerto Rico's
situation on what FEMA and the other first responders, in this
case SBA, would expend and what the disaster is.
But I want to explain something to you, too. I have staff
down there. And I have to tell you that it was a very difficult
road for us as well. Half of my organization is law enforcement
and the other side are auditors, and I have a presence of both
in Puerto Rico.
I spent quite a bit of time the first few weeks getting my
staff water and getting them food so that they could go out and
assess the damage for HUD. Because they have law enforcement
vehicles, they could see what HUD was not able to see. And so
they didn't have the basic necessities.
The other side of my organization in the last few weeks has
been going out to nursing homes and making sure that the
elderly--this is an unusual role for the HUD IG. We are doing
what we have to do because it is for the public good.
So this situation is a real humanitarian crisis, and I
understand that more than most because my own staff have been
affected by it.
Ms. Velazquez. It is very easy to come here and make the
argument that we must be the steward of taxpayers' money, but
at what cost? We should not--the issue is--are we looking to
the real issues when we are dealing with CDBG-DR?
We are using arguments just to cut the funding for an
agency that has failed American citizens because of the lack of
manpower to be able to come up with a report and the estimates
that we need in order to allocate the money that will make the
people of Puerto Rico whole. That is the real issue here.
Ms. Albert. Yes. And I agree with you, they should not be
cut.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Ms. Albert, for being here today.
And I appreciate the comments of my colleagues from New
York. I have worked in disaster relief and recovery in a
volunteer basis for many years. I can't even imagine--anybody
in America imagine--the devastation that Puerto Rico is seeing
today. And it is bureaucracy that is clearly in the way of
getting the relief to the people. I am working with some
nonprofits right now in trying to get some relief to Puerto
Rico, and because of how things are stalled there, it is even
hard to get that relief out there.
On the other hand, without proper oversight also costs
lives. We have seen it time and time again that when the people
that the funds are designated to do not receive the funds
because it is diverted to another area, it costs lives as well.
This is an extreme example, but you don't have to go any
further than 1993 in Mogadishu when the U.N. was providing food
to those that are in need, but the warlords were intercepting
that food and it was never getting to who it needed to, and it
resulted in the incident we know as Black Hawk Down. So we have
to find that way to put that oversight into place.
I want to make sure I understand this right. So the funds
are given to a grantee, who may be a State government, a local
government, a city government, et cetera. Then they can grant
those funds to a subgrantee. Who might that be? What type of
entity might that be?
Ms. Albert. There will be local agencies, developmental
authorities typical--for instance, if it is in a city, typical
agencies that would normally deal with economic development and
other things.
Mr. Loudermilk. Is it ever a private entity? I know in
Georgia--
Ms. Albert. Could be.
Mr. Loudermilk. It could be, lack of better term, a
developer who actually builds HUD homes.
Ms. Albert. Could be. Uh-huh.
Mr. Loudermilk. And I know that you have said that the
diversity of HUD projects is part of the problem. So these
funds could be used for any HUD-type project, is that what I am
understanding?
Ms. Albert. They are typically for--in a disaster they are
typically--because the CDBG program is for an overarching.
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Ms. Albert. But this is disaster recovery. They will do
home repair, economic development, infrastructure as well. This
is typical of what HUD does.
But I do have to mention, though, one thing as you are
talking about the money flowing down. When HUD, in the disaster
recovery, signs an agreement with the State or locality and
then it goes to, as you said, the subgrantee, it then loses the
oversight for the subgrantee because it signed the agreement
with the State or the locality. Therefore, it becomes very
difficult to monitor the funds when it goes to that level.
Mr. Loudermilk. So really the challenge is, you can monitor
the grantee, but is it the grantee who is responsible to
monitor the subgrantee to make sure the work is done?
Ms. Albert. They are.
Mr. Loudermilk. Are they equipped properly to do that in
every case?
Ms. Albert. No. Not always. And so we have actually made a
recommendation from our lessons learned. One of the interesting
scenarios was after 9/11 when lower Manhattan was devastated.
The city of New York, particularly their Department of
Investigations, which is a law enforcement entity, knew that it
was going to have issues with reconstruction in Lower
Manhattan. It was very worried about organized crime getting
involved in the construction of the World Trade Center.
And so therefore they had had a history of vendor problems
and had a problem where they had these independent or integrity
monitors, that they were called, inserted, if they were a large
enough subgrantee, and monitoring. And then they would go back
to the States and let them know, with eyes on the ground, what
they were seeing.
The only issue with that is that then the State or locality
gets the viewpoint of the integrity and independent monitor,
but we in the IG and we in HUD lose that. So we want to make
sure that if you are going to require these independent
monitors, which we think are a good idea, that we at least get
the benefit of knowing what problems they are seeing at the
subgrantee level.
Mr. Loudermilk. Within the last few seconds, as we move
forward to authorize this and put constraints, what else can
HUD and Congress do besides the monitoring to make sure that
the funds do go to those who need it and that the proper repair
or--the money is used for the proper thing?
Ms. Albert. I think we, at our level, should have oversight
of subgrantees, too. We should have some sort of tie to be able
to take action if something happens.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back.
And the chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Crist, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crist. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Ms. Albert, for being here.
I would like to talk about duplication of benefits and how
a well-intentioned practice can sometimes perhaps disadvantage
homeowners.
As you know, FEMA is often the first place that natural
disaster survivors turn for assistance. And during discussions
with FEMA about the options available to them, many homeowners
are encouraged to also apply through the Small Business
Administration for disaster recovery loans.
Those who choose to apply, are approved for the loan, can
then begin the process of rebuilding. Months later, however,
that same homeowner may see his or her neighbor, who did not
seek immediate assistance from the SBA, rebuilding their home
with a Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery
grant, I should say, money that doesn't require a cost share
nor needs to be paid back.
But when the homeowner first tries to get the same funding,
they are denied due to duplication of benefits. Or worse, they
are mistakenly approved for CDBG-Disaster Recovery, Grant-
Disaster Recovery dollars, only to be audited later and forced
to repay those funds. In both cases, the homeowner is
rightfully upset and often feels perhaps duped by the Federal
Government.
I fully agree that it is important to guard against waste.
I think we all would. But this seems inherently unfair to those
homeowners who seek early assistance in the rebuilding effort,
often at the direction of the government.
You recommend that the Department of Housing and Urban
Development generate guidance to help victims better navigate
the programs available to them following a disaster. But
because Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery
funding almost always comes after FEMA and Small Business
Administration, shouldn't disaster victims be notified, made
aware, if you will, of any potential duplication of benefits
from FEMA and the SBA first?
Ms. Albert. Yes. Easy answer. This issue of the confusion
for the homeowner is one that we have brought to the staff here
right after Harvey and Irma, but before Maria. We know that
there is confusion between particularly the SBA and HUD that
needs to be deconflicted. There are inequities that come as a
result.
Now, technically the reason that HUD comes after SBA is
because SBA loans are supposed to go for higher income who can
afford to repay; and the grants, as Ranking Member Green was
talking about, are supposed to be given to low and moderate
income.
That doesn't always happen. They don't always go to the
intended. So you could end up with a HUD grant going to
somebody who is not low and moderate income, and then the
person who ended up getting the loan is disadvantaged because
somebody else got a better situation than they did, which is
not to have to repay the loan.
We absolutely agree that this deconfliction and seamless
issue needs to be addressed as you, as the authorizing
committee, go forward with how you see disaster across the
government.
This is a result of what I said is the fragmentation of how
the disaster program emanated, primarily after 9/11. Whoever
had what function in what department ended up dealing with
their program. Some of them overlapped; some of them didn't.
The government has gotten better at trying to make it more of a
seamless scenario. However, like I said, it is not a linear
route; it is a circuitous route. And when you come into it at
different aspects of it, you could be disadvantaged, and that
is why I think you need to address that.
Mr. Crist. We the Congress?
Ms. Albert. Yes. HUD right now deals, like I said, with it
in the Federal Register, because it has never been directed in
a statute. And it will look to the supplemental, and it will
look to the guidance that comes from the supplemental.
Sometimes it is very broad and it is very general. This is why
they give the maximum feasible deference. They won't put a lot
of specificity in it.
And so you will end up with the inequities that are already
built into the system if you don't have at least the ground
rules set out.
Mr. Crist. So it is not in statute currently?
Ms. Albert. For HUD.
Mr. Crist. Right. It is a reg?
Ms. Albert. It is dealt with by Federal Register notices.
Mr. Crist. Could it be fixed there then?
Ms. Albert. I think that the more Federal Register notices
you use, the more inconsistency you will find from disaster to
disaster.
Mr. Crist. That is unfortunate. OK. Thank you.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired. And it
is unfortunate. It is no way to govern, by Federal Register, or
to have oversight.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Kustoff, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And thank you, Ms. Albert, for being here this morning. If
you could I will maybe dial it back a little bit, can you
explain the role of the CDBG-DR and specifically why the
program exists, considering the number of other programs
designed to provide similar relief among different agencies?
Ms. Albert. The CDBG program, which has traditionally been
the HUD program, is the preeminent Community Development Block
Grant out there. So while FEMA responds to disasters and
emergency management eventually they leave and it is HUD that
really stays. So when you talk about the 6 to 8 years of a
traditional redevelopment after a disaster, it is really HUD
that is there, and that is because of the Community Development
Block Grant which was set to make economic and community
development.
Mr. Kustoff. Ms. Albert, are you familiar or can you speak
to the level of coordination in disaster relief efforts between
HUD, FEMA, and SBA?
Ms. Albert. Sure. So when a disaster initially hits, FEMA
is the first in under the Stafford Act, which is the governing
statute for disasters. And it will come in and it will set up a
number of systems: Disaster recovery centers for residents and
those affected to come into, joint operations command centers,
and so forth.
And it will pull in from the Federal Government staff,
which is exactly what happened to us in the beginning, because,
as I said, half my organization is law enforcement. We then
fell under the public safety and security and did sort of
nontraditional IG roles, but we were, under the Stafford Act,
required to do that. We went out and did search and rescue. We
did other functions, including force protection. So that is
initial.
Then, as time goes on and you get sort of past the
immediate after effects, other areas start taking over, and
that is really where HUD comes in. It is the long-term economic
development and revitalization of a disaster area. But in the
initial stages, it is really FEMA; and depending on the various
support functions, it is different departments. For instance,
under public safety and security, which is called ESF 13, which
you always have an acronym in the government, that is ATF that
coordinates for all the Federal. And they are set up in various
support functions of who takes over and what.
But that is very short-term. Eventually, there is the long-
term, which is where we are at with Sandy right now, 5 years
out, and it is really the CDBG that is there.
Mr. Kustoff. Again, along those lines, now, I will tell you
I am a lawyer, was a lawyer before I was elected to Congress.
And in legal terms, sometimes you talk about forum shopping,
where you try to pick a court, a particular court that you
think may be better inclined to handle your matters. Not that I
ever did anything like that.
But do you ever see any forum shopping or venue shopping,
if you will, between grantees seeking the best deal between
these various agencies?
Ms. Albert. As a law enforcement agency, we absolutely do
see fraud, and we see it in a number of different ways.
First of all, getting to the forms and you saying that you
are an attorney, one of the things that we really try to
insist, it doesn't always happen, but HUD has been very good
when we point it out to them. We want to make sure that those
forms that people sign, have the correct certifications on them
that actually say that you are certifying that what you are
signing for is truthful, that you are the actual homeowner and
so forth. If those certifications aren't in the form, it is
very difficult to prosecute later on for actual improper
activities. So that is a preventative thing.
But we do see issues of fraud in a variety of different
ways. You are not supposed to seek moneys to rebuild if your
home is a vacation home, for instance, but yet we have people
seeking moneys which were supposed to be for low and moderate
income who have vacation homes and are saying that their home
was destroyed and they live there year round and they are low
and moderate income and so forth. Those absolutely do happen.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you, Ms. Albert.
Now, I see that my time is expiring. I yield back the
balance of my time, Madam Chairman.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the distinguished ranking member
Mr. Green for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Again, I would like to thank the witness for appearing. I
have great respect for this witness, and I greatly appreciate
what you have done in Puerto Rico. You indicated that you
dispatched some of your personnel to Puerto Rico to acquire
information such that HUD could react rapidly. Can you say just
a little bit more about this? I think it is important for us to
know.
And by the way, before you do, you don't work for HUD. I
think the record needs to have a clear indication that you do
not. Is that a fair statement, you don't work for HUD?
Ms. Albert. Yes. Inspector generals are independent
entities within the executive branch, and we are actually sort
of strange creatures, because we actually report to Congress.
So we sit and reside in the executive branch, but we have a
dual responsibility to report to Congress.
Mr. Green. Thank you. Now, if you would, Puerto Rico and
some of the things that you have been able to accomplish.
Ms. Albert. So early on, with the humanitarian crisis that
was happening in Puerto Rico, we sent--we had a limited staff
in Puerto Rico, so, unfortunately, over the years our staff
itself has gone down and so we have had to diminish some of our
actual field offices, and Puerto Rico was one of them, although
we still had a presence.
We were trying quickly, because we knew that HUD was not
able to get around and, frankly, was having a great deal of
difficulty even finding its own staff. So we would go out in
the first days after Maria to try and locate HUD staff, let the
Department know that its staff was OK--many of them were in
shelters, they had evacuated--and just let them know that they
were there and where they were. So that was the very, very
beginning was actually locating people.
After that, we went into and did a variety of things. We,
along with the U.S. Attorney's Office and the FBI, were part of
the Viejito task force which tried to deal with the issue of
hoarding, which always happens in a disaster when there is
limited fuel and supplies. We went into nursing homes, Section
202 and Section 232 facilities that are HUD but others as well,
to make sure that the situation that happened with Irma in
Florida where the horrible nursing home situation happened
didn't happen in Puerto Rico.
So we took valued water, supplies, and other things with
our agents. And we had to go, unfortunately, with our agents,
because we had to protect the trucks, but not only that, we had
to navigate the streets, which were dangerous, with downed
wires and other things, to get those things to the elderly and
disabled.
Mr. Green. Let me intercede for just a moment, because your
list is rather extensive, and I greatly appreciate all that you
are saying.
Notwithstanding all that was done, and you have obviously
made a Herculean effort, but notwithstanding all that is done,
we can visually see that there is still great work to be done
in Puerto Rico. I heard General Honore, who was in Louisiana
after Katrina, literally was in charge of a good amount of the
disaster recovery effort, he indicated that circumstances such
as what we see in Puerto Rico might require a lot more
flexibility. The accountability obviously should be there, but
it might require a lot more flexibility.
Now, he used a term that I am not suggesting that we use,
and I don't think he meant it literally. Maybe he did. But he
said, listen, let the person who needs to make the request just
write it out on a piece of paper and just send it in, because
of the dire circumstances that are having to be dealt with.
At some point, in places like Puerto Rico, we have to
dispatch more of our resources and we have to do it in a much
more expeditious fashion. I appreciate greatly what you are
trying to do to help acquire the intelligence. Somehow, we
cannot leave people stranded in the middle of the ocean, as has
been called to our attention. We really have to find a way to
get help in as quickly as possible.
And on that point of getting help to them, in my district
we had a town meeting. And for us to explain to my constituents
what was available, we had to bring in nine people, nine people
to explain. And at the end, I am convinced that people were
thoroughly confused after having all of this siloed information
presented. It is just overwhelming. And you are trying to get
back home. Your kids are at someplace where they are probably
being kept by someone.
Somehow we have to do more for Puerto Rico. Can you just
quickly give some indication, based on your observations, as to
how we might move expeditiously?
Ms. Albert. So it is always a balancing act. Obviously,
there is a great humanitarian crisis in Puerto Rico that exists
that is unique to that area. And getting people just basic
necessities--food, electricity, water--is paramount.
By the same token, we also have to look to the fact that
the capacity of Puerto Rico to now take the vast amounts of
billions of dollars that are going to come--that those
structures that need to be set up--and they do there, because
they are in bankruptcy and they have some problem agencies--
need to be done quickly but done well, with good accounting
principles and other things.
So that--just take the lessons learned. Disasters--you
don't need to reinvent the wheel--disasters have occurred: 9/
11, Katrina, Sandy. Take those lessons, make sure that you have
the best of those and put it in place where you know that there
will be capacity issues.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Tenney, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Chairwoman Wagner.
And I really appreciate the inspector general, Ms. Albert,
being here today to discuss and examine the Community
Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery Program, which is
intended to deliver emergency help to communities and
neighborhoods with limited resources post-natural disaster to
help rebuild their livelihood. I just want to make that really
clear. Over the last decade, the Housing and Urban Development
inspector generals audited grantees, which include States and
local governments, where they found many areas this program can
improve on to be run more efficiently.
And I heard your testimony earlier. Obviously, I have
numerous sheets of some of the work you have done, which looks
very comprehensive, and some issues my colleague mentioned
about some of the Sandy funding not coming out. I am really
happy to report that with all the natural disasters, and it is
particularly in the flooding realm, that there are none of my
local communities or anyone in my district that has been
reported as not getting their funding out.
But there are a couple things I just wanted to talk to you
about as the inspector general, and one of them is the
thresholds in determining how we get to some of the disaster
aid for, especially in my community, it seems that the flooding
and the natural disasters we have almost cruelly go to the
poorer areas and the poorer neighborhoods, and they are the
ones that need the most resources. And I have walked through
the muddy streams. I have walked into cellars where the
basements are 5 feet of mud, and these people don't have the
resources.
How do we get around--I don't want to say get around, but
get to the threshold so they actually meet--some of them are
dollar amounts, some are per capita. How would you recommend we
actually get to some of these people who are caught without
having--and especially in an area like mine where our values
are much lower than, say, New York City or other areas.
Ms. Albert. First of all, to get to your point about that
some of the poorer communities often flood this, unfortunately,
is a reality. You saw it with Katrina, New Orleans. Some of the
areas that have been developed that are the poorer areas were
in the ninth ward, were flood zones. And this is why they
flood, they were built in flood zones. We see this,
unfortunately, even with public housing, that they are built,
some of them, in flood zones, which gets to another issue which
we have audited, which is that public housing sometimes doesn't
buy flood insurance even though they are in a flood zone.
But as far as the inequities of receiving funding HUD's
allocation when it gets a supplemental and it goes to CDBG-R,
CDBG is formula-based, but CDBG-R is a whole different
allocation. And it looks to FEMA and SBA and the first
responders and it sees what unmet needs are there, and then it
makes a decision based on what it has determined the
destruction has been in a particular area, and then it goes
into a calculation of what is the unmet need.
I think that if you feel that there are inequities--again,
this is not a statutory program. So it is an interpretation by
them and Federal Register over supplemental language.
Ms. Tenney. If I may just say, one of my concerns is that
our local governments have taken a lot of the burden in my
region, and some of our local officials have actually become
quite knowledgeable on some of the disasters, especially
related to flooding.
And it seems that when the Federal Government comes in, we
don't take into account their local knowledge and their ability
to solve the problem. And I am wondering if that is something
the inspector general can dive in and say, look, these guys
know what is going on, how can we give them the opportunity to
provide the solutions, and then better spend the money that is
coming in.
And often we find that tens of thousands of dollars come in
on projects that could have been solved--we have already
studied these, we have analyzed them, and sometimes our input
isn't taken into consideration. Is that something that we can
do through your office or we can fix? Because it is a huge
problem.
Ms. Albert. I think that this is an issue you can discuss
when you talk about codification in an authorizing language,
because typically under CDBG disaster recovery funding, it will
go to the States as opposed to an entitlement community, which
could be lower, a locality, which is where traditional CDBG
goes.
So this inequity rises because you have different funding
streams of who gets the money. And maybe this is something that
you could discuss while you are dealing with your authorizing
language.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. Because really, we do need to focus
on so many of these communities. We know what we should have
done, could have done. It doesn't get done. And then we have a
few years later a heavy rain, not even a major storm, and we
are in catastrophic flooding again like we experienced this
year in my district on July 1st. And where's the Federal
Government? We are still tied up. We are still not responding
the way we should be to our needy communities.
And I do thank you. My time has expired, but I thank you
very much for your great testimony.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentlelady's time has expired.
And the chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana,
Mr. Hollingsworth, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Good morning. Thank you so much for
being here. And in addition to thanking you for being here,
thank you for the hard work that you put in every day, you and
your team. I know that you do that with a great amount of
diligence. You can see that in your testimony here today and
the way that you are thoughtfully answering questions and you
are focused on ensuring not only that we do everything we can
to help those that need it, but also that we do everything we
can to be good, thoughtful stewards of taxpayer dollars.
From a bigger picture perspective that I wanted to ask
about, what I kind of heard throughout the course of your
testimony today and some of the questions my colleagues have
been asking is in the event that we respond to something like
this, ``we'' being the Federal Government, there are two big
risks and concerns, right?
One is that there is a lot of overlap and duplicative work
and resources that are put to the same missions. In other
words, the two circles of the Venn diagram are too much
overlapped, right? But then there is also another big risk,
right, that those circles don't overlap at all and people fall
through the cracks and aren't able to get the resources that
they want.
And you and certainly the Department overall are trying to
find the place where you can marry those two up at exactly the
point where there is no overlap, no duplicative waste of
resources, but also that no one falls through the cracks.
And so really, what I wanted to ask first was, have you
encountered any challenges inside the Department in being able
to execute upon your mission of ensuring that there are
stewards of taxpayer dollars thinking through at each of these
points? Is there anything that we need to provide you,
resources or tools, to help you and your office accomplish
their mission more thoroughly throughout the Department itself?
Ms. Albert. Thank you for that question. Nobody takes the
job of an inspector general because they want to win a
popularity contest. I will be honest with you. It is maybe one
of the toughest jobs in government, because you are criticizing
programs, but you are criticizing them in a way that you hope
to make them better.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Ms. Albert. But, of course, the message is not always one
that is well-received by many.
From the inspector general's perspective, it has been a
tough road for us. Not only have we now had to deal with
natural disasters, but, frankly, HUD, during the great economic
crisis after 2011, was, frankly, the major entity supporting
the economy through housing. I don't know if people realize
that FHA became 30 percent of the mortgage industry at that
point for new home sales. And when you add refinances in, it
was as high as 70 percent.
Concurrently, while it has had to oversee that, for
instance, I have to oversee a $1.5 trillion FHA fund and a $1.5
trillion Ginnie Mae remaining principal balance. That is $3
trillion, including HUD's $48 billion regular appropriation and
$47 billion disaster.
When Sandy started, I had 711 staff. Today, I have 574. So
you can see that something gives. And while I am very proud of
our organization--we have returned more than $60 in the last
few years to the government for every dollar you spend on us--
there is only so much we can look at.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Is it just a question of resources or do
you need more of a cultural shift or a push from Congress on
how important your role is, how important auditing generally
is, how important the inspector general role can be?
Ms. Albert. One thing I have to say about this committee,
this committee has always been, as our authorizing committee,
very supportive of the inspector general. We have enjoyed a
great relationship as our authorizers. But I think there are
more things that this committee, as an authorizing committee,
could do to help maybe alleviate, and certainly in this area,
not only just codification, extending our oversight to
subgrantees ensuring that procurement rules are met, because we
know there can be great abuse in procurement. These are really
things that could help facilitate us and would actually help
our dialog with the Department.
Now, I can say that I meet regularly with the Secretary. As
a matter of fact, I have a meeting with him tomorrow. And he
and I have had conversations about the critical juncture we are
at right now and the need to do something different.
Mr. Hollingsworth. I totally agree with that. And I think
that certainly maybe many people see you and your role as a
problem; I see it as the key to the solution and ensuring that
we accomplish the mission that we want, but also do it
effectively.
My good friend and colleague that also sits on this
committee, not this subcommittee, French Hill, this is a matter
of passion for him as well. I know that he has done a great
amount of work after Katrina, as president of the Rotary Club,
Cooperative Baptist Fellowship, and ensuring that homes were
rebuilt down in Louisiana.
And he was astounded to see what he felt like was a waste
of resources and not long-term sustainably helping individuals
build above the floodplain so they wouldn't have this issue
again. And so he and I are going to continue to work together
to do everything we can to support you in your role and the
Department generally in accomplishing its mission, but also in
being a good steward.
With that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Wagner. The gentleman's time has expired.
I am going to take a point of privilege from the chair and
recognize my good friend from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, for a
quick follow up question, please.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you. Let me thank you, Madam Chair, for
the hearing, and thank the IG for being here.
In many ways, some of the questions, maybe the majority of
the questions we ask were not what you do. We put you in the
position in defending HUD.
But I want to go back to what you might be able to do. You
talked about the fragmentation, which is what I was trying to
talk about earlier. Again, if Mayview is hit by a disaster,
Mayview, Missouri, in my district, 222 people, if we followed
the law of the CDBG--I know a little bit about CDBG, so I know
the requirements. If we followed the regulations, before
Mayview can get Federal assistance, there is supposed to be a
Presidential declaration. There has not been a Presidential
declaration for any of these small towns that have had
disasters.
And there is also a requirement, a HUD requirement for a
community hearing. And I think you guys probably are the people
that check up on this. There is supposed to be a community
hearing. You are supposed to have a written notice of the
hearing, and the plan is supposed to be presented. None of that
happens.
We have a problem. I have seen it firsthand. I have talked
about it. I don't know what we can do. Looking at your
recommendations, your legislative recommendations, and maybe it
is all entangled into your recommendations, but there needs to
probably be some clarity.
This is a problem, and it is just a matter of time we are
going to have another situation where in Biloxi, Mississippi,
the ranking member and I went down there right after Katrina.
They had rebuilt a yacht dock for yachts. People--downtown, the
windows were still out of stores. Anyway, this is frustrating.
Thank you so much for being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for allowing me to follow up.
Ms. Albert. Can I make one point, though? You are
absolutely right that for HUD, you have to have a
Presidentially declared disaster zone for them to come in,
traditionally, after FEMA and SBA.
FEMA can come in--I don't know if I have this title
correct--when there is an emergency zone created, so that they
can preposition and get in before the disaster. So like when
Harvey was hitting, they would get in there before.
This is why I am recommending that HUD actually have these
jump teams, so that they can get in and do what they have to.
And this may be part of your authorizing languages. When does
HUD come in? Does it have to wait for the declared zone.
Chairwoman Wagner. I thank the gentleman for his secondary
question. And I thank you, Ms. Albert, for your testimony today
and the wonderful collaboration between your office and the
Oversight and Investigation Committee here of Financial
Services. I know we have varied in some of our questioning here
today with you.
And knowing that Congress thus far in the 115th Congress
has only authorized and appropriated, in fact, $7.5 billion in
Community Development Block Grant-Disaster Recovery funds, and
they were specifically I know for Harvey and Irma. Many of us
spoke today about the horrific conditions and tragedy and
devastation in Puerto Rico. Knowing that there are not specific
CDBG-DR funds that have been appropriated there yet, I just
thank you for your perspective on some of the ways that we can
work together to reform the system.
The ranking member and I are committed to working together
to come up to some of your recommendations, some of your
thoughts about how we can streamline this so that in the end,
this money does, in fact, reach those who need it the most and
that we are--while remaining good stewards of the taxpayers'
dollars.
So I thank you, Ms. Albert.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
And this hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:01 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

November 1, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
