- THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S IMPACT ON MAIN STREET, RETIREES, AND SAVINGS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S IMPACT ON
MAIN STREET, RETIREES, AND SAVINGS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MONETARY

POLICY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 28, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-25

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

28-222 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah                       DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade

ANDY BARR, Kentucky, Chairman

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Vice          GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     BRAD SHERMAN, California
MIA LOVE, Utah                       AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DENNY HECK, Washington
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
June 28, 2017................................................     1
Appendix:
June 28, 2017................................................    41

WITNESSES
Wednesday, June 28, 2017

Dynan, Karen, Nonresident Senior Fellow, Peterson Institute for
International Economics........................................     9
Kupiec, Paul H., Resident Scholar, American Enterprise Institute.     7
Michel, Norbert J., Senior Research Fellow, the Heritage
Foundation.....................................................     5
Pollock, Alex J., Distinguished Senior Fellow, R Street Institute    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Dynan, Karen.................................................    42
Kupiec, Paul H...............................................    49
Michel, Norbert J............................................    74
Pollock, Alex J..............................................    93

THE FEDERAL RESERVE'S IMPACT ON
MAIN STREET, RETIREES, AND SAVINGS

----------

Wednesday, June 28, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Monetary
Policy and Trade,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:06 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy Barr
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Barr, Williams, Huizenga,
Pittenger, Love, Hill, Emmer, Davidson, Tenney, Hollingworth;
Moore, Foster, Sherman, Kildee, and Vargas.
Chairman Barr. The Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and
Trade will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare a recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The Federal Reserve's Impact
on Main Street, Retirees, and Savings.''
Before I get any further, I would like to take a moment of
moment of personal privilege to talk about the tragic shooting
that happened at the Republican Congressional baseball practice
exactly 2 weeks ago today. Our thoughts and prayers remain with
our friend and colleague, Steve Scalise, and his family,
especially his wife Jennifer. Zach Barth, who is a good friend
of Roger Williams' aide, was shot in the calf and is recovering
well. We are happy to report he will be throwing out the first
pitch at the Houston Astro's baseball game on July 4th,
Independence Day, against the Yankees. I think Representative
Williams had a lot to do with that.
Matt Mika, the Tyson's Foods employee, was shot multiple
times. We are happy to say that he has been discharged from the
hospital. And we commend the heroic actions of Crystal Griner,
the Capitol Hill Police officer who was shot in the leg, and
David Bailey, a special agent for the Capitol Police, who was
also injured. And then our good friend, Roger Williams, the
Vice Chair of this subcommittee, was injured. We are just so
grateful for his recovery, and we are so glad to have him with
us here today, 2 weeks after that incident.
I will now recognize myself for 3 minutes to give an
opening statement.
Measured in terms of length, the Great Recession is hardly
remarkable. At 18 months, it ties 5 others as our 8th longest
recession. So what is remarkable about the Great Recession? In
a word: severity. The Los Angeles Times documented how more
than half of adults lost a job or had a cut in pay or hours,
and almost everybody's wealth fell.
Unfortunately, our recovery has not been great. Out of
recession for 8 years, households and businesses continue to
fall short of their potential. Every other postwar recession
saw a considerably faster rebound.
Our questions for today's hearing are motivated by this
disappointing economic performance. Why did the resilience of
hard-working Americans go missing this time around? Did
monetary policies contribute to or mitigate this disappointing
recovery? And how did these policies affect our economy for
savers, retirees, and Main Street?
Monetary policy was, at best, late to react. The New York
Times reported that, ``Federal Reserve officials were unaware
in January 2008 that the economy had already entered a
recession.''
If monetary policy does not work, then our economy cannot
work. This concern is more than academic. The Federal Reserve
looked past monetary policy's fundamental service to our
economy, that is providing clear price signals so the goods and
services can easily find their most promising opportunities.
Instead of strengthening fundamentals to rebuild our economy
from the ground up, the Fed engineered a financial reflation
from the top down. But the promised Keynesian nirvana never
came. Households and businesses saw through the Fed's
artificial economic sweeteners and focused, instead, on
mitigating a new normal of rapidly mounting policy distortions.
America's hallmark confidence that tomorrow will be better
than today went into retreat, cracking the very foundation of
what was a reliably resilient economy.
Households and businesses watched almost $14 trillion of
potential income go down the drain since our recovery started
in 2009.
Had we enjoyed a more resilient recovery, American
households could have earned $100,000 more income over the last
8 years. A decade of artificial monetary support put retirees
at risk of seeing interest earnings fall short of expenses. And
younger savers face the opposite problem of paying higher
prices for their retirement savings. Returning to a monetary
policy that simply eases the trade of goods and services
wherever it shows promise would improve our economy for
retirees, savers, and Main Street households and businesses. A
better way is available, and we should act on it.
At this time, the Chair recognizes the ranking member of
the subcommittee, the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Gwen Moore,
for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
associate myself with your comments with regard to those
injured 2 weeks ago. I have used every opportunity to keep them
in my thoughts and prayers. And it is good to be here. It is
good to see our witnesses.
I know that retirement security is an extremely important
issue facing Americans. We have baby boomers who are retiring
every day. Every day, 10,000 people turn 65, and it creates
real challenges for the country.
The Boomers, of course, are retiring with grossly
insufficient savings. But you know what doesn't keep my up all
night? The impact of the Fed's crisis policy on retirement
savings. I am not sure how it would have served retirees for
the Fed to not have acted in the face of the Great Recession
and to have allowed bread lines to come back or to further the
Republican austerity agenda that all of our experience shows
would have been disastrous for the economy.
You know what retirees need? They need the fiduciary rule
that helps them save by making advisers put their clients'
interests ahead of their own.
They need Medicaid, because they might find themselves in a
nursing home. The massive Medicaid cuts that the Republican
House, passed and the Republican Senate has right now under
their jurisdiction, will absolutely devastate retirees. That is
what keeps me up at night, not what the Fed did.
Savers need a robust CFPB making sure financial hucksters
and fraudsters are not draining the hard-earned money of
consumers. Savers need a strong Dodd-Frank Act that safeguards
the financial market. The growth is not despite Dodd-Frank, it
is because we have not had booms and busts, and markets are
free from fraud. I am 100 percent confident that my Democratic
colleagues and I are 100 percent on the side of savers.
I want to yield the balance of my time to Representative
Foster.
Mr. Foster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member
Moore.
I think one of the reasons that we have a lot of--both
parties talking past each other in a lot of these things and
often coming up with imaginary scenarios of what might have
happen. It is one of the realities of politics that you don't
get controlled experiments the way you do in science.
You can't restart and set up a parallel universe and find
out what would have happened without the aggressive monetary
actions by the Fed during a crisis. It would be a very
interesting experiment. We don't have it, so we are stuck with
imagined alternate scenarios.
But I think when I look at the debate over monetary policy,
the big problem is that we are not looking enough at the
distributional consequences of this. There was what was, to me,
a very influential paper on MIP actually from the Federal
Reserve entitled, ``Doves for the Rich, Hawks for the Poor,
Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy,'' that came out
in 2016. And it makes the point that, over the course of a
business cycle, if you decide which one of the two elements of
the dual mandate you are going to emphasize, it has real
distributional consequences.
And the other side of the coin is that even if you are
focusing only on aggregate numbers like total GDP growth or
household net worth, the distributional elements of that are
very important in how fast our economy grows.
To put it sort of bluntly, the reaction of our economy in a
macro sense is very different if you give additional dollars to
someone with higher net worth than someone who is part of a
working family, that the working family is much more likely to
let the money circulate in the local economy; the high net
worth person is much likely to turn the money over to their
funds manager and send a big fraction of it offshore under the
standard advice of diversifying and risk.
And so I think that we have to more and more in our debate
look at distributional effects. I would very much like to see
the Federal Reserve every quarter come out with not just the
aggregate household net worth but by quintiles or even
percentiles, because I think that would very much illuminate
the debate and, I think, yield a higher level of understanding
of what the real constraints are on economic growth in this
country.
Thank you. I look forward to the hearing.
I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back. And the
gentlelady yields back.
And as I said before, we are so grateful for the well-being
and recovery of our good friend, Roger Williams, the Vice Chair
of the subcommittee. And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from Texas, Roger Williams himself, a Main Street businessman
who suggested the topic of this hearing, for 2 minutes for an
opening statement.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Chairman Barr, and Ranking Member
Moore.
As a point of privilege, I would like to echo the remarks
you made about the tragic events that unfolded 2 weeks ago. I
would also like to thank Chairman Hensarling, and the members
of this committee and their staff, for the support my office
has received during these difficult times.
As I have said many times, events like this might slow us
down, but we cannot let them deter us from doing the important
work our constituents sent us here to do. So I want to, again,
say thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your kind words.
The economy of the United States is the largest in the
world. At $18 trillion, it represents a quarter share of the
global economy. Since 1854, Americans have seen their economy
fall under recession 33 times. And as Chairman Barr noted
earlier, the most recent recovery has been slow with sluggish
growth and policies that have hurt Main Street America.
Consequently, one of those policies requires the Federal
Reserve to pay higher rates to banks that have excess reserves.
Required reserves alone provide $110 billion in funding, less
than 3 percent of the current $4.5 trillion Federal balance
sheet. The troubling spike in excess reserves held at the bank
has ballooned to over $2 trillion. According to former Fed
Chairman Bernanke, banks are not going to lend out the reserves
at a rate lower than they could earn at the Fed. Essentially,
Mr. Bernanke is admitting that the Fed is paying above market
interest.
The excess money being held in reserve is just sitting
there, not being let out, not serving an economic purpose.
Clearly, the Fed has stepped far outside of the bounds of a
conventional balance sheet in terms of both funding sources and
size.
So, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to discussing this further
with the witnesses today, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Dr. Norbert Michel, a
research fellow at the Heritage Foundation. His research
focuses on financial markets, financial regulations, and
monetary policy. He previously taught finance, economics, and
statistics at Nicholls State University's College of Business.
Dr. Michel earned his bachelor's degree from Loyola University,
and his Ph.D. in economics from the University of New Orleans.
Dr. Paul Kupiec is a resident scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute, where he specializes in systemic risk
management, and regulation of banks and financial markets.
Previously, he was the Director of the Center for Financial
Research at the FDIC and has also worked at the International
Monetary Fund, Freddie Mac, JPMorgan, and the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Dr. Kupiec earned his
bachelor's degree from George Washington University, and a
doctorate in economics from the University of Pennsylvania.
Dr. Karen Dynan is currently a nonresident senior fellow at
the Peterson Institute for International Economics. Her
research focuses on fiscal and other types of macroeconomic
policy, consumer behavior, and household finances.
She previously served as Assistant Secretary for Economic
Policy and Chief Economist at the U.S. Department of the
Treasury. She also will be a professor of economics at Harvard
starting in July. Dr. Dynan received her Ph.D. in economics
from Harvard, and her bachelor's degree from Brown.
Alex Pollock is a distinguished senior fellow at the R
Street Institute, where he specializes in financial systems and
central banking, economic cycles, financial crises, and the
politics of finance. He previously was a resident fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute, and was also President and CEO
of the Federal Home Loan Bank of Chicago. Mr. Pollock earned
his bachelor's degree from Williams College, his master's of
philosophy from the University of Chicago, and his master's of
public administration from Princeton University.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Dr. Michel, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NORBERT J. MICHEL, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, THE
HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Michel. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Moore, and
members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
I am a senior research fellow in financial regulations and
monetary policy at the Heritage Foundation, but the views that
I express in this testimony are my own, and they should not be
construed as representing any official position of the Heritage
Foundation.
The Federal Reserve has a much better reputation among
economists than with the general public. And even though I am
an economist, I have to side with the public on this one.
Monetary policy is not working for Main Street America. And my
remarks will provide four specific examples of why Americans
need Congress to fix monetary policy.
First, the Fed has not tamed the business cycle. When the
Fed is no longer given a free pass on the Great Depression, and
the entire Fed era is compared to the entire pre-Fed era,
neither the frequency nor severity of recessions has decreased.
Even when the period between the two World Wars is excluded,
updated data suggests that the average length of recessions, as
well as the average time to recover from recessions, has been
slightly longer during the postwar period than during the pre-
Fed period. In many cases, the apparent decline in postwar
volatility is literally a figment of the data.
Second, the Fed has not tamed inflation unless one defines
price stability in a way that is extremely favorable to what
the Fed has done. For instance, the variability in inflation
has declined in the postwar period, but the average rate of
inflation is much higher than it was before the Fed was
founded.
Estimates of the annual CPI show that the average inflation
rate prior to the Fed was only about 0.2 percent, whereas the
average rate since the Fed has been more than 3 percent, and
the variability has only dropped one percentage point. Perhaps
more importantly, the Fed has been actively trying to stamp out
the good type of deflation that a growing productive economy
normally produces. The Fed simply doesn't want to let prices
fall, even when they should.
Main Street Americans understands that when the Fed
constantly fights the Walmart business model, it makes it
harder for them to earn a living.
Third, an inflated opinion of the Fed's ability to control
every aspect of the economy is what contributed to our recent
housing boom and the consequent bust, likely worsening massive
job losses, millions of home foreclosures, and billions of
dollars in lost wealth.
In the early 2000s, the Fed actively and openly tried to
keep its Fed funds target rate below what it viewed as the
natural Fed funds rate. The Fed thought that it could use the
higher productivity to further boost employment without
increasing inflation, so that is what it tried to do. And
residential construction grew from supporting about 5\1/2\
million jobs at the end of the 1990s to almost 7\1/2\ million
jobs at the peak of the cycle in 2005.
When the crash hit, housing-related employment fell
substantially down to 4\1/2\ million by 2008. This means that
roughly 75 percent of the drop in total U.S. employment was
housing related, and the Fed simply shares some of this blame.
Several measures suggest that the Fed's policy stance was
excessively tight at exactly the wrong period, thus worsening
the downturn. And the Fed openly admits that starting in 2008,
it sterilized emergency lending and large-scale asset purchases
with the explicit intent of ensuring that those purchases would
not spill over into increased private lending, and did so out
of concern for its Fed funds target and inflation target, but
it should have been worried about preventing aggregate demand
from collapsing, and it completely failed on this front.
Fourth, as a result of the Fed's extraordinary efforts,
taxpayers are left shouldering the risk of more than $4
trillion in long-term securities sitting on the Fed's balance
sheet with very little to show for it, all while a select group
of financial firms received more than $16 trillion in credit at
subsidized rates. The Fed's policies have helped drive demand
for safe assets through the roof, thus contributing to
historically low interest rates. They have also crowded out
private investment and contributed to less affordable housing.
And I have left out of my oral remarks any critique of the
Fed's regulatory failures, particularly those that blessed
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgage-backed securities with a
preferred position in bank's required capital framework.
Congress would not be fulfilling its responsibility if it
allows the Fed to continue operating under its existing ill-
defined mandates where it has essentially become a broker,
allocating credit to preferred sectors of the economy.
And I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Michel can be found on page
74 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Dr. Kupiec, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF PAUL H. KUPIEC, RESIDENT SCHOLAR, AMERICAN
ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Kupiec. Chairman Barr, Ranking Member Moore, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
convening today's hearing. It is an honor for me to testify
before the committee today.
I am a resident scholar at the American Enterprise
Institute, but this testimony represents my personal views.
There is little doubt that the Federal Reserve is the most
powerful agency in government. The Fed's decisions have
important impacts on the lives of every American, and yet, the
Fed's decisions are made by unelected officials with only
limited oversight by Congress.
Few Members of Congress are deeply schooled in the arcane
details of monetary theory, and those who are schooled face a
full-time job just keeping abreast of the ever-changing
fashions in central banking. Economists and central bank
officials are continually refining the thinking that guides
their policy prescriptions.
In addition, Congressional Members who dare to question the
propriety of the Fed's monetary policy decisions know full well
that they will be charged with the mythical crime of attacking
the Fed's independence.
Countercyclical monetary policy is, at its core, a
redistribution mechanism. To stimulate the economy, the Fed
lowers interest rates, thereby reducing the income of savers
with the hope of encouraging other groups to borrow and
increase their spending. The monetary policy works as planned.
It generates growth benefits that more than offset the
redistribution. But in the current recovery, the theory did not
work out as planned.
The economy has continually performed below Fed growth
targets. Moreover, the income and wealth redistributions caused
by the Fed's post-crisis monetary policies have been
exceptionally large and unusually prolonged.
There is little doubt that unconventional monetary policies
like near zero interest rates, interest on bank reserves, and
quantitating operations have had important impacts on the
distribution of income and wealth in America.
My written testimony includes analysis that shows that
those on the less well-heeled side of Main Street, of which
there are many in America, have seen fewer gains and a weaker
recovery compared to the benefits that policies have generated
for a wealthy minority of Americans.
Under post-crisis monetary policies, households near the
top of the income distribution have received most of the wage
gains as well as the QE-generated gains in stock and home
values. At the same time, households outside of the top income
bracket saw their wages stagnate, and those living off fixed
income retirement savings saw their incomes decline.
Households trying to save have had to accept near zero
returns on prudent investments or gamble by investing in equity
markets inflated by Fed QE programs. Fed policies benefited
banks by sharply reducing their funding costs. At the same
time, bank customers saw the markup they pay on bank loans and
services increase. And few seem to realize that the largest
banks are now more reliant on cheap, taxpayer-guaranteed
deposit funding than they were at the start of the crisis.
Had unorthodoxed generated the income growth that was
anticipated, the Fed's policy experiments would have been
suspended years ago without generating the public dismay that
has sparked today's audit-the-Fed movement. To be clear, the
Fed's mandate to maintain price stability and maximum
sustainable employment does not include any explicit obligation
to consider wealth or income redistribution when formulating
policy. And the current mandate is probably sensible given the
fact that monetary policy is truly a blunt instrument. But the
Fed is mistaken if it assumes that it will be insulated from
Congressional intervention when a large share of the electorate
becomes disillusioned with the Fed's performance.
The need for a more comprehensive Congressional discussion
on the impacts of the Fed's monetary policy decisions is long
overdue. But thus far, Congress has been unable to catalyze
this discussion. The modest size of Congressional staff
provides Members with limited resources to gauge the Fed on
technical discussions on monetary policy, nor is it clear that
proposed legislation such as the Federal Reserve Transparency
Act of 2017 will adequately address these issues. When engaged
to investigate controversial financial issues, GAO studies are
rarely conclusive. Congress needs a new approach.
My recommendation is that Congress consider a simple
procedural change that could, without any new legislation, help
to level the playing field. After the Fed delivers its written
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, but before scheduling the Fed
Chair's testimony, the Congress could hold hearings in which
outside experts evaluate the Fed's written testimony.
After such hearings, they would allow the Congress
additional time and expert resources to prepare oversight
questions for the Fed Chair subsequent to the Humphrey-Hawkins
hearing. My guess is there is at least an even chance that once
the Fed's written testimony is subjected to expert opinion and
outside review before the Fed Chair testifies, that the Fed
will find it preferable to anticipate and address controversial
issues in its written testimony. Especially if the Congress
encourages nonaligned experts to focus on issues with which
they are concerned.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kupiec can be found on page
49 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you. .
Dr. Dynan is now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAREN DYNAN, NONRESIDENT SENIOR FELLOW, PETERSON
INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMICS

Ms. Dynan. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Moore, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I
will make five points on how the Federal Reserve's policies
have affected Main Street retirees and savers.
First, accommodative monetary policy since the recession
has produced a strong economic recovery in the United States.
The lower interest rates resulting in the Fed's actions reduced
borrowing costs for households and businesses. They also
enabled homeowners to refinance their mortgages, leaving them
with more money for other things. This spurred additional
spending, leading to yet more hiring and more income.
Real GDP is now 17 percent above its recession low point,
and the unemployment rate is at its lowest level since 2001.
Indeed, as noted in a recent OECD report, our economic recovery
has been stronger than in most other countries, with the report
attributing our better performance partly to the best monetary
policy support.
My second point is that while the employment effects of the
Fed's actions have differed across people, everyone has
benefited from more job growth. Someone who found a new job
after being laid off during the recession undoubtedly benefited
more from the Fed's efforts to restore a healthy labor market
than a neighbor who had a stable job.
That said, the effects of a stronger labor market were not
limited to unemployed people who found jobs. Employed people
were more likely to see wage increases and to find better
opportunities with other firms. The additional income generated
by new and better jobs boosted household spending, helping
businesses do more hiring and expand in other ways.
I want to particularly emphasize the importance of
restoring a healthy labor market to small businesses, because
they account for so much employment, and they were hit hard
during the recession. I think small businesses would have faced
far greater struggles in recent years if demands for their
products had been weaker because monetary policy was not
sufficiently supportive.
Third, the effects of monetary policy on savers have
differed across people. Lower interest rates have hurt some
savers by reducing their interest income, but have helped some
savers by boosting stock and home prices.
Increases in stock and home prices in recent years have
added tens of trillions of dollars to household wealth.
Overall, a relatively small amount of wealth, around 5
percent, is in interest-paying accounts, but there are
differences across the income distribution. For retirement-age
households, middle- and upper-middle income income households
are the most exposed to interest income losses. While we should
not minimize the hardship suffered by some in this group,
research has shown that the financial losses of the group from
2007 to 2011 amounted to less than 10 percent of its income.
In addition, many savers, among them many retirees, are
also borrowers, which meant they benefited directly from lower
interest rates.
Furthermore, the strong labor market fostered by monetary
policy enhanced retirement security by reducing forced early
retirements.
My fourth point is that while the Federal Reserve should be
accountable to Congress for its actions, some of the provisions
in the CHOICE Act would impair its ability to support a strong
economy and low and stable inflation. Studies have demonstrated
that economies perform best when monetary policies are
insulated from short-term political pressures. But regular GAO
audits of monetary policy might discourage the FOMC from taking
the actions needed to create maximum employment and stable
prices particularly on unpopular actions.
Furthermore, closely tying the FOMC's actions to strict
predetermined rules would hinder its ability to appropriately
react to adverse developments given the complexity of our
economy.
My fifth and final point is that too many Americans have
not saved enough for retirement, and various aspects of Federal
policy apart from monetary policy should be used to enhance
financial security.
One way to raise retirement saving is to increase access to
tax-deferred workplace retirement savings accounts. For
example, Congress could adopt a proposal developed by the
Brookings Institution and the Heritage Foundation under which
firms would automatically enroll workers without a plan in an
individual retirement account with an option, of course, to opt
out of that plan.
We should also protect the Labor Department's new fiduciary
rule to help savers, large and small, get a fair shake in
financial markets. It is common sense to require financial
advice to be in the best interest of savers.
And we need to protect savers from investment fraud,
including older households who seem particularly vulnerable to
such abuses. To do so, among other things, we should preserve
the powers of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Dynan can be found on page
42 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you. And now, Mr. Pollock, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALEX J. POLLOCK, DISTINGUISHED SENIOR FELLOW, R
STREET INSTITUTE

Mr. Pollock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Moore,
and members of the subcommittee.
I couldn't agree more with Dr. Dynan that the Fed needs to
be accountable to the Congress. I am going to discuss one
particular way in which that accountability should take place:
relative to savings.
There is no doubt at all that among the important effects
of the Federal Reserve's actions since 2008, up to now, has
been expropriation of American savers, and that makes things
especially difficult for many retirees. This, of course, has
been done through the imposition of negative real interest
rates on savings through a remarkably long period of 9 years.
Negative interest rates would be expected from the central bank
in the crisis mode. This morning, we talked a lot about the
crisis, but the crisis ended 8 years ago. After that, the Fed
wanted to inflate asset prices to achieve a so-called wealth
effect.
Well, house prices bottomed 5 years ago, and they are back
up over their bubble peak. The stock market is at all-time
highs. So what is the Fed doing, still forcing negative
interest rates on savers at this point? The Fed should be
required to explain that to Congress.
I recommend that Congress require a formal savers impact
analysis from the Federal Reserve at each discussion of its
policies and plans with the committees of jurisdiction.
Under the CHOICE Act, this would be quarterly. This
analysis would discuss, quantify, and talk about the plans of
the Fed as they relate to savings and savers so that these can
be balanced with other relevant factors.
The Fed endlessly announces to the world its intention to
create perpetual inflation at 2 percent, which is equivalent to
a plan to depreciate savings at the rate of 2 percent a year.
Against that plan, what are savers getting? The FDIC's June
2017 report shows the average interest rate on savings accounts
is 0.06 percent. The average Money Market deposit account rate
is 0.12 percent, and in no case can savers get their real yield
anywhere near zero, that is to say, near the inflation rate.
In other words, thrift, prudence, and self-reliance, which
is what we should be encouraging, instead are being strongly
discouraged.
As Congressman Foster said a minute ago, we have to think
about distributional consequences of the Fed's actions--I agree
with that. Overall, speaking of distribution, the Fed has been
taking money from savers in order to give it to borrowers. This
benefits borrowers in general, but in particular, it benefits
highly leveraged speculators in financial markets and
speculators in real estate.
More importantly, it benefits the biggest borrower of all,
the government itself. Expropriating savers through the Federal
Reserve is a way of achieving unlegislated taxation. One term
for this is financial repression, and financial repression is
what we have.
By my estimate, the Federal Reserve has taken since 2008
about $2.4 trillion from savers. The specific calculation is
shown in the table, which is included in my written testimony,
which compares normal, based on the 50-year average of real
interest rates, to those that we have had since 2008. We
multiply by the savings base, and to repeat the answer, it is
$2.4 trillion.
Now, there can be no doubt that taking $2.4 trillion from
some people and giving it to other people is a political act.
As a political act, it should be openly and clearly discussed
with the elected Representatives of the People who have the
constitutional responsibility for the nature of money.
In this context, it is an obvious fact that the Fed is just
as bad at economic and financial forecasting as everybody else.
It has no special insight into the future, and since it can't
see the future, it must be rely on theories.
Dr. Kupiec said they are refining their thinking on
theories. I say they keep changing the theories. Grown-up
substantive discussions with the Congress about which theories
the Fed is supplying, what the alternatives are, who the
winners and losers may be, and what the implications for
political economy and political finance are, just as the CHOICE
Act suggests, would be a big step forward in the accountability
of the Federal Reserve. And a key part of these discussions, I
again suggest, should be a formal savers' impact analysis.
Thank you very much for the chance to share these views.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pollock can be found on page
93 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you, Mr. Pollock, and your time has
expired.
And the Chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pollock, your testimony that Federal Reserve policies,
and near zero interest rate policy since 2008 have deprived the
American people savings to the tune of $2.4 trillion is
certainly a depressing analysis of the failure of Fed policies
post-recession. And I think even Dr. Dynan acknowledged that
Fed policies have punished at least certain savers or certain
Americans in the economy.
But I want to focus on, for a moment, the comments from my
colleague, Mr. Williams, who talked about interest on excess
reserves and the policy of the Fed paying interest on excess
reserves.
As you know, the FOMC's primary monetary policy tools are
now interest on excess reserves and reverse repos, not open
market operations.
Interestingly, in 2013, former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke
said, ``Banks are not going to lend out the reserves at a rate
lower than they could earn at the Fed.'' So essentially, in
effect, Mr. Bernanke is admitting that the Fed is paying above
market rates through interest on excess reserves (IOER).
Do you agree with Chairman Bernanke that paying IOER is
effectively paying banks to not deploy capital into the real
economy? And if so, what are the consequences for Main Street
Americans?
We will start with Dr. Michel.
Mr. Michel. Thank you. I do agree. You have a large pile of
money sitting there, and anyone who has a large pile of money
has choices in what to do with it. So if you have given them an
above-market rate, they are going to probably go to that spot.
Right? And that is all that is going on here.
You have essentially diverted money from the real economy
for a very small number of very large banks, and that does not
help Main Street America. It does not help anybody but those
large banks.
Chairman Barr. Dr. Kupiec, in my discussions with the
members of FOMC, both Governors and district bank presidents,
some have defended Fed policies by arguing that IOER is not
diverting access to capital in the real economy in a material
way. What would you say in response to that?
Mr. Kupiec. It is not just excess reserves. It is all bank
reserves they pay interest on, which is problematic. It is
problematic because without paying interest on excess reserves,
the Federal fund rate, which is the rate that banks trade
excess reserves at, would be zero. And it would be zero for the
foreseeable future, because there are so many excess reserves
that the Fed has generated through QE operations.
So until excess reserves come down to a level far, far
smaller than they are, the Fed has to do something to control
the short-term interest rate. And how it does that is it puts a
floor over it by setting the IOER, which is now at 1 percent.
It is not 25 basis points anymore. It is a real number.
Those benefits do not pass on to depositors and banks,
because banks have excess liquidity in deposits. They don't
have to pay to raise new deposits. So deposit rates haven't
risen, and they are unlikely to rise for a long time. This
whole mechanism distorts the way the market works.
The Federal funds market is not working the way it worked
before the crisis, and the Fed is still targeting the Federal
funds rate to set monetary policy. So there is kind of a
disconnect here in how the whole system is operating.
Chairman Barr. Mr. Pollock, in addition to the zero low
interest rate policies punishing savers, do you concur with the
argument that the Fed policy of paying interest on reserves,
paying interest on excess reserves, is diverting capital away
from the real economy?
Mr. Pollock. I do, Mr. Chairman. I think we have to look at
the classic theory of reserves, which is they were supposed to,
by definition, be zero interest bearing and, therefore, banks
tried to get out of holding them by lending out their money.
That is the classic theory of the bank multiplier through high-
powered money.
Chairman Bernanke, in a brilliant political move, got the
act changed to be able to pay interest rates on reserves.
My interpretation is that is because the Fed itself wanted
to act as the financial intermediary where it could draw the
resources into itself and allocate the credit, which it did, to
mortgages and to financing the government.
Chairman Barr. Dr. Kupiec, really quickly, we know that the
balance sheet is now $4.5 trillion. Do the American people have
anything to be concerned about, with this oversized balance
sheet?
Mr. Kupiec. The Fed has to decide what to do with its
balance sheet. One of the reasons it has to control the Federal
funds rate is that it doesn't want to sell off Treasury
securities. If that were to spook the long-term rate, then the
long-term rates would jump, the stock market could risk
calamity, and that kind of policy decision really isn't in
their playbook right now.
So they are stuck looking at long-term interest rates. As
long as they do that, they are going to have to pay banks to
keep the interest rates up. Banks are going to be low to pass
these benefits on to savers. And so I think it is a problem.
Chairman Barr. My time has expired.
And the Chair now recognizes the distinguished ranking
member, Congresswoman Moore, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Moore. And thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Again, these are always extraordinary opportunities for the
committee to hear from the best and brightest in the financial
services industry, and I appreciate your appearance here today.
I would like to direct my question to you, Dr. Dynan. This
committee is often very critical of the Fed for its dual
mandate, and there is a constant cry for us to eliminate the
mandate that talks about increasing employment.
So I am wondering if you can elaborate a little bit on the
accommodative monetary policy of lowering those interest rates
in order to avoid the employment versus the Fed doing nothing
or doing something else.
Ms. Dynan. Thank you, Congresswoman Moore.
With regard to the dual mandate, I think the two sides of
the mandate really go hand in hand. The soft employment
conditions that we have had in recent years are mirrored by
disinflationary or deflationary forces, which contribute to the
softer economy.
In general, if you expect prices to fall in the future, you
are going to defer spending today. So ignoring these forces is
not the way to address an economy where a demand is falling
short of where it should be.
I should say, in this particular case, low inflation has
been a particular problem, because we had a debt crisis where
people were overleveraged. Traditionally, one way in which debt
burdens are reduced is that inflation erodes them because they
are usually defined in nominal terms.
So I think the Fed's efforts to both support employment,
produce maximum employment, and to raise inflation to their
targeted 2 percent--
Ms. Moore. Ms. Dynan, I am really specifically interested
in the comments you made in your written testimony about the 86
consecutive months of private sector job growth, and is that a
worthwhile tradeoff with regard to whatever interests, income
may have been enjoyed by savings?
Ms. Dynan. As I noted in my testimony, you don't want to
minimize the hardship of anyone who has suffered as a result of
lower interest income. But I will say that the Fed needs to act
in the interest of the economy as a whole, and the effects of
strong job creation have been really enormous for the American
public as a whole. And as I explained in my testimony, really,
that strong job growth benefits everyone in the economy.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much.
The name of this hearing talks about the suffering the
seniors have felt with regard to monetary policy of the Fed.
I am wondering if you can comment, or elaborate a little
bit more on the fiduciary rule and the impact that may have on
protecting seniors?
You mentioned in your testimony that $17 billion has been
lost as a result of--and the advice not being given
appropriately to seniors. And you also mentioned provisions of
the CHOICE Act that you think would materially impair the Fed's
ability to support a strong economy and stable inflation. Would
you comment on that?
Ms. Dynan. Yes. I worked on the fiduciary rule when I was
in the Administration. I think it is very important to make
sure that savers both large and small get a fair shake in
financial markets.
It is just common sense that we should require financial
advice to be in the best interest of the saver. There are some
very big opportunities for abuses, particularly when someone is
coming out of a job and they have a 401(k), and they have been
given advice under one standard in which the financial advisers
need to adhere to stringent rules and, suddenly, they are being
approached by people who want them to roll this money over to
IRAs, and those people have conflicts of interests. And that is
where, really, the $17 billion number comes from.
So I think it is very important that we protect the
fiduciary rule, and it is very important that we fight off
attempts to weaken it, because I think it would harm savers.
With regard to the CHOICE Act, as I mentioned in my
testimony, the main concerns I have are about the provisions
that require regular GAO audits of the Fed as well as the
provision that ties monetary policy decisions closely to a pre-
determined Taylor Rule. I think that both would undermine the
Fed's ability to support a strong economy.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much. My time has expired.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the Vice Chair of the
subcommittee, Mr. Williams from Texas.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all of you for your testimony today. I
appreciate that.
I am a Main Street guy, a small business owner back in
Texas. I go so far back, that I borrowed money at 20 percent
interest. And I can tell you, today, it is tough on Main
Street.
Dr. Michel, on page 14 of your testimony, you talk about
how the central bank's policy stance was excessively tight at
exactly the wrong time. You go on to say that the Fed's
policies prolonged the recession. You said, paying interest on
excess reserves is bizarre. And can you go into more detail on
why the 2008 policy was wrong then and why it is still wrong
today?
Mr. Michel. Sure. It was wrong then, because the whole idea
behind expanding monetary policy during the crisis is that
there would be more lending and more economic activity. The Fed
acknowledged that they were using interest on excess reserves
to prevent that money from getting out there. I'm not making
this up. They have told us this. That doesn't make any sense.
If you have a crisis and you want to expand the economy,
and you want to stop a downturn, you don't do anything to stop
that money from getting out there. You do everything you can to
get it out there. So that was exactly the wrong time to do
that.
As far as now, what you have is, essentially, $2 trillion
in excess reserves by the largest banks, and we have nothing to
show for what we have done, but we have that money sitting
there. And we are paying--the Fed projects that they will pay
almost $30 billion of interest this year to those banks, and
that will rise up to, under their projections, almost $50
billion, $50 billion by 2019.
That is not community banks getting that money. That is not
Main Street Americans and average wage workers getting that
money. That is money that is not being productively used. It is
almost an overt bailout. And if it was the Treasury doling that
money out, it would be an overt bailout.
Mr. Williams. Let me follow through on that. You just said
the Fed projects that it would pay $27 billion in interest on
these excess reserves reaching nearly $50 billion by 2019,
mostly going to large domestic and foreign banks. So now that
the balance sheet has grown from the $900 billion pre-crisis to
$4.5 trillion today, we see this money basically being diverted
from the private sector to the Federal Government.
So how does this hurt Main Street America, when someone
wants to start a new business or get a loan? Because, frankly,
when you combine these Fed policies with the heightened new
regulatory standards under Dodd-Frank, I can see why we haven't
had sustained economic growth of 3 percent.
Mr. Michel. No, this represents credit that has been
allocated to someone outside of the productive sector of the
economy. So it represents an opportunity lost. It represents
money that they don't have to start their new businesses or to
finance their existing businesses.
It is very hard to quantify the exact number of jobs and
things like that, but what we know that it is a diversion from
the real sector of the economy.
Mr. Williams. The American Dream, and who gets hurt, at the
end, is the consumer.
Mr. Kupiec, as the Fed raises target interest rates, it
must make increasingly large interest payments to banks,
correct?
Mr. Kupiec. That is correct.
Mr. Williams. So can you go into more depth quickly on how
dealing with the excess reserves has the potential to increase
our national debt?
Mr. Kupiec. Yes. As long as excess reserves are large and
the Fed needs to raise short-term interest rates, the only way
they can do it--they could do it in two ways.
They could raise rates by selling off the Treasuries they
have in their $4.5 trillion portfolio, but that would be such a
change to financial markets that it would spook long-term rates
in the stock market, and it would risk causing another
financial problem there, another crisis.
So they are kind of stuck with that and letting that roll
off slowly, which means the reserves stay in the banking
system. Banks are willing to keep the reserves in the system
and not lend them out as long as they are being paid on that
money. And the higher the interest the Fed wants to set the
short-term Federal funds rate, the higher the rate it has to
pay banks on their reserves. It is just as simple as that.
So as they go through the cycle and raise rates, what is
going to happen is they are going to pay banks more and more
money, and it is going to impact the Federal Government
deficit. Because the money that the Fed earns on its Treasury
portfolio, it uses for operations. Part of the expense of the
operations is now paying banks interest on their reserves. And
so the Fed will give back to the Treasury smaller and smaller
surpluses until it would directly impact the Federal deficit.
And as the Fed raises rates, if excess reserves don't
decline, it is going to have a bigger and bigger impact on the
deficit. And we are going to be talking about it in this
committee, but you are going to be talking about it in the
Budget Committees too. It is going to be an issue. It is there.
Mr. Williams. Thank you for your testimony.
I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Kildee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for holding
this hearing, and to the ranking member as well for helping to
lead this.
And thank you to the members of the panel. It is a very
important discussion.
Dr. Kupiec, I want to return to a point that you made in
your opening testimony that had, I think, addressed in part
what Ranking Member Moore was raising, and that is this issue
of what is happening in the employment sector relating directly
to the Fed's dual mandate.
And I think it was your testimony that while there has been
positive job growth, most of the wage gains, in terms of
household income, have been concentrated by people at the upper
end of the economic spectrum. And I wonder if you might explore
for a moment how Fed policy would impact that particular aspect
of income distribution?
Mr. Kupiec. Yes. First of all, let me say, I don't think
any of the distributional effects of the monetary policy that
have come about have ever been intended. I think the Fed did
what it thought it had to do to spark a recovery. And I think
the income distributional impacts are all unintended
consequences. And again, they probably wouldn't have shown up
if monetary policy worked and sparked growth quickly.
The problem is it didn't work the way they thought it
might. The recession was way worse, and these policies have
continued on for many, many years now. And so they have had big
and noticeable effects on income distribution.
The wage gains come from the Fed's own 2013 survey of
consumer finance, which shows that the household income of the
very highest deciles of the income distribution are the ones
that receive the biggest gains.
And through 2013, the middle of the distribution actually
had 5 percent losses in household income.
Mr. Kildee. Yes. And I think we--obviously, the data speaks
for itself, and we clearly would agree on that.
I guess the question that I have is, because this
discussion has to do specifically with Fed policy, to what
extent is that phenomena attributable--and I ask the other
panelists to maybe weigh in on this as well--to Fed policy as
opposed to other drivers: globalization; technology; the
relatively low rate of unionization in private sector
employment--
Mr. Kupiec. You can attribute it to lots of things, but
what you need to add on top of that is it is not just what
happened to wages. It is what happened to the--when the Fed
started QE policies to actually bid up asset and home prices,
and those benefits also go to the highest income earners,
because they are the ones that have the houses and the
financial assets.
And, again, I don't think any of this was designed to help
the wealthy, but I am saying, if you look back over the last 9
years, it is pretty clear in the data that the wealthy did a
lot better from these policies than the poor, or even the very
middle-class, the vast majority.
Mr. Kildee. Maybe if the others could answer and then fold
into that question about the extent to which low- and moderate-
income households benefit from interest-based income or asset
sources as opposed to other assets, other income sources?
Dr. Dynan, if we could start with you?
Ms. Dynan. Thank you very much. I want to build on what Dr.
Kupiec was saying. His analysis of the 2013 survey of consumer
finances is correct, but it has been 4 years since that survey
data was collected.
If you look at more recent data on the distribution of
wages, you can see that wage gains are now concentrated at the
lower end of the distribution as would be expected given that
we are at the tail end of an economic recovery.
I also want to say, first of all, with regard to asset
holdings, housing is a really important part of the nest egg of
middle-class households. So they did, in fact, benefit
tremendously from the $7 trillion of wealth, of housing wealth,
that has been created since house prices hit their low point
during the recession.
I also want to say that recent research on the effects of
expansionary monetary policy on the income distribution coming
out of the Brookings Institution has shown that it does not
raise inequality. That, in fact, the effects through job
creation are really dominant and that offsets some of the other
aspects that Dr. Kupiec was talking about.
Mr. Kupiec. I want to make a factual point. The U.S. Census
Bureau says that the income distribution got more unequal in
2014, 2015, the last one out. According to the U.S. Census
Bureau, there was no reversal in the income distribution.
Ms. Dynan. If I can just make a point on that point.
Income inequality--the wealthier households were hit harder
during the recession, because they held so many assets.
Mr. Kildee. My time has expired.
Ms. Dynan. So just as a rebound from that.
Mr. Kildee. I certainly appreciate any documentation you
might supply to support your arguments. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentlemen's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Pittenger, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank each of
you for being with us today, for your great expert witness and
counsel to us in Congress as we walk through the many ways that
we can help address these issues.
We have been out of this recession now for the last 8
years. We certainly have not seen the rebound for households,
for small businesses. They have clearly fallen short of their
potential. Every other post-war recession has certainly seen a
greater and faster rebound. I would like to take a look at why
this has occurred, particularly related to compliance issues
and regulations and how they have had an effect in these
policies and impacted Main Street, impacted the access to
capital. It impacted the access to the capability of growth.
Dr. Michel, we will start with you and go down the row.
Dr. Michel. Sure. Regulatory? On the regulatory side?
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir.
Dr. Michel. If you look at the timing of Dodd-Frank and
Basel III, it couldn't have been any worse. You have an economy
trying to recover and a banking sector trying to recover, and
you impose stricter liquidity requirements, stricter capital
requirements. You require them to hold onto more money as
opposed to using it. There is only one way that is going to go
when you look at the macro effect, and it is not up.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir Dr. Kupiec, would you like to
comment?
Dr. Kupiec. When you look at the data, and it is in my
written testimony, as are the sources for the income and
equality, there are cited there too, the data pretty clearly
show that small business lending by banks is down. It is not
up, it is down. It hadn't recovered at all.
Now, there is always an issue if whether that means that
small businesses have no demand for loans, they just don't want
money anymore, or is it a supply issue. Are the banks
constrained? And, quite frankly, economists, no matter how we
go--we could be at Harvard, we could be at Brookings, we could
be at Heritage, we can't really figure out totally whether it
is supply or demand. But I bet your hunch that regulation is
playing a part is probably true. Was there a time when small
businesses weren't very optimistic and conditions weren't good
and they didn't have a strong demand for money, that was
probably true at stages of the cycle too.
But you would think, in 9 years by now, small business
lending at banks would have recovered and exceeded its levels
prior to the crisis. And so that is a pretty good sign that
something unhealthy is going on here in the financial system.
Mr. Pittenger. In North Carolina, since 2010, we have lost
50 percent of our banks. And just in the last 2 months, we have
had 3 additional banks which have had to merge because of the
compliance and regulatory requirements. And certainly that has
a direct effect on the access to capital and credit in the
market. Mr. Pollock, would you like to comment?
Mr. Pollock. Thank you, Congressman. I think you are right
about the regulatory burden. We know that expansions in
regulatory bureaucracy always fall disproportionally hard on
smaller organizations and on smaller banks.
We mentioned who benefited in terms of labor. We know some
labor segments it benefited: its examiners who check on
compliance officers who check on external auditors who check on
internal auditors, all of whom are checking on somebody who is
actually doing some work.
In the meantime, in the Federal Reserve's own balance
sheet, we have a huge, very conscious, very intended by the
Fed, huge resource allocation to take the funds and divert them
to making house prices go up, securities prices go up, and to
financing the government expenditures. That takes money away
from the kinds of productive enterprises of which you are
speaking.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes, sir. To that end, extrapolate some more
on what the Fed could be doing in its role in all of this, how
it could effect a positive change?
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, in my opinion, the Fed has gotten
itself in a tough situation with its big investment portfolios.
It consciously set out to move the market up by creating huge
market moving positions and now it wants to sell without
putting the market down, and they can't do it. So they have a
dilemma. But in my judgment, what they ought to be doing now, 8
years after the end of the recession, 5 years after the bottom
of housing, is trying to get back to actual functioning of a
market economy in the financial sector with market-set interest
rates.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you. My time has expired. I appreciate
your comments.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. And the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Take a minute to deal with the supposed war on
savers, the war on seniors. First, most Americans have a lot
more debt than they have invested in interest. So for most
Americans, low interest rates work out pretty well. Seniors get
only get 10 percent of their income from interest income. They
get a lot more in terms of wealth increases when the stock
market goes up, when real housing and other real estate prices
go up.
So, in fact, the policies of the Fed have been beneficial
to seniors, but there is a harkening for the good old days.
Make American interest rates great again. I remember the good
old days. You had 6 percent interest. If you had a million
bucks in the bank, you were getting $60,000, you felt good, you
weren't invading your principal, and you were spending $60,000,
we had a 5 percent inflation rate, you were invading your
principal. But it was hidden.
So the good old days basically were a way for people to
feel good even while they were invading their principal by
saying, well, you are only doing that in real terms. Nominally,
you are keeping your nest egg intact. So the idea that taking
out $60,000 in interest and seeing the value of your nest egg
decline by $50,000 is somehow better than making $10,000 in
income and then having to invade your nest egg by $40,000 or
$50,000 in order to support your standard of living is
psychologically true but not economically true.
But what we have here--the mandate of the Fed is not to
bring psychological benefits to savers. The mandate of the Fed
is full employment and stable prices. Full employment means
economic growth. And I would point out that, for example, the
S&P Global found that, without--and this is just the third
round of quantitative easing--1.9 million fewer jobs would have
been created, implying an unemployment rate 1.3 percent higher.
That is real economic growth just from that round.
But I am concerned about the interest on excess balances,
because I don't want to encourage excess balances. Why should
banks put their money in the Fed when there are so many
deserving business in the 30th Congressional district. Dr.
Dynan, we are paying banks 1\1/4\ percent absolutely risk free
for excess reserves. What do we do to get them to loan that
money to deserving businesses, in the 30 seconds I have left?
Dr. Dynan. Thank you. I appreciate your comments. And I
will say I very much appreciate what you said at the beginning
of your comments about perceptions. I think behavioral
economists are looking into that and also about the fact that
so many seniors do benefit directly from lower rates.
On the excess reserves, I think there are good questions to
be asking about why banks aren't passing on those savings to
the depositors.
Mr. Sherman. Why don't we tell them to we are not going to
pay them interest on their excess balances, make them take that
money and invest it in the private sector economy?
Dr. Dynan. I am not enough of an expert on the technical
issues involving excess reserves and interest on excess
reserves to be able to explain why the Fed needs--
Mr. Sherman. I will go with the doctor sitting next to you
on your right.
Dr. Kupiec. I can tell you exactly why. Because if they
stop paying any interest on excess reserves, banks would pay
absolutely nothing and raise their rates on their deposits,
charge for deposits, because they would have to make it the
income source. Everybody would take deposits out of banks and
put them in money market mutual funds, and the banking system
would collapse. They have to keep the reserves in the banking
system, because if the rate outside the bank--if they didn't
pay anything at all, depositors would start getting charged
through the roof to keep deposits at the banks. Banks are
getting paid right now to hold people's deposits--
Mr. Sherman. You are saying the banks can't find another
place to make 1\1/4\ percent on their money?
Dr. Michel. Could I? I think Paul is--
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Pollock, I was going to call on you
earlier.
Mr. Pollock. Thank you, Congressman. My answer is you take
the interest on reserves to zero, where it always was, and thus
you encourage loans. Now, why the Fed doesn't want to do that
is because that will generate the inflation set up by their big
QE investments, which is what they are trying to avoid.
Dr. Dynan. If I may just add one more thing, I don't think
that there is evidence that those excess reserves being held at
the Fed are actually holding back the banks from making loans.
Chairman Barr. The gentlemen's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Hill, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
opportunity to have this hearing. I want to echo some comments
that, when it comes to the economic expansion, certainly in the
2nd Congressional district of Arkansas, which is Central
Arkansas, Little Rock, there are only 4,400 more people
employed since July of 2007--4,400 more people employed since
July of 2007.
So the economic growth over the last 90-plus months has
been not only subpart anemic, it has been certainly not shared
by most of the country. In fact, many studies show that more
than 50 percent of businesses and jobs are limited to just 20
counties in this country, all of which have an NFL franchise,
except for Austin, Texas. So I call it kind of the ``NFL
effect.''
And I agree with Dr. Michel that nonmonetary policy
structural impediments have been a real drag on productivity,
business formation, and labor-force, participation. And those
nonmonetary policies, structural impediments include all the
comments you made about the capital and liquidity rules that
have been impacted by Dodd-Frank on top of the economic
conditions that we have had.
So I really think that the QE that we have talked so much
about this morning, the multiple unconventional monetary policy
that we have had, I don't think the added GDP growth we have
had, and the statistics have been thrown around here are
measurably better. I think if we look with hindsight now, QE1
QE2, will not be proven to have been worth ballooning the
balance sheet from $900 billion to $4.5 trillion.
So with that, I am interested in the panelist's views on
the preferred course now to shrink this balance sheet. As we
have risen rates--actually, 10-year rates have backed up a
little bit in the marketplace, which makes me think because of
the dollar and the strength of the American economy, there is a
high demand for Treasuries in the world, which would make me
think that market conditions are actually right for shrinking
the balance sheet.
And I am also concerned with the fact that we have seen the
Fed become allocator of credit by buying 40 percent of the new
issue mortgage-backed securities in this country. That is
unheard of, has never been done before, and, I think, has
terrible possibilities for GSE reform, the Federal budget
deficit, the impact on credit markets. And I think there is--I
read a story by one of the traders who was so shocked by the
willy-nilly impact of buying mortgage-backed securities during
the recovery period to the point that he wanted to apologize to
taxpayers.
TARP was not the biggest bailout. Maybe QE1 and QE2 were
the biggest bailouts to Wall Street through particularly the
mortgage-backed securities market. So Dr. Michel, what would
you suggest is the right way to shrink this balance sheet, if
you were advising Chair Yellen and Governor Powell and others?
Dr. Michel. This may be where Paul and I differ a little
bit. And I think that if you look at how QE was put into place,
you have a roadmap for how to undo it. It was done in terms of
the relative market--size to the relative overall market. It
was done in a small fashion per month. And you remove interest
on excess reserves. That does have an inflationary tendency.
But as you sell assets, that has offsetting contractionary
effect.
So the thing to do is both of those at the same time, and
do it in a slow, gradual manner. Pre-announce it and start
auctioning them off. And I don't know that the number is as
important as the announcement and the timing and the slow
graded sort of manner in which you do it.
If you want to do it in exactly the amount that you
purchased them, fine. Do it, $50-, $75 billion a month. But you
have to make the announcement, you have to start doing it
slowly over time. And both at the same time have the offsetting
interest on reserves being pared back so that you have the
contractionary and expansionary effect going against each other
so that don't see the high inflation and that you dont' see the
large contraction.
Mr. Hill. Do you think the Fed should limit its purchases
in the future to Treasuries as opposed to other asset classes?
Dr. Michel. Possibly. It depends on the framework that we
were talking about. But in general, I think that you still have
the risk of saying that what we are doing by Treasuries only is
allocating credit to the government in a preferred position
over everybody else. So there is a question there that I would
say it depends.
Mr. Hill. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr. Emmer.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
panel. You know, as I sit here, it is my second term in this
place, and I listen to people who are brilliant, like you
folks, come in and talk about the economy and numbers. And I
wonder sometimes, have you ever been to Main Street? Because I
will tell you what, the topic is about what the Fed has done to
Main Street. And I think my colleague Mr. Williams was getting
at it, because that is where he comes from. I think some people
have been touching on it. But we have too many people who want
to play with particular fact. And I don't have your degrees. I
think you could say I graduated from the School of Hard Knocks.
I am somebody who actually was a consumer and still am a
consumer.
I think about the fact that my colleague French Hill just
commented that we have some of the lowest employment
participation in decades, that we are not producing the jobs
that we should be producing. But everybody wants to say we got
this incredible recovery. And it goes on and on.
Dr. Michel, can you tell me one good thing the Federal
Reserve has done in the last decade?
Dr. Michel. In the last decade?
Mr. Emmer. Well, maybe that is not fair. Let's go back to
1913. Can you tell me one good thing they have done since 1913?
Dr. Michel. I am sure they have done something right
somewhere. Maybe if we focused on the great moderation period,
Volcker's second term, maybe up in there, something like that,
I guess. That would be the highlight for me.
Mr. Emmer. Here is another thing you have to help me with
is that up here I keep hearing about how studies have shown you
have to insulate financial or monetary decisions from the
political process. And yet somewhere in our genius somebody in
a previous Congress decided that we were going to add maximum
employment to this price stability thing when, in fact--again,
I am just a simple guy from the Midwest--my understanding is
that price stability will drive maximum employment. Isn't that
correct, Dr. Kupiec?
Dr. Kupiec. That used to be the theory, but theories change
all the time. But I think Congress created the Fed. Congress is
in charge of the Fed. And I think the whole issue is Congress
needs to have these kinds of discussions with the Fed and have
the Fed explain clearly how they are going to unwind their
portfolio.
Why paying interest on reserves is a good idea, not a bad
idea, you are asking us, but this is the kind of thing that the
Fed should be really having a discussion about. That is what is
missing.
Mr. Emmer. It is interesting. Again, I'm just a simple guy.
We have gone from an economy that is based on wealth creation
to an economy that is based on debt leverage. So an economy
based on wealth creation is for everybody. Even the little guy
or gal who goes down to the community bank or the credit union
and gets a loan to start the next great idea. We are not
starting new businesses like we used to. And yet I come here
and I hear it is great.
They are doing wonderful things. In the time I have left,
there is something that I want to talk to Mr. Pollock about,
because you hit on it, and I think the chairman and/or his
staff probably knew when you submitted your written testimony
that this would get me all fired up. I don't know any other way
to put it other than theft. But this 2 percent annual inflation
rate, this target, Mr. Pollock, that is purely arbitrary,
correct?
Mr. Pollock. It is Congressman, and it is a pure theory.
Mr. Emmer. And call it a hidden tax. Call it what you want.
But you are stealing from my parents. You are stealing from all
the Boomers who have saved and planned. And then I hear
testimony that, you know what, people haven't saved enough.
Where is the incentive? What are we doing?
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, you are absolutely right. And I
will add that the Federal Reserve Act, as amended in 1977 with
the so-called dual mandate, doesn't talk about steady
inflation. It talks about price stability. The Fed itself made
up the idea that it was going to redefine price stability to
mean perpetual inflation.
Mr. Emmer. And isn't that somewhat subject to political
pressure?
Mr. Pollock. Absolutely. That is why I said in my
testimony, if I may repeat myself, that the nature of money is
a political decision to be made by the Congress.
Mr. Emmer. And I appreciate you repeating yourself, because
it is interesting to me that this is not more widely discussed
outside of Washington, D.C., that the average person who is out
there working hard, trying to play by the rules saving for
their retirement, they have these insidious policies that are
literally stealing the money from them while they are sleeping.
And I think more people need to talk about it. And, frankly,
the Administration, I think, needs to take a bigger a role in
this.
Dr. Kupiec. Some of the Fed Governors or presidents of the
banks are arguing they need a higher inflation target to meet
their high employment price stability bill.
Mr. Emmer. And some are also arguing we should make banks
utilities which would completely frustrate the process. Thank
you for your patience, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. I wish the gentleman's time had not expired,
but it has expired. And now we move to the gentleman from Ohio,
Mr. Davidson.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
panel. I really appreciate your written testimony and what you
have shared with us here. It's very tempting to pick right up
where Mr. Emmer left off, but I do have a couple of other
questions, so maybe we can get back to that.
Dr. Michel, your testimony highlights a sense of humility
and perspective about what is the proper scope of monetary
policy. And you also highlighted--we didn't really see an
incredibly good track record for the Fed. If you look at the
decision to have the Federal Reserve in the system that we have
today, is it a structural problem or is it a strategic problem?
Dr. Michel. I think it is a structural problem in the sense
that we have way too much faith in our ability to sort of turn
dials on the economy through monetary policy. And I think that
the evidence bears out that this just doesn't work when we had
almost exactly 100 years to experiment with this type of thing.
And recessions have not gotten shorter, recoveries have not
gotten quicker, as we have just talked about what happens with
inflation. So the idea--I will go quickly--that you can have
this trade off between inflation and employment, that was an
idea that started and I believe came to its peak in the 1960s.
And I thought it was dead. Somehow it keeps coming back.
So, I don't think that there should be an employment
mandate anywhere in there with the Fed. And I think they need
to be more accountable for what they are doing, and in that
sense it is a structural problem for sure. So maybe that
answers your question. Yes, I think it is a structural issue in
terms of, we have not properly defined what they should be
doing and held them to account.
Mr. Davidson. We have a lot of debate about this strategy
or that strategy. But in a way, we have put in place a system.
And to pick up where Dr. Pollock, you left off, a system that
has a structure in place that preserves the status quo of
inflationary which deflates the value of savings. It destroys
the value of our money. If the purpose of money is to be a
store of value, everything about the current structure erodes
it.
And I might add that we are not doing ourselves any favors
with fiscal policy. And if you could comment about the
intersection, Dr. Kupiec, if you could talk about the
intersection of fiscal policy and the fact that we borrow so
much and the Fed's role in that?
Dr. Kupiec. If you look at what has happened since the
financial crisis, the whole idea of stimulative monetary policy
is to get consumers to borrow and spend more and increase
growth that way, and businesses to invest and spend more and
increase growth that way, borrow and spend. But, really, who
borrowed since the crisis is the Federal Government.
And there are some nice graphs in the back of my written
testimony which show that the government borrowings are up
almost 300 percent since the crisis, while the private sector
level of borrowing is nowhere near that. And some parts of it
it are pretty flat.
So, the whole monetary expansion has very much benefited
the government in terms of keeping the cost of government
borrowing exceptionally low for an exceptionally long period of
time, and the Fed owns a lot of that. And without a doubt, that
has been one of the big impacts. And now, as we move into a
period where we want to raise rates, it is going to have an
impact on the deficit in two ways. One, because we are going to
have to pay banks more to keep these excess reserves.
And, two, if they were to sell off their bond portfolio and
raise long-term interest rates, the Federal Government would
have to refund those bonds, the ones that mature at much higher
interest rates. And that is going to cause you guys headaches
in the Budget Committee hearings. So that is kind of where we
are right now, that these things are going to impact--they are
going to feed back on the budget, and it is going to happen.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you. And I will close with Dr. Pollock,
just a question. But when we talk about this, what is the
impact on the household? What is the impact on Main Street?
Destroying the store of value in our money is a huge problem.
And our fiscal path of bankrupting our country is a big
problem.
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, I agree with your thoughts here.
The longest-serving Federal Reserve Chairman, William McChesney
Martin, called inflation, ``a thief in the night.'' The Fed has
changed its ideas since then. And if I could--could I have 20
seconds, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Barr. Well, the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Pollock. All right. I don't get 20 seconds,
Congressman. I will tell you later.
Chairman Barr. We will have an opportunity for a second
round.
Mr. Davidson. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. I am sure you will have an opportunity, Mr.
Pollock. And now the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Hollingsworth.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Mr. Pollock, I will give you 20 seconds.
Mr. Pollock. Thank you very much. In ancient Greece,
Dionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse, couldn't pay his debt. So he
expropriated all the silver coins from his citizens on pain of
death and took the One Drachma coins and restamped them two
Drachmas and gave them back to pay off the debt--thereby
setting the pattern for inflation by governments in all future
times.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Before we delve into a couple of
questions, I wanted to reiterate something my colleagues have
said. I found the use of the word ``strong'' in recovery almost
an insult. And I think Hoosiers across the district would feel
the same way back home. Certainly, this recovery hasn't been
strong. And to say it has been strong relative to the nadir of
the recession is a misnomer. And to say it has been strong
relative to other countries is just measuring who is the
tallest dwarf in the room rather than a measure of real
strength in the economy.
Dr. Kupiec, in reading your testimony, I really appreciated
that you walked through kind of a lifetime consumption model
and how lowering interest rates theoretically should move
savers--or move down the preference line between saving and
consumption and create more consumption. But have we really
seen before what happens when interest rates are very low for a
very long period of time and, rather, instead of allowing for
the tradeoff consumption and saving, whether we are permanently
altering the preferences themselves and expectations for rates
in the future.
Dr. Kupiec. Congressman, that is a great question, and the
answer is, ``no.'' Back in December, we had an event at AEI
where we had a noted historian, Dick Sylla, come in, who has
actually written the book on the history of interest rates all
the way back to the Roman times. And in Dick's book, he did
remark that he had never seen in history anywhere a period
where interest rates were 0 or negative for such a long period.
So it is extraordinary, and it has a number of
implications, because if you really think about it, the
financial services industry is built on a model where interest
rates are positive. They make investments at some higher rate
to provide a service to consumers and take some spread. When
interest rates get to 0 or below, there is no spread anymore.
So things like life insurance--all those things become
problematic. They either have to directly charge more for it.
And so this is an experiment that has far-reaching implications
for the whole financial sector in how we move forward.
Mr. Hollingsworth. I think, if I could speak anecdotally,
certainly millennials don't know what it is like to see
interest rates at 7, 8, 9, 6, 5 percent. They think of
mortgages. And when they hear 3\1/2\ percent, they think that
is outrageously high. That must be usury, right? And the second
question I really wanted to talk about, and it has been touched
on before, but have we really started to see the cost of
unwinding this balance sheet? Because one of the things that I
really worry about is not just, as French Hill said, the
mechanics, but also the crowding out of investment. As we start
to unwind the investment in those Treasuries, it has to come
from somewhere. It is going to come from the private sector,
maybe some of it coming from abroad. But it is not going to be
invested in the private sector. And I worry that we have not
begun to see the significant costs.
We have seen very little benefit. Now we are going to start
to see the significant cost in the future, and I wonder whether
Dr. Michel might touch on that and Dr. Kupiec, and Mr. Pollock
as well?
Dr. Kupiec. I would say I agree with you. I think we are
treading water at this point in time. And the Fed is starting
slowly to try to engineer the old way they used to raise rates,
the Federal funds rate, and they have to do it in a different
mechanism. They don't want to sell off their long-term Treasury
portfolio. They have not figured out how to do that yet,
because it would spook, I think, longer-term rates if they did
it in a big way. And if they announced a long-term program to
sell it off, if it was slow enough that the economy could
absorb it, maybe. But I think they are treading water, hoping
there is no inflation now, things don't look so bad. But I
really don't think the whole process of unwinding all this has
been thought through. And I don't think the costs have actually
shown up yet.
Mr. Hollingsworth. I will go to Mr. Pollock, because I want
to ask Dr. Michel a question at the very end. Go ahead?
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, on the 0 interest rate question,
I think the answer is long periods of negative real rates are a
narcotic for financial markets, and it usually doesn't end
well. You are absolutely right on the Fed's balance sheet. We
are not seeing the cost on the unwinding, because they are not
unwinding. They are still buying every month.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right. And Dr. Michel, the last thing I
want to talk about is, is it universally agreed upon by
economists that inflation is a positive thing? Deflation
exists, right? If price levels were the same and productivity
were increasing, we would see deflation, right?
Dr. Michel. Right. It is not universally agreed upon. So it
is not universally agreed upon that it is a good thing. It is
not universally agreed upon in that group, what rate it should
be. And both of the those groups ignore something that we knew
a very long time ago and somehow or another, as a profession,
seemed to have forgotten, which is that you need less less
money if the economy is more productive, not more. So you
should have--there is a difference between a massive deflation
in asset prices and a good deflation as the economy grows. We
shouldn't be stamping that one out.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Perfect. Thank you so much. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from Utah, Mrs. Love.
Mrs. Love. Thank you so much for being here today. I just
have a couple of questions. Dr. Michel, you state in your
testimony that we should hold the Fed accountable for
maintaining a stable inflation rate where the target rate is
conditional on the rate of productivity growth so that
inflation rises above its long-run rate only when there are
productivity setbacks and it falls below its long-run rate only
when there are exceptional productivity gains. Would you expand
on that for me?
Dr. Michel. Sure. Think of something like, stable inflation
under the Fed's current interpretation of it means you should
have constant inflation all the time at 2 percent. That is the
idea. And, of course, we don't really get 2 percent over the
long-term. We get more like 4 percent. But leaving that aside,
think of something like a supply shock that we had, say, in the
1970's with an oil embargo.
What happens is you have less oil, so everybody is hurting,
and prices go up, and you see inflation across-the-board. It
makes absolutely no sense to try to stick to an inflation
target by taking more money out of the economy and, therefore,
killing the people who don't have the fuel they need, right.
Mrs. Love. Right.
Dr. Michel. But that is what this constant low, ``positive
inflation'' does in that environment. So you cannot let the Fed
interpret price stability the way that they have, otherwise you
get into that problem. And it is the same on the other side
when you have productivity and prices should be declining.
Mrs. Love. Okay. Mr. Pollock, you say in your testimony
that the Fed is just as bad as everyone else at economic and
financial forecasting, despite having an army of Ph.D.
economists who can run computer models as complicated as they
choose. So why do you think the Fed is so bad at forecasting?
And I want to get back to that, because you have a brilliant
quote in your testimony that I want to get back to. But why do
you think the Fed is so bad at forecasting?
Mr. Pollock. Thank you very much for liking my quote,
Congresswoman. It is bad at forecasting because forecasting is
about the financial and economic future, which is fundamentally
uncertain. It is not like a physicist calculating the path of a
planet using Newton's laws. This is about forecasting the
interacting behavior, interacting strategies of governments,
investors, consumers, entrepreneurs. And no one, including the
Fed, knows what is going to happen. And that is why they should
not pretend to be philosopher-kings who know this, and why they
should not be granted independence from the elected
Representatives of the People.
Mrs. Love. Okay. So you have said that in our current
national policy it is not one of savings and loans but one of
loan and loan. And I want to know what that means for the
average American. In other words, what does that mean for the
young person who is still dealing with the high cost of
education and paying off their student loan debts or the
trucker who is trying to make ends meet and he is realizing
that the cost of healthcare has continued to go up? What does
that mean for the single mother who is just busting her chops
every day to provide for her children?
Mr. Pollock. Congresswoman, without savings, there are no
loans, in the end, or any investment or any growth, in the long
run. Savings should be encouraged, and we have forgotten how to
do that. Now, in certain circumstances, of course, it is more
difficult to save than others. I mentioned in my testimony the
old theory of the savings and loans, I am talking in the 1920s
and 1930s, which were focused on low-income people and inducing
them to save; it was a wonderful and right idea, in order to
get control of their lives.
It is harder sometimes than others. But I used to have the
historical savings contracts from the savings and loan I ran in
which people promised to save $2 a week, $1 a week, $5 a week.
It was to establish the pattern and practice of savings which
will stand you in good stead over time.
Mrs. Love. It is really interesting because as I speak to
people in my district, I ask them if it is a lot easier or a
lot more difficult to save for the future. And over and over
and over again they tell me that it is absolutely impossible to
have any savings, because every time they turn around and save
something, there is something else that is coming out of it,
and they can't keep up. I know my time has expired. But I just
want to say this. You said that the notion of philosopher-kings
is distinctly contradictory to the genius of the American
constitutional design. That is a great quote. I yield back.
Mr. Pollock. Thank you very much.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. And the gentlelady's time has
expired. The Chair now recognizes the chairman of our Capital
Markets Subcommittee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Huizenga.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am attempting
to go back into Plato's Republic on this, again, as a Brown's
child, approaching how we are going to deal with what lies in
front of us. There are so many different directions to go. And
I think I am going to need to lay out a couple of things.
Something that I am very concerned about, and I know other
members on this committee are, on both sides of the aisle, is
income disparity. You look at where we are as a Nation. It is a
real issue. And we have pockets of economic activity. My home
county has a 2\1/2\ percent unemployment rate. Within my
district, I house that county. I also house the poorest county
in the State of Michigan, like one of the top 50 counties in
the Nation when it comes to poverty. I house, just literally 25
miles north of where I live, the county that butts up to this
county with 2\1/2\ percent unemployment has double that, triple
that. Quadruple that in the African-American community. We have
a significant pocket of minorities that are there.
We are seeing older workforce participation and, really,
frankly, underemployment among youth. So the workforce is
getting older. Why? Because they are having to work longer. And
this notion that seniors are doing great because the stock
market's doing great, I just do not buy it. We are seeing IPOs
at modern era lows. We are seeing a select few groups of
people, whether they are Wall Street folks, whether they are
qualified investors, folks who have a million dollars in value
or net incomes of $250,000. They are doing great. It is the
other folks. It is the folks that we represent who are
struggling, who are really kind of bumping along. And as we
look, we have seen the other side others have thrown up a chart
about. Loan activity is up. Oh, but if you dive into it,
industrial loan activity is up. Small business loans are down.
And so we are losing the engine of economic activity on
that grassroots micro basis for this larger scheme that has
been painted out there. And it seems to me for--why would we
keep trying this, certainly, at a minimum, underperforming
system, if not failing system of stimulus, that is not reaching
the people that it is intended to reach? Why do we keep doing
it? Read Keynes. You all have, right? You probably are not on
this committee if you have not read John Maynard Keynes at some
point or another. He talks about short stimulus. Not 10 years.
Not bumping up on the 10 years of this. And if monetary policy
is not doing what it can to facilitate investments wherever
they show this promise, lone American households and American
businesses and American entrepreneurs just keep bumping up
against this wall as they are trying to fulfill their
potential.
That really, I think, ought to be concerning to all of us.
And how do we unwind--getting back to my colleague from
Arkansas--this? Because I am concerned. Just yesterday we had a
phenomenal hearing. Two panels on market structure and where
the market is going. And ultimately, it doesn't matter if we
are not allowing the system to work for those who need it the
most, which is our constituents, hardworking taxpayers who have
felt like they have had nothing but headwinds coming at them
from their own government with a monetary policy and a whole
raft of other things, like tax policy and regulatory policy.
And I am just very concerned about that. And I don't know, Dr.
Kupiec, if you care to comment quickly?
Dr. Kupiec. I think your concerns are well-founded. And I
would say first that monetary policy is a blunt instrument. I
don't think the Fed ever had the intention of causing the
income redistribution that I think it has caused. I think it
tried to do what it thought was right to resuscitate growth.
And it had these unintended consequences. And at this point, I
am not sure we all have answers on how you get out of this in
the long run. I think there are going to be costs involved. But
I think the point is--
Mr. Huizenga. As Keynes said, we are dead in the long run
anyway, right?
Dr. Kupiec. Well, no. I didn't say that exactly.
Mr. Huizenga. No. No. I know you didn't. Keynes did.
Dr. Kupiec. Yes, he did. But I think the whole point is to
encourage and not discourage better dialogue with the Fed on
all these other issues that aren't just the top number GDP
numbers, inflation numbers that tend to hide all that is going
on underneath.
Mr. Huizenga. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired, and the
Members have requested a second round of questioning for the
witnesses. So with your indulgence, we will proceed with that
second round. And the Chair recognizes himself now for an
additional 5 minutes.
I wanted to follow up on the question related to the
oversized balance sheet. Mr. Hollingsworth asked a series of
very good questions about that. And he asked about the cost of
unwinding and the potential of crowding out private investment.
What other risks does an oversized balance sheet pose to Main
Street America? What are those risks? And is there any way that
the Fed can, as it unwinds, avoid those risks? We will just go
down the line here. Dr. Michel?
Dr. Michel. One of the risks is that you are paying--
literally paying these people on these assets. So if you look
at what is going on with interest and excess reserves on the
extra balances, under the Fed's projections, you are going to
be seeing--taxpayers, rather, are going to be seeing that they
are going to be paying large banks $50 billion a year. That is
a direct cost to people, and it is going to be a political
nightmare when you have the Fed set up to continue paying these
banks literally billions of dollars a year.
I will concede that we don't know exactly what is going to
happen here. But I think when we talk about the recovery, the
anemic recovery, you have to put it in context of, oh, and then
there is some more to come, because we haven't unwound all this
stuff.
Chairman Barr. And, Dr. Kupiec, as you answer this
question, please amplify your testimony when you basically
described a dilemma between, on the one hand, a need to
normalize, and on the other hand, the economic downside of the
Fed's only policy tool that it is using right now of increasing
interest on excess reserves.
Dr. Kupiec. That is the dilemma. They have this problem, in
part--not in part, in total, because of the QE. And they bought
enormous--billions of dollars--well trillions, actually, in
assets, right, and they turned those into reserves. And for the
bank to make that tradeoff, they paid the bank on reserves to
keep reserves in the Fed. And now their only policy tool--they
have two policy tools. They could start selling their
Treasuries. If they sold their Treasuries, the market would
react in a fairly big way, I think. They have such a large part
of the Treasury in GSC market that long-run rates would react
to any kind of unwinding announcement or something like that.
And they don't want long-run rates to rise. We haven't
recovered. We need a recovery still.
And so now they are sticking with their old instrument to
keep--to tighten or to look--do whatever they are doing which
raising the Federal funds rate, and it is not clear that that
works the same way it used to work with all these excess
reserves in the banking system. But that is the only other
technique they have. Now, they could do repo operations and not
pay on bank reserves, but then that would--repos, mutual funds
can participate in, and that would move money out of the
banking system into the mutual fund system. And the Federal
Reserve wouldn't want to do that. So they wouldn't want to do
anything that disadvantaged the banking system relative to what
they would call the so-called shadow banking system. So they
are kind of stuck. If short-term market rates were to change
anywhere else in the economy, they are going to have to pay
banks to keep the money in the banking system and not migrate
out. So I am sorry this--I know this sounds confusing, and I
don't have an answer to the question. But it is sort of a
quandary we have gotten ourselves into that--
Chairman Barr. My time is about ready to expire. So I have
another question for Mr. Pollock, really quickly. Obviously,
the loose monetary policy that has been pursued by the Fed was
supposed so boost asset prices.
The idea was to goose these asset prices to make people
feel wealthier, and the synthetic wealth was, in turn, supposed
to cause households to spend more and, therefore, jump start
the economy. That is, in effect, Dr. Dynan's testimony.
Clearly, the results haven't been as projected. In the previous
Administration, we didn't see a single year of GDP growth of 3
percent or greater. That is the first time that has happened
since the Administration of Herbert Hoover. So clearly, the
Fed's policies have not produced the result that they
predicted. Can you respond to that analysis?
Mr. Pollock. Mr. Chairman, it has produced the result of
goosing asset prices, just as you say. So we have had a huge
boom in house prices, stock prices, and bond prices. The
problem with an eternal monetary policy of that sort, which we
could better call a market distortion, is those prices will not
go up forever. Let's talk about house prices for just a second.
High house prices may feel good if you own a house. It is
terrible if you are a new family trying to buy a house. And
when the overinflated house prices then go down, everybody will
feel terrible.
Chairman Barr. My time has expired, and the Chair
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am glad you are
doing a second round, but no Democrat can stay here past
another 5 minutes. So I hope the second round is as nonpartisan
as possible. We won't be here to inject our words of wisdom
should that not be the case. The policies we have had over the
last 5 or 7 years have given us the longest if not the fastest
recovery.
House prices for the buyer are not the stated price. They
are the mortgage payment that comes with that house. Can you
afford the mortgage payment? So housing prices are not at an
all-time high until we get normal interest rates, and then they
will be. And then I think, as Mr. Pollock points out, some
people are going to get hurt.
The gentleman from Michigan talks about the need to lend
money to small business. We have a lot of money in capital. And
it is all going to T bonds and highly safe instruments. And
that is perhaps the responsibility of this committee, because
we have this very efficient banking system that is told raise
all this money, and it is insured by the Federal Government.
And then we are telling them only lend it at prime, maybe prime
plus 1, prime plus 2. The businesses in our district and your
district that you want to get the loan, you wouldn't loan the
money at prime plus 1. The pizzeria in my district has a chance
of going bankrupt. That is why we need prime plus 4, prime plus
5 loans. But we have a very efficient system that takes all the
money and prohibits them from putting it in prime plus 5 loans.
And instead, that money has to be given--it has to be loaned to
a small business or a private equity or a venture capital. And
then maybe it can get to a business that is doing something
that is risky or different or small. We have a low--great
target. It ought to be higher.
In my first statement, I pointed out the psychological
benefit for seniors of living in a world with a 6 percent
interest rate and a 5 percent inflation rate. Economists can
tell them that they are eating into their capital. They don't
think they are, and the mistake that they are making is
wonderful. It makes them feel better. And that is very helpful.
Also, we see that rents, salaries, and other things stick. But
in inflation, you don't have to lower things. You can just keep
them the way they are. And that is your method of lowering
them. So it actually adds some ability to move prices up or
down as the economy calls for. But the main reason we should
have lower interest rates, which will lead to somewhat higher
inflation rate, is we need the labor shortage that will give us
rapidly expanding wages. IPOs are down. I don't know whether
that is because our system for initial public offerings is
worse or a private equity system is better.
But everything we can do to make initial public offerings
work better, we ought to do in this committee. One of the
witnesses said savings should be encouraged at all times. I
disagree. You can't have too much savings, too little
consumption. If you have that, then you have no--then demand is
flat. You have unused capital resources. Nobody wants to borrow
to build those capital resources. But the phrase savings should
always be encouraged at least meets a particular political
plan, which is lower taxes on the savers, those people who get
a substantial portion of their income from savings, when the
vast majority of Americans can't get a--don't have that
savings. So it is only a small segment of the economy that gets
a substantial portion of their income from savings. I would
also point out that the after-tax inflation adjusted return in
our current economy is 0 for those who don't want to take a
credit risk. The yield on tips is a little bit over the
inflation rate.
But then you pay taxes not only on the part that is a
little bit on the inflation rate but also the part that just
reimburses you for inflation. We have a lot of savings as
evidenced by the fact that nobody is--that saver's reward after
tax is roughly 0, and people are still willing to save. We
ought to, perhaps, provide an inflation justified APR to
lenders and to depositors. The information we calculate now is
very exact and very complicated and very wrong in an economy in
which there is inflation. Democracy versus bureaucracy, there
is a lot of support in the elites in our society, for
philosophers kings and Federal Reserve members and others to
make the important decisions. And I will point out to this
committee, if that bridge in Alaska had been a bureaucrat's
decision, nobody here would have ever heard of it. The media
focuses on attacks on decisions made by elected officials. And
I am going to have to ask for a written response to this
question, and that is how much capital gain or loss has the Fed
incurred through QE? We know they have made a lot of money on
interest rate spread. But I assume if you bought long-term
bonds in 2010 and 2011, you lost some money. So, Mr. Pollock,
perhaps--is there just a number that you have, or should you
answer for the record?
Mr. Pollock. I have written on that recently, Congressman.
I will be glad to send you my article on the interest rate risk
of the Fed, which I describe as the biggest savings and loan in
the world.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you,
Mr. Sherman. And now the Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Arkansas again, Mr. Hill.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So continuing our
discussion, I was looking at the value of QE1 and QE2 and
PIMCO, for example, estimated that for spending $4 trillion, we
got $40 billion in additional economic output, not a very good
tradeoff. And I can remember being in banking back during QE1
and QE2 wondering what are we getting for this, as a banker,
just as a private sector participant, when we--the first thing
you learn when you have a losing position in an investment
portfolio or a losing bond loan--a loan in a loan portfolio is,
when in a hole, stop digging. And the Fed double-downed on
digging as it went beyond QE1, QE2.
So now that we are here and we are talking about the impact
on Main Street, I would say that, to your comment, Mr. Pollock,
that, with a 6-year duration at the Fed now, you have set up,
not a savings and loan, but one of the biggest hedge funds in
the world. We have monetized the debt of the United States, we
have inflated speculatively stock prices. We, in turn, with
public policy, have moved people into index funds instead of
making individual decisions about the individual quality of
equities. And we have 0 interest rates and yet we have extended
car lending from--when I started in banking, it was a 3-year
loan. Now it is 72 months--at these low rates. And 40 percent
of new cars are in a lease program, which is even higher than
you can borrow at the bank and you don't own anything at the
end of the term.
We have done commercial real estate lending, basically
underwritten to a 125 debt service coverage ratio at 3 or 4
percent. And if rates normalize, think of the equity
contribution those investors are going to have to make to
maintain that 125 debt service covered ratio. We have hidden
the budget deficit, the real impact on the budget deficient by
the Fed's actions, and that will get worse as rates go up. So
the impact on Main Street of the Fed's actions of the last
decade are going to be immense. And they are essentially, in my
view, all negative. And any benefit that occurred from them is
modest. As evidenced by PIMCO's suggestion that, for $4
trillion, we got $40 billion of extra economic output. So when
we try to reform the GSCs, Mr. Pollock, could you reflect on--
since you have written on this subject, we have a 6-year
duration, we own 40 percent of the government-issued, mortgage-
backed securities, how is that going to impact our ability to
reform the broken secondary mortgage market in this country,
the Federal Government owning 40 percent of those securities?
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, I think that is an excellent
point, and it gets in the way of reform, since we have the
Federal Reserve owning the biggest position in Fannie and
Freddie's mortgage-backed securities. We have the U.S. Treasury
owning most of the equity of Fannie and Freddie. And it gives
us what I call the ``government combine'' in the housing
finance business.
My subtitle is: who is the socialist? Between Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac, and the Federal Reserve, and the U.S. Treasury,
there is a very tight and complex financial set of
intercommitments and relationships, and it gets in the way of
reform. But in my opinion, that shouldn't stop us from
reforming housing finance and Fannie and Freddie toward
extracting the government from being the dominant and
distortionary mortgage finance player and moving toward more
private, more competitive market.
Mr. Hill. I appreciate that.
Dr. Kupiec, I think Governor Powell did lay out a very good
long-term speech not long ago about the unwinding and set out
some expectations and, really, in the market rates have
improved, even anticipating this shrinkage.
So I do think, to Dr. Michel's point, that if the Fed
outlines a plan, that maybe the market would be more resilient
than we think, and we should get on with it.
But Chair Yellen said something that she said that she felt
that the balance sheet reduction should be delayed until we get
the Fed funds rate up to a number that she would not say.
I would be interested in your view. Is there a range of Fed
funds rate that would make it better for shrinking the balance
sheet more directly?
Mr. Kupiec. I wonder why the Fed funds rate means anything
if it is the rate that the Fed pays on bank deposits, if that
is the floor. So I don't know what it reflects. It is an
administered rate. So I am not entirely sure I understand why--
they could set it at whatever rate they want it to tomorrow.
Would the economy change any differently, immediately? I don't
think so.
Mr. Hill. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And with all due respect to my colleague from Arkansas, Mr.
Hill, we have gone from 72 months to 84 months. So does anybody
want to buy a car?
Dr. Michel, as Mr. Sherman suggested, if we stopped paying
IOERs, would we be able to return to the Fed fund's policy
rate, do you think?
Mr. Michel. Oh, if we do?
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Mr. Michel. I would say yes at some point. I don't know how
quickly this happens. I don't know how quickly they can fix it.
I think you have to unwind the balance sheet and stop the
interest on the excess reserve program and the overnight
repurchase program, which is effectively very close to the same
thing.
I think all of those things have to happen to get back to
where you have a competitive--or anything like a competitive
Federal funds rate market.
So, yes. I just don't know how quickly you can do that. And
I don't know that they do either. If you go back and look at
what happened, initially, when they said they were going to pay
interest on excess reserves, they said we are going to set this
rate so that it is a floor on the Fed funds rate, as Paul
mentioned. And what happened? It went straight past the floor.
And then they said, oh, no, it is going to be a ceiling on the
Federal funds rate, and now we are going to have a Federal
funds target range instead of just a target.
So they have lost control of it because of what they did.
And I don't think they fully understand or anybody fully
understands exactly how and when that could be put back
together.
Mr. Williams. Mr. Pollock, would you have a response to
that?
Mr. Pollock. I think that if you could get away from the
interest on reserves, it would help get back to the previous
system of Fed funds targeting. But we have to remember, when it
comes to the Fed setting interest rates, that just like the Fed
doesn't know the future, the Fed doesn't know what the right
interest rate is either, because no one knows that. That is why
you have a market.
Mr. Williams. I remember when 16 percent was a good rate,
so--
Mr. Chairman, I yield my time back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Emmer.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
submitting to another round of questions.
I want to talk about reform, believe it or not, if it is
possible. Obviously, I am not a fan of what the Federal Reserve
has been doing, but I do agree with Dr. Kupiec. I think well-
intentioned people are trying to do the right thing.
You talked about procedural change in your initial
testimony after the Humphrey-Hawkins, once you get the written
testimony, have experts review it. I am just wondering if any
of your colleagues--and, again, put it in this context: I do
come from Main Street. And I think one or more of you in your
testimony said earlier, there is a breakdown between those who
are inside the Fed or actively working with the Fed and those
who are on Main Street wondering what in God's name are they
doing, and why can't we see what they are doing, and there must
be something going on that isn't quite right, because we aren't
feeling this great recovery that everybody tells us is there or
at least it is hollow.
Are there other reforms? And maybe since, Dr. Kupiec, you
gave one, how about Dr. Michel? Is there some other reform?
Mr. Michel. I have a list, several papers that have--I
don't know, maybe 15 different ones.
But I think basically what you have to do is start one on
the balance sheet, getting back to having a minimal footprint
on the market, having them only do monetary policy in a very
accountable way. I think that the approach and the format is
the right way to go and that you make them benchmark against
the rule.
Everybody says--well, they are all gone, but everybody says
that the format would tie the Fed to a mechanical rule, and
that is not true.
It would make them benchmark against a mechanical rule.
Mr. Emmer. Right, it wouldn't have--
Mr. Michel. So they could explain what they are doing and
why they are doing it. And those are all positive approaches
and improvements.
Mr. Emmer. Dr. Dynan, we probably don't see this exactly
the same way. But in this context, I would think there has to
be something that you have looked at that would be a helpful
reform.
Ms. Dynan. So, first of all, I think that Dr. Kupiec's idea
is an interesting one. I certainly support giving Congress more
time to review the monetary policy report written document
before going to testimony. I think that could lead to a more
constructive conversation.
I think moving to a quarterly frequency for the testimony
is also a good idea. My main concern is, I do not support more
aggressive measures that would undermine the Fed's--
Mr. Emmer. What about winding down the balance sheet? You
would agree with that. We should be doing that at some point,
right?
Ms. Dynan. Oh, yes. And with that, I should say I agree
with Dr. Michel's earlier comments that it is really, really
important that it is done gradually, and it is done
predictively and transparently. Because I think--I was not
asked what I thought the dangers were, but I do think the
biggest dangers of a surprise--and even what the Fed does and
even what it says, if the market suddenly says, hey, I didn't
understand what they are doing and now my view is totally
different. I think that, too, would be very disruptive to
financial conditions.
Mr. Emmer. Mr. Pollock, same question, but I also want to
add for you, is it time, at the very least, to eliminate the
dual mandate?
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, could I preface this by saying, I
grew up in the City of Detroit near Schoolcraft Avenue. I think
that could count as Main Street.
I think we need to understand the Fed actually has at least
six different mandates, and they can't possibly do them all.
They can't perform what those with great faith in the Fed have
faith that they will perform. That is why I think the
accountability issue is so important, and what I call a grown-
up discussion with the Congress, not a media event, but a
grown-up discussion of the true uncertainties, the true
alternatives, of how much of what is going on is debatable
theory. That is essential in my view, including as you know
from my testimony, that I think we should require the Fed to
focus on the impact on savers and savings, as well as on all
the other important things.
Mr. Emmer. So if I am--if I go based on that, there are at
least six different mandates. If we were going to give you the
task of advising us, how would you rewrite the mandate for the
21st Century Fed? How would you rewrite it?
Mr. Pollock. I would take them very much back to the
original idea--what the founders of the Fed did in 1913, which
was the overwhelming mandate was to help deal with crises and
then other than that be mostly out of the way and let the
market work.
Mr. Emmer. Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for taking some additional questions. To get
near term and potentially practical, using conventional or
unconventional means, is there anything the Fed could do to
prevent a yield curve inversion? And if they could do it,
should they? Anyone?
Mr. Michel. I believe that everyone shows overall that the
Fed can do very little to ultimately make interest rates do
whatever they want. So I would have to say no, I don't think
that should be the goal. I think the goal should be getting
back to a minimal footprint so that there is--so that there are
as minimal distortions as possible from what they do. That is
where I would come down on that.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you.
Dr. Pollock?
Mr. Pollock. Congressman, they could start selling their
mortgage-backed securities and long-term Treasury bonds, and
that would push up the long end of the curve and prevent an
inversion. They won't like it. That will cause big capital
losses in the Federal Reserve itself, probably a large market-
to-market insolvency. It would be interesting to see what would
happen then.
Mr. Davidson. Any other comments on that?
Mr. Kupiec. What we have right now, I think, is very much a
situation where the Fed really does control a lot of the term
structure by its long-term holdings and its trying to control
the short-term rate. So these are pretty much administered
interest rates.
And if an inversion were to come and the problem there is
normally, we think that reflects a looming recession. Why would
you want them to hide the evidence? I am not sure that setting
the rates would--if the rest--if the world were really tanking,
I don't know that raising the long-term interest rate would
help anybody.
Mr. Davidson. That gets to the next question. So you just
picked the next question is, so if they could manipulate the
rates in this way and prevent the yield curve inversion, one
way Dr. Pollock highlighted, dump assets in the long term, at
least they certainly have plenty of them. It could be very
market distorting, particularly if they are done rapidly, would
that do what would be indicated? Would it avert a recession?
This goes back to the whole limits of monetary policy. And so
would it really do what it presumably be targeted at?
Mr. Kupiec. Some medicines treat symptoms but they don't
fix the underlying problem. They just mask them. So to the
extent that you think the long-term interest rate is reflecting
the real economy and something that is going on, manipulating
long-term interest rate I don't think is going to fix the real
economy. And if we were heading for a recession, I don't know
why raising the long rate would do anything but make things
worse. It might cosmetically hide the fact for a while, but I
don't know why that would be in the Fed's interest to do that.
Mr. Davidson. Okay.
Mr. Michel. And this is why they shouldn't be in this
position in the first place.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you.
Okay. And they are in this position, I think summing up,
because you go back to the scorpion and the fox, an analogy.
The Fed is in this position because that is what they do. They
exist, therefore, they must do something. And they can't resist
the item passion to.
How do we get the structure in place that the things they
do aren't inherently market distorting?
Mr. Michel. So no more emergency lending. Open market and
no more primary dealer system, flexible system that lets
everybody who is eligible for a current discount window come.
So it is marketwide liquidity. That is the only thing they do,
period. And a flexible inflation mandate, a flexible price
stability mandate and that is it. That is all you let them do.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes our final questioner, the gentlelady
from Utah, Mrs. Love.
Mrs. Love. Thank you. I just wanted to finish up some of
the questioning that I was asking previously, so I appreciate
the second round.
But I wanted to get back to, Mr. Pollock, what you were
talking about in your statement in terms of if you believe that
the Federal Reserve had superior knowledge and insight into the
economic and financial future, you would possibly conclude that
it should act as a group of philosopher kings and certainly,
enjoyed the independent power over the country. You also
mentioned that it is unable, as we have all seen, consistently
predict the result of its tone actions, and there is no
evidence that they have any special insight.
It is almost as if they are trying--it is worse than trying
to predict the weather, because you are predicting interaction
between private consumers, interaction between government and
people. It is just the--it is incredibly monstrous.
And you also mentioned that not only--it is not really a
dual mandate. It is literally six different mandates. And to be
fair to the Federal Reserve, they cannot do it all. And it is
irresponsible for us to say that they can do right by the
American people by giving them, literally, an impossible task.
So here is what I wanted to ask: In order for consumers,
households, and businesses to plan for the future and consume,
save, invest most effectively, do they need to be confident
that the prices will remain relatively constant over time? And
do you believe that the Fed should spend more time on monetary
policy and price stability as opposed to all of these other
responsibilities that they have been given?
Mr. Pollock. Thank you, Congresswoman. I do. Again, that
they have the policy of acting in a crisis, which is useful,
which was their original 1913 mandate. They called it in those
days, ``to create an elastic currency.''
But when you put on top of that the notion that they are
going to, as people say, manage the economy, and manage
interest rates, now long as well as short term, and know what
the right inflation rate is, all of these things, they can't,
in my judgment, possibly do it all, just as you suggest.
It is my belief that the Congress was right--and this was a
Democratic Congress in 1977--with the Federal Reserve Reform
Act, to try to exert the control of Congress over the Fed. They
wrote, ``price stability.'' Now, we need to understand what
price stability means. In my opinion, that is a long-term
concept--
Mrs. Love. Right.
Mr. Pollock. --of price stability, which is, I think, best
for consumers, investors, and economic growth.
That means in any short term, prices may be going up, or
they may be going down. But on average, over the long term,
they are something close to flat. That is where I believe we
ought to go. Of course, there are great debates about all these
things among economists, Congresswoman, proving once again,
that economics is not a science, but a set of competing
theories.
Mrs. Love. Okay. I know you want to add to that, so I am
going to actually have you answer this question: If people
understood everything that we were talking about, would you say
that, in effect, the Fed would be doing more for maximum
employment if they actually focused on price stability?
And I am going to have you answer that, Dr. Michel.
Mr. Michel. Yes. So yes, they would be. And what I was
going to say is the great irony is that what Alex is talking
about is exactly what used to take place before we had a
Federal Reserve. The short-term price fluctuations were
literally 1 percentage point greater than they had been since
we had the Fed, but it would always come back to zero, the
price level, more quickly. That is what we have gotten rid of.
And the truth of the matter is that the Fed can do very little
for long-term structural employment. The Fed has nothing to do
with us having the lowest participation, labor-force
participation rate that we have had since the 1970s. That is
not the Fed's fault. They can't do anything other than stay out
of the distortionary business by not messing around with so
many things so that we don't have a worsening employment
situation. They should not be focused on trying to change
something that they can't change.
Mrs. Love. And I would be so bold as to conclude that this
is a result of Members of Congress not being willing to take on
the responsibilities that they have and pushing it over to the
Fed so that if something happens, we are not the ones who are
accountable. And we need to take that accountability back. We
are the ones who are accountable to the American people, and so
I am going to conclude with that.
Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady yields back.
And I would like to thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:19 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

June 28, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
