- THE STATE OF BANK LENDING IN AMERICA

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATE OF BANK
LENDING IN AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
AND CONSUMER CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 28, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-11

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

27-368 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah                       DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit

BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri, Chairman

KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania,      WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     AL GREEN, Texas
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                DENNY HECK, Washington
MIA LOVE, Utah                       GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
March 28, 2017...............................................     1
Appendix:
March 28, 2017...............................................    39

WITNESSES
Tuesday, March 28, 2017

Calhoun, Michael D., President, Center for Responsible Lending...     9
Heitkamp, R. Scott , President and Chief Executive Officer,
ValueBank Texas, on behalf of the Independent Community Bankers
of America (ICBA)..............................................     4
Motley, J. David, President, Colonial Savings, F.A., on behalf of
the Mortgage Bankers Association (MBA).........................     7
Wade, Holly, Director, Research and Policy Analysis, National
Federation of Independent Business (NFIB)......................     5

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Calhoun, Michael D...........................................    40
Heitkamp, R. Scott...........................................    60
Motley, J. David.............................................    73
Wade, Holly..................................................    86

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Luetkemeyer, Hon. Blaine:
Written statement of the Credit Union National Association...    90
Barr, Hon. Andy:
Chart entitled, ``FACT: Business lending has increased 75%
after Dodd-Frank''.........................................    92
Hill, Hon. French:
Article from The Hill entitled, ``Why we must base the
banking regulation debate on real data,'' by Paul H. Kupiec
of the American Enterprise Institute.......................    93

THE STATE OF BANK
LENDING IN AMERICA

----------

Tuesday, March 28, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions
and Consumer Credit,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:02 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blaine
Luetkemeyer [chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Luetkemeyer, Rothfus,
Royce, Lucas, Posey, Ross, Barr, Tipton, Williams, Love, Trott,
Loudermilk, Kustoff, Tenney; Clay, Meeks, Green, Heck, and
Moore.
Ex officio present: Representative Hensarling,
Also present: Representative Hill.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Consumer Credit will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time. And with regards to
that, we are expecting votes around 3:00. I am not sure how
long they will be, but it shouldn't probably take much more
than an hour, but we will see, give or take some time. But we
do anticipate that happening, so we hope everybody will be able
to bear with us.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``The State of Bank Lending in
America.''
Before we begin, I would like to thank the witnesses for
appearing today. We appreciate your participation and look
forward to a robust conversation.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
In her testimony before the Senate Banking Committee last
month, Chair Yellen painted a rosy picture of economic recovery
and widespread credit availability. Chair Yellen supported her
assertion by referring to the study conducted by one of our
witnesses today, Holly Wade of the National Federation of
Independent Businesses (NFIB).
What Chair Yellen neglected to mention was that half of the
small businesses surveyed by NFIB said that while they were
optimistic about the future, they were still sitting on the
credit sidelines. She also failed to highlight the fact that 37
percent of small-business respondents said that taxes,
regulations, and red tape were their top business problems.
Simply put, the picture she painted last month doesn't match
the reality that small businesses and their employees live
every day.
Like so many others in Washington, I don't think she quite
gets it. The truth of the matter is that we have what some have
referred to as a two-speed economy. Since the 2016 elections,
consumer confidence is high, unemployment rates are trending
down, and the economy is starting to show signs of life. While
the Nation's economic health may be improving, many of her
citizens continue to face significant headwinds as they seek to
grow their businesses or build a better life for their family.
So today we will scratch beneath the surface to examine
what is happening in our economy and how it is impacting
American consumers and small businesses. The unfortunate
reality is that a significant number of borrowers are, and Ms.
Wade's work demonstrates, sitting on the sidelines. And small
banks, consumers, and small businesses continue to operate in a
stalled economy with limited access to credit.
Data from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis indicates
that in the years before passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, small-
bank lending was more than 150 percent above large-bank
lending. In the 6 years after Dodd-Frank, small-bank lending
was almost 80 per cent below large-bank lending. And the
reality is that community financial institutions are the
primary small-business lenders. Today, nearly half of small
businesses and startups don't get the financing they seek. And
the situation for consumers who have a less-than-pristine
credit history or collateral isn't as bright as it should be.
This week, the New York Fed released a study indicating
that one in three Americans couldn't come up with $2,000 if
faced with an emergency. So despite seemingly low unemployment
rates, people are still living paycheck to paycheck, preventing
them from achieving the economic stability all Americans
deserve.
Despite the rhetoric fed to us since its passage, consumers
and small businesses haven't been protected by Dodd-Frank.
Rather, the rules and regulations billed as a pathway to a
stable economy have stifled small-business institutions and led
to more restricted access and much more expensive credit.
Even the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), which
purports to protect consumers, has smothered innovation and
financial products that Americans want and need. The result is
that consumers and small businesses, the drivers of our
economy, are left sitting on the sidelines and struggling to
survive.
Today's conversation may be one of the more important ones
that we have. It will serve to examine an alarming trend that
should be on the front page of every newspaper in America, and
to better understand the actual impact the regulatory climate
has on banks and their customers.
I thank our witnesses for their time today and look forward
to your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Clay, for 5
minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling today's
hearing to examine the state of bank lending.
And I thank the witnesses for participating in today's
hearing.
Prudent bank lending is key to a sound banking system and a
strong economy. Excessive bank lending without appropriate
safeguards has proven to lead to a devastating financial
crisis. This is why Dodd-Frank focused on restoring reasonable
safeguards to better protect consumers from the kind of
predatory lending that hurt so many people just a few years
ago.
Despite assertions by President Trump and our friends on
the other side of the aisle that community banks and lending
was crushed because of Dodd-Frank, the data tells a different
story. As Joe Friday used to say, ``Just the facts, ma'am.''
And here they are.
Banks have done quite well in the past few years and posted
an all-time record in profits in 2016, making more than $171
billion. The number of unprofitable banks has not been this low
since 1995, more than 2 decades ago. Very few small-business
owners report problems getting access to credit when they want
it. And in fact, bank loans to businesses also hit an all-time
high after increasing by 75 percent since Dodd-Frank became
law.
And how are community banks doing? According to recent FDIC
data, community banks are outpacing their larger competitors.
Community bank lending increased by more than 8 percent last
year and they increased small loans to businesses at more than
twice the rate of their peers. Community bank annual profits
rose by more than 10 percent over the prior year.
In the words of a Houston Chronicle article for my friend
from Texas, ``Alternative facts underlie Trump's push to ditch
Wall Street regulations.'' Dodd-Frank isn't making it harder
for businesses to get loans.
And I hope with today's hearing we examine the real facts
and have a good discussion on sensible, targeted steps, not
ideological rollbacks of Dodd-Frank, that we should consider to
help small banks continue to lend responsibly to our community.
And, Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. And I
thank him for his statement.
We will now turn to our witnesses.
First, we welcome the testimony of Mr. Scott Heitkamp,
president and chief executive officer of ValueBank Texas, who
is testifying on behalf of the Independent Community Bankers of
America.
And I understand he needs to leave at about 4:30 to catch a
plane, otherwise he is going to be stuck in our beautiful city
here for a while, and I don't wish that on anybody, especially
if you are not a tourist, and so we will excuse him. So heads
up to all the Members, if you do have some questions of Mr.
Heitkamp, please make sure you get those out first.
Second, Ms. Holly Wade, who is the director of research and
policy analysis at the National Federation of Independent
Business. We welcome you.
Third, Mr. David Motley, the president of Colonial Savings,
who is testifying on behalf of the Mortgage Bankers
Association. Welcome.
And Mr. Michael Calhoun, who is the president of the Center
for Responsible Lending. Welcome.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony. And without objection,
each of your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
So with that, I recognize Mr. Heitkamp. You are recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF R. SCOTT HEITKAMP, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, VALUEBANK TEXAS, ON BEHALF OF THE INDEPENDENT
COMMUNITY BANKERS OF AMERICA (ICBA)

Mr. Heitkamp. Thank you, Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking
Member Clay, and members of the subcommittee. My name is Scott
Heitkamp and I am president and CEO of ValueBank Texas in
Corpus Christi Texas. I am also chairman of the Independent
Community Bankers of America and I am testifying today on
behalf of the more than 5,800 community banks we represent.
Thank you for convening today's hearing on the state of
bank lending in America. Despite some recent, positive news on
the state of bank lending, now is not the time to be
complacent. From my viewpoint as a community banker in south
Texas, and from my conversations with hundreds of community
bankers from around the country, I promise you that the
economic recovery is lukewarm, uneven, and fragile. This view
is supported by data that when broken down, shows a recovery
that is mixed at best with notable regional differences in need
of strong solutions.
Today, a customer with a pristine credit score or a large,
established business can get a loan. But this isn't the measure
of a strong economy. When the credit box is tight, we have
subpar economic growth. To break out of this rut and strengthen
economic growth, we must expand credit availability to millions
of hardworking households and would-be borrowers with less-
than-perfect credit scores. Many of these borrowers are in the
middle to lower end of the income scale.
Today's regulatory environment has choked off community
banks' ability to take on and manage reasonable credit risk.
Before I discuss ICBA's recommendations, I would like to give
you some background on my bank.
ValueBank Texas was chartered in 1967 and later acquired by
my father. I am proud to carry on that legacy. Today, ValueBank
Texas is a $213 million bank with 10 offices in Corpus Christi
and Houston and 114 employees. We specialize in small-business
and residential mortgage lending.
As our name suggests, we are dedicated to creating value
for our customers and our community. We are like thousands of
community banks across the country with a vested interest in
the success of our communities we serve today and for
generations to come.
Unfortunately, the number of community banks is rapidly
declining. Today, there are some 1,700 fewer community banks
than there were in 2010. This historic consolidation will harm
competition and leave many small communities stranded without a
local community bank. Any review of the health of today's
community banking industry must take into account consolidation
and a lack of de novo charters.
I believe this consolidation and the lack of charter
formation is due to the rise in regulatory burden. Today's
banks need a larger scale to amortize the sharply increased
costs of compliance. These same costs have a chilling effect on
new charters. We need regulatory relief that will slow the
consolidation trend, and encourage new charters, creating a
more vibrant financial system for the benefit of our customers
and small-business owners.
According to a recent Urban Institute study, tight credit
killed 1.1 million mortgages in 2015 alone. These would-be
borrowers are people with lower credit scores and lower
incomes. The study found that tight credit was directly related
to regulatory restrictions.
One of the bright spots in today's economy is a surge in
optimism among small-business owners as shown in the NFIB
survey. This optimism will lead to a growing demand for credit
and we must ensure the regulatory environment allows community
banks to meet that demand.
The good news is that we have solutions. ICBA's plan for
prosperity is a robust regulatory relief agenda with nearly 40
recommendations that will allow Main Street and rural America
to prosper. A copy of that plan is attached to my written
statement.
This committee's work in the last Congress set the stage
for enacting meaningful regulatory relief. I want to highlight
the CLEAR Act, soon to be reintroduced by Chairman Luetkemeyer.
I also look forward to the reintroduction of Chairman
Hensarling's Financial CHOICE Act. These bills, among others
before the committee, are all part of the solutions to
regulatory burden.
We strongly encourage this committee to complete the work
that was started in the last Congress and enact meaningful
regulatory relief for community banks.
Thank you again for this opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Heitkamp can be found on
page 60 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Ms. Wade, you are now recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HOLLY WADE, DIRECTOR, RESEARCH AND POLICY
ANALYSIS, NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT BUSINESS (NFIB)

Ms. Wade. Good afternoon, Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking
Member Clay, and members of the Subcommittee on Financial
Institutions and Consumer Credit. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today on the state of bank lending in America.
Small businesses' ability to access financing is a vital
component of a healthy small-business sector. Small businesses
rely on financing for general business operations, but also
expansion activities and reinvestment.
NFIB regularly studies banking activities and borrowing
trends among small-business owners. NFIB's small-business
economic trends survey offers a monthly update on borrowing and
lending trends among a random sample of NFIB's 325,000 small-
business members, a survey NFIB has conducted since 1973.
Since the recession, loan demand has remained historically
weak, even with record-low interest rates still available. The
percent of regular borrowers has remained in the low 30s with
little pick-up throughout the recovery, whereas previous
expansions experienced a level of regular borrowing closer to
40 percent. High numbers of firms remain on the credit
sidelines seeing no good reason to borrow.
The survey also asks owners if they were able to satisfy
their borrowing needs over the last 3 months. In recent years,
about 4 percent report that they were not able to satisfy their
borrowing needs, significantly lower than the record high of 11
percent reached in 2010.
These trends are further reflected in NFIB's small-business
problems and priorities survey that asks small-business owners
to evaluate 75 business-related problems. From 2012 to the
current 2016 report, financing has become less of an issue for
many owners with fewer interested in borrowing due to slow
economic growth, but also due to better balance sheets for
those seeking credit.
The ranking for obtaining long-term and short-term business
loans both fell precipitously from 2012 to 2016. The former
fell 13 positions to its current ranking of 69 out of 75
issues, and the latter 12 positions to the ranking of 70th. The
percent of owners finding each a critical issue also fell from
about 11 percent to 6 percent in the current report.
But there are a few pockets of small businesses that do
have more difficulty accessing credit than the general
population: businesses experiencing declining sales of more
than 10 percent; and those experiencing rapid growth of 50
percent or more over the last 3 years. The difficulties of the
former are generally self-explanatory, but the latter is of
significant concern, as those businesses generate jobs and
economic growth.
For example, obtaining short-term and long-term loans
currently ranks 39th and 42nd, respectively for high-growth
firms, roughly 30 positions higher than the ranking for the
overall population. And more than twice as many owners find
each a critical issue.
The reasons why high-growth small businesses have a more
difficult time obtaining credit compared to years past are less
obvious. But the decline in the number of small community banks
is of particular concern. Small-business owners are far more
successful accessing credit through smaller regional banks than
larger ones.
A recent Federal Reserve survey found that while 76 percent
of small-business applicants were approved for some credit at
small banks, only 58 percent were approved at larger banks. The
downward trend of commercial banks is not new. But over the
last 8 years, the number of commercial banks has dropped from
about 7,000 in 2009 to its current level of about 5,000.
The importance of these banks cannot be overstated for
small businesses, but also for the banking system itself. NFIB
worries that overregulating these smaller community banks will
create more bank consolidation and deter new bank formations.
Loans to these small businesses are critical to the health of
local communities and, collectively, to the health of the
small-business sector.
With recent improvements in small-business optimism, owners
are in a good position to grow and reinvest in their business.
If this occurs, borrowing activities should pick up. Market
forces, not regulators in Washington, should manage the supply
and price of banking services and loans so that small-business
financing remains available for a potential increase in small-
business borrowing.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the current state
of small-business financing and the challenges that face us
going forward, and I look forward to working with the committee
to support small businesses and strengthen the U.S. economy.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Wade can be found on page 86
of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Ms. Wade.
Mr. Motley, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF J. DAVID MOTLEY, PRESIDENT, COLONIAL SAVINGS,
F.A., ON BEHALF OF THE MORTGAGE BANKERS ASSOCIATION (MBA)

Mr. Motley. Chairman Luetkemeyer, Ranking Member Clay, and
members of the subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify this afternoon on behalf of the Mortgage Bankers
Association.
MBA represents mortgage lenders of all sizes and business
models, from small, independent mortgage bankers to community
banks like mine, to the Nation's largest financial
institutions. Each segment of our industry plays a unique and
vital role in the market.
As a 4-decade veteran of the mortgage industry, I can tell
you from experience that recently enacted laws have created
commendable consumer protections and have made the mortgage
market a safer place to do business.
MBA has consistently supported reasonable requirements that
will prevent a reemergence of housing and market disruptions.
However, we must be mindful that new regulatory demands imposed
under Dodd-Frank have also negatively impacted the availability
and affordable and sustainable mortgage credit.
MBA's data show that mortgage credit availability remains
far below history norms. As a result, many borrowers, too often
already underserved populations, have been left on the
sidelines. Now that most of Dodd-Frank's mortgage rules have
been implemented, it is time to review these regulations and
make the necessary adjustments.
Let me highlight some of the key issues we feel would allow
lenders to reach more credit-worthy borrowers. There is no
better place to start than with the CFPB's ability-to-repay
rule. MBA appreciates the work of this committee and that of
the CFPB to address some of the flaws in the qualified mortgage
definition. We believe that rather than continue to address the
rule in a piecemeal fashion, now is the time to examine it
holistically, so that all lenders can deliver QM loans to
consumers, regardless of size of business model.
To achieve this, we urge Congress and the Bureau to: expand
the legal safe harbor to all QM loans; increase the small-loan
threshold to fit more smaller-balance loans under the QM
umbrella; establish alternatives to the QM underwriting
criteria to allow lenders to use other commonly accepted
underwriting standards; broaden the ability for lender-secured
defects and technical errors in those loans; pass the Mortgage
Choice Act, which would exclude title insurance fees paid to
lender-affiliated companies from the calculation of points and
fees; and finally, start the process of replacing the so-called
QM patch by developing a transparent set of criteria to define
QM.
Beyond these QM changes, there are several other areas that
should be addressed. First, as a mortgage servicer, I know the
cost to service loans has increased dramatically. This is due
to new CFPB rules as well as the punishing treatment of
mortgage servicing rights under the Basel III framework. Under
that rule, banks are required to hold extraordinary amounts of
capital to support the MSA asset, making it less likely that
banks like mine will retain mortgage servicing.
Amid the backdrop of complicated and conflicting servicing
rules, these increased costs directly impact consumer access to
credit and make new-loan production less attractive to lenders.
Second, the CFPB should be required to provide
authoritative written guidance to accompany its rules. The
CFPB's resistance to providing timely written guidance has
resulted in confusion, increased costs, and credit overlays by
uncertain investors. This is particularly notable in the
implementation of the know before-you-owe rule.
Third, regulatory burdens on independent mortgage bankers
need to be addressed. For example, State-licensed lenders face
frequent and duplicative examinations from the CFPB in each
State in which they operate. MBA urges rationalizing this
process by requiring the CFPB to adopt formal, risk-based
standards for examinations and to better coordinate with the
States.
MBA also supports establishing an appeals process for CFPB
exams that applies to both banks and nonbanks and adoption of
transitional licensing under the SAFE Act.
Fourth, the Justice Department's enforcement action under
the False Claims Act continues to have a chilling effect on
lender participation in the FHA program. The resulting legal
liability for what are oftentimes immaterial defects has forced
lenders to impose new credit overlays or limit their
involvement in FHA altogether.
So long as the Justice Department continues to impose these
draconian penalties on lenders for foot faults, the remaining
FHA lenders will continue using overly cautious, defensive
underwriting that limits options for borrowers.
In conclusion, the current regulatory environment has
increased costs and forced many responsible lenders to limit
their lending. This harms consumers, most often low- to
moderate-income borrowers, minorities, and first-time home
buyers. We urge this subcommittee to do a thorough review of
these rules and regulations and make adjustments where
necessary. Done properly, we can balance the need for
appropriate consumer protections while ensuring access to safe,
sustainable mortgage credit.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Motley can be found on page
73 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Mr. Calhoun, we now recognize you for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL D. CALHOUN, PRESIDENT, CENTER FOR
RESPONSIBLE LENDING

Mr. Calhoun. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Clay,
and members of the subcommittee for the opportunity to testify
today on this important topic.
The state of our banks is critical to our country's
economic well-being. In my testimony today, I want to
underscore three points, but focusing most on how best we can
move our economy forward.
First, as noted, data show that banks and especially our
community banks are helping to spearhead our Nation's economic
recovery.
My second point is that there are broadly supported steps
that can be taken immediately to improve bank regulation and
lending. And these should be implemented.
And finally, we must reject those proposals that would
thwart the advancement of our economy.
My testimony reflects my experience as president of the
Center for Responsible Lending, but also as former general
counsel of our lending affiliate, the Self-Help Credit Union.
It was established in 1982 to expand access to credit, and in
subsequent years has provided over $7 billion of financing for
first-time home buyers, small-business loans, and other
consumer loans. Today, we serve more than 100,000 account
holders with a full range of financial services.
In the early 2000s, the Center for Responsible Lending was
established in response to the growing predatory subprime home
loans and it works to promote sustainable lending.
On the first point, as noted, after a long and painful
recession, our financial institutions and the economy are
recovering. And bank and credit union profitability is at near-
record level and lending volumes, including commercial and
industrial lending, are increasing. Community banks are doing
particularly well, as are smaller lenders in general.
This is a healthy sign. And as anyone in the banking
industry knows, bank profits are still a very small part of the
costs of financial services, usually 2 percent or less. Today's
market is a welcome relief from the Great Recession when banks,
especially community banks, were hit so hard.
The climb back has been hard. And while some contend that
new regulations have depressed that return, numerous studies
and data from government and private researchers show
otherwise. And those are set out and discussed in my testimony.
I would note, for example, the Urban Institute, cited
often, found that the QM rule was not restricting credit
access.
Looking first at the areas where we can move forward with
the ability-to-repay mortgage rule, that has been a common-
sense requirement that has produced a better market, but there
are ways that it can be improved. It includes importantly a
two-tier approach. There are a number of important provisions
where there is additional flexibility for smaller lenders. And
in fact, the data as set out in our testimony show that
mortgage growth since Dodd-Frank, mortgage originations, have
grown the fastest for smaller lenders as opposed to largest
lenders.
As noted by my friend here, the housing area that maybe can
be improved most quickly is FHA. The continuing uncertainty of
the False Claims Act, as mentioned, is discouraging lending to
first-time home buyers, which are a key lagging part of the
overall housing market.
In addition, FHA servicing requirements are poorly
structured, harming lenders, consumers, and taxpayers alike.
They should be reconciled and reformed to match up with other
industry standards.
A broader area for reform and one that is often overlooked
is the Bank Secrecy Act, and the Anti-Money-Laundering Act. It
is essential to prevent terrorists and other criminals from
using our financial services system as a vehicle to cause harm.
But these Acts place a very heavy regulatory burden on banks
and, most particularly, on small banks.
I can tell you, the experience I had at lending programs in
our bank, it was one of the toughest regulatory burdens. And
the ABA, in fact, in a survey of compliance officers, found it
was the costliest regulatory burden.
There is a pretty easy way, though, to substantially
improve that, and that is simply to have ownership data
collected when businesses are formed rather than placing that
burden on the banks. Many groups, including ICBA, The Clearing
House, and others have endorsed this, and bipartisan bills have
been introduced to implement it. It would be a major advance.
The one thing we need to do is not step backwards, such as
by thwarting the work of the CFPB or by creating huge, gaping
loopholes in the QM rules, such as having portfolio loans being
swept in for all lenders. I look forward to discussing that
further with you during our questions.
Thank you again.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Calhoun can be found on page
40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Calhoun.
And I thank all of our witnesses for their testimony. Good
job.
I will recognize himself now for 5 minutes for questions.
The name of our hearing today is, ``The State of Bank
Lending in America.'' And I guess the first thing we need to
establish is, is there plenty of money to lend?
Mr. Heitkamp, you represent the independent community
banks. Is there plenty of money in the community banks to be
able to address the needs of the citizens and the businesses of
the communities?
Mr. Heitkamp. Our liquidity is strong. We have plenty of
liquidity to lend. We are just looking for a place for it.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Mr. Motley, what about you? You are
mortgage bankers, are you guys all ready to go, to jump into
the market here, with plenty of money to hand out to folks?
Mr. Motley. We have plenty of money to lend. The issue that
we have is making sure that we are threading the needle to
comply with the regulatory framework that we live with today.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. That was my next follow-up; it's a
nice segue for me here. Once we have established the fact that
we have the money, now we have to figure out why it is not
getting to the people, or is it getting to the people? And if
so, how are we helping people? Or are we not helping people?
That is the reason for the hearing today, to find out what kind
of lending is going on and what kind of lending is not going
on.
So to follow up with you, Mr. Motley, you made a comment
that Dodd-Frank regulations are hurting lending, and you
advocated a whole lot of different rules and regulation changes
that would help implement a lot more lending to continue to
allow people to be able to participate in the economy, and I
guess do it in a safe way. So would you like to elaborate on
just a little bit of that?
Mr. Motley. Sure. The QM rule did establish some basic,
prudent underwriting criteria, but it is very, very specific
and it relates to the Appendix Q underwriting guidelines that
are referenced in the Act.
Appendix Q was lifted from the FHA 4155 handbook, and that
4155 handbook is not particularly applicable to new types of
households, to underserved markets, underserved people who are
trying to enter the market, who might be trying to use multiple
sources of income, there could be multiple households or
generational households put into one household, and trying to
fit that type of income documentation into the Appendix Q
protocol is very difficult to do.
So we believe that Appendix Q needs to be modified, that
there needs to be an alternative or an expansion to Appendix Q
to allow lenders to react to today's marketplace.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Heitkamp, I had a banker come to me the other day and
he told me this story. He said, ``I had a customer of mine who
came into the bank. He has a half-a-million-dollar home, and he
wants to sell it and buy another home, but he needs $250,000 to
buy this other home and didn't have that extra amount of cash,
but he had less than 30 days to do the deal.
``So he had a half-a-million-dollar asset that he really
couldn't take advantage of because of the timing of all of the
rules and regulations here. And so, he had to cobble together a
bunch of other assets to get to about $200,000, and the bank
then made him a loan, but they said they were exposed for the
other $50,000 of the $250,000 loan to him.
And so, if regulators would have come walking in that
particular day and seen a loan like this that was secured by
$200,000 basically with the cash and a $50,000 exposure, what
would have happened? And is this a common occurrence in your
bank, the situation that the rules and regulators are putting
you in?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, sir. I think we find that all the time.
I think we have rules that are supposed to help us, but they
hurt us from taking care of our borrowers. We have instances
all the time where we have borrowers come into the bank asking
for us to make them a loan. We want to make the loan, they have
plenty of assets, they have plenty of--
Chairman Luetkemeyer. And these are customers that you
are--
Mr. Heitkamp. These are our customers. I will give you an
instance. Last week, we had a lady--we are in a retirement
community. Corpus Christi is down in the south of Texas, in the
Gulf Coast, and people want to retire down in Corpus, are
coming from the Dallas area or the Houston area and want to
retire. They have a home still left where they lived. They are
moving down, they are deciding either they want to rent that
home or they want to sell it.
But they want to come down to Corpus. They have found a
home they wanted to buy, they fell in love with the home. They
came to the bank and said they would like to buy this home. And
through the QM qualifications, the debt-to-income level is 43
percent, so they couldn't qualify.
And our bank made the decision that we are not going to
have non-QM loans so we weren't going to take the risk of being
sued and figuring out how that is going to work out later on.
So a good borrower, with a good capacity, we felt for them, but
we just couldn't take that risk.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Ms. Wade, very quickly, I am about
out of time here, but you made the comment in your testimony
that the difference between small banks giving approvals to
small businesses and large banks is about a 20, 25 percent
difference. Can you explain that difference, why the difference
is there? If you had the identical customers, why are small
banks doing a better job or being more liberal or more
accommodating to small businesses versus large banks?
Ms. Wade. Sure, thank you. From what we have heard from our
members, small-business owners, generally the local community
banks have a small-business staff, a person in the bank who
knows the community, knows the area, and is better able to help
them finance their business through lines of credit or
traditional bank loans compared to larger banks that might not
have the local expertise that is needed.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you.
My time has expired. With that, we will recognize Mr. Meeks
from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank the witnesses. I think all of you made
excellent presentations. And I think that I agree with you in
that we have to make sure that the pendulum didn't swing all
the way the other way. At one time we had no-doc loans, et
cetera, and anybody could get a loan. And now in an effort we
have to make sure that pendulum did not swing all the way the
other way so that folks don't have access to loans and make
sure that they have more available.
And I know and I compliment the smaller community banks and
what you have done. I have said often, my parents probably
would have never owned a home if it wasn't for a small bank
that took a risk on them, that they would be able to buy the
home that they purchased.
I know that Mr. Barr has a bill that he is working on. I am
not on that bill yet, but I am looking forward to continuing to
talk to him, because with his Portfolio Loan and Mortgage
Access Act, I think it may be heading in a direction that maybe
we can do something in a bipartisan way. And so, I look forward
to continuing to work with him in that vein because I think
this is tremendously important that we make sure there is
access.
Let me ask, yesterday I was reading in the American Banker
an article that touched on how banks of all sizes--actually, I
am really focused on the community bankers--are investing in
small-business loan funds to meet their CRA economic
development goals. And while the funds allow the participating
banks to mitigate risk and diversify their small-business
lending, the lending seems to be increasing access. And as a
result, these funds allow small entrepreneurs to obtain the
capital to finance their business ideas.
So, Ms. Wade, would you talk about the impact, if you will,
the Community Reinvestment Act has had on increasing small
businesses' access to capital? And are there things Congress
can do or should do to increase CRA business loaning?
Ms. Wade. Thank you for the question. The members that we
survey, I don't know how they are affected by that. But for the
most part, they aren't seeing a whole lot of obstacles in
gaining access. The problem that we see is that there isn't a
lot of optimism or expansion opportunities for them to borrow.
And so the lack of confidence in the economy growing, even
if sales are increasing a bit, they aren't confident about
expanding their business, reinvesting in their business, given
the current state of the economy. And that has been one of
their main problems in growing. And that is where we see the
low borrowing rates from our members.
Mr. Meeks. And let me ask Mr. Motley, because here is
another reason. Oftentimes, when people say CRA, they may think
just urban America. But I think urban America and rural
America, in certain areas they have the same problems as far as
access and finding and getting loans.
So I would ask Mr. Motley, do you think there is a way to
strengthen CRA to incentivize banks to serve small, rural as
well as urban areas in these underserved communities? In other
words, are there incentives that we can provide through CRA to
encourage more reasonable risk-taking by some banks so that the
smaller entrepreneurs can get access to capital?
Mr. Motley. Are you referring primarily to rural lending?
Mr. Meeks. Rural or I think they are similar. CRA reinvests
in communities that are underserved. So they help rural areas
that are underserved, but also help urban areas that are
underserved, so that both have more access to capital.
Mr. Motley. We satisfy our CRA opportunity primarily
through low- to moderate-income lending with the FHA program.
We do a little bit of lending on a commercial basis throughout
our marketplace. And those are underwritten to our personal
standards there in town.
But one of the things that we have a tremendous challenge
with in the rural areas and outlying areas is the appraisal
process. There are very few appraisers available. It is
difficult for us to get timely appraisals. And so that is a
challenge to us being able to serve that rural neighborhood,
both from a residential standpoint and from a commercial
standpoint.
Mr. Meeks. Let me ask you. I have 29 seconds left, and I
just wanted to find out, maybe I will ask Mr. Calhoun, CDFIs, I
saw that they were being zeroed out under the current budget.
Could you tell me the significance of CDFI funding to small-
business communities? And are you alarmed at all by zeroing out
CDFIs?
Mr. Calhoun. Very quickly, CDFIs have played a leading role
in providing that small-business lending to particularly
underserved parts of the market. And historically, the CDFI
program has enjoyed strong bipartisan support for that reason.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you.
I am out of time. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back. With that,
we go to the vice chairman of the subcommittee, Mr. Rothfus
from Pennsylvania, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rothfus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Heitkamp, I wanted to ask you a couple of questions.
Last week we had a hearing about the lack of de novo activity
that we have been seeing, also a striking consolidation that
has been going on in the community bank sector.
Now, I am hearing from community banks on a regular basis
and their customers about the post-crisis lending environment
and the challenges they face in complying with all of the new
regulations. Unfortunately, some on the other side of the aisle
dismiss these complaints, telling us that bank lending is
strong and that profits are high so there cannot be any real
problems.
But I think that is a superficial view of the state of bank
lending in our economy today. And what we have is a two-speed
economy. There is one speed for the largest firms, individuals
with the best credit and the biggest banks and there is another
speed for everybody else.
As you noted in your testimony, ``A customer with a
pristine credit score, or a larger, established business can
secure a loan. But those with less-than-perfect credit, middle-
and lower-income Americans, and those trying to start small
businesses are not finding it so easy to access capital.
Community bank consolidation and the de novo drought have
surely contributed to this bifurcation since many of these
groups would normally turn to community banks for capital. In
fact, lending by smaller banks was more than 150 percent higher
than large-bank lending before Dodd-Frank, but today it is 80
percent below large-bank lending.''
Can you describe how regulatory burdens play a role in
creating this two-speed economy?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, sir. I think when you look at it and you
see the difference with the regulatory burden and talking about
de novo charters, I think that is the reason why we have a lack
of de novo charters is the regulatory burden. You are looking
at why you would take that risk and getting involved with the
regulatory environment today is you are seeing a lot of people
saying there are too many regulations and risks to put my money
at work to take that risk.
Mr. Rothfus. Can you identify or tell us why certain
regulations disproportionately disadvantage smaller banks?
Mr. Heitkamp. Our compliance costs are through the roof. I
can give you--in my bank, for instance, in the last 5 to 7
years, I have a compliance person, I have a checker of the
compliance person, I have people doing the job day to day. And
we are looking at that burden every day to make sure that we
don't make a mistake because that mistake will cost us a lot.
So the compliance cost is a lot of the burden that we have to
deal with.
Mr. Rothfus. Now, how has your bank's lending activity
changed as a result of Dodd-Frank?
Mr. Heitkamp. Our loan-to-deposit ratio is about 70
percent. We keep it about 80 percent. It is down about $10
million in the last 5 years. We have been struggling to keep it
there. We are trying to hire new people to get it involved, but
overall compliance and just the lack of the small- to mid-sized
customer not having that flexibility where they can come in,
sit across the desk, and say I can take that risk with you,
with that regulatory risk that we need to take, we are not
willing to do that. So it is forcing some of those customers
not to have that credit.
Mr. Rothfus. Mr. Motley, if I could ask you a couple of
questions. In your testimony, you discussed the tremendous
uncertainty about how the CFPB will approach various compliance
issues. You wrote, ``Despite the extensive liability that can
arise from the Truth in Lending Act (TILA) violations, the CFPB
has largely forgone providing guidance on TRID, taking the
position that such questions will be settled by the courts.''
Can you describe how the CFPB's regulation by enforcement
impacts consumers?
Mr. Motley. Sure. We can mitigate credit risk, we can
mitigate rate risk. We have a very difficult time mitigating
regulatory risk because the rules have not been clearly defined
in every case. And when we ask for rule clarifications, we get
webinars, we get presentations, but at the bottom of every one
of those presentations it says you cannot rely on this as being
authoritative, you must rely on written guidance, and yet we
don't get that written guidance from the CFPB. So it makes it
more difficult for us to lend.
And when we are faced with the possibility of a loan being
kicked out of a pool or a challenge in court at foreclosure
time, if there is a problem with the regulatory issues, with
the disclosures, we are going to run into a problem with that.
So we are more likely to take a more conservative approach and
lend very much within the credit box rather than out to the
edge of the credit box. And if we had more regulatory clarity
from the CFPB in terms of written guidance, I think that all
lenders would be more likely to lend to the edges of that
credit box and live within the rules.
Mr. Rothfus. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
I recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses for appearing as well.
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to especially thank you for
styling the hearing today. You styled it, ``The State of Bank
Lending in America.'' You didn't say, ``horrible bank
lending.'' There are so many adjectives that you could have
used, and you did not. And I must tell you, I appreciate it. It
gives each side an opportunity to make the case and to hear
evidence, if you will, hearkening back to a prior life. So
thank you for your balanced approach to styling this hearing.
I am one who believes that community banks, by a given
definition, should be aided in every possible way. We do from
time to time have difficulty defining community banking.
Eighty-nine to 90 percent of all banks are a billion and under,
$1 billion and under. We have tried to fashion rules to cover
90 percent of all banks, rounding up, but the problem that we
have run into is that when we try to do this, there is a desire
to go through the entire additional 10 percent or to some
additional portion of the 10 percent that wouldn't be covered.
We tried to do this with H.R. 2642, the Community Lender
Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act of 2015, lots of
relief for what I call community banks.
My friend from Texas, your bank started in 1967, with $213
million and 114 employees, am I correct?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, sir.
Mr. Green. A good bank, by the way. I compliment you. That
was not a commercial, but I compliment you. If we could fashion
a bill to cover all banks at a billion and under, will your
association in Texas support that bill to cover banks at a
billion and under as opposed to up to the $50 billion level?
Mr. Heitkamp. I think you have to look at it in a way of
what a community bank is. A billion and under--
Mr. Green. Yes, this is where we run into the problem. Go
right ahead.
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes.
Mr. Green. This is where we run into the problem.
Mr. Heitkamp. You can put a threshold out to the billion
and under, there are community banks that really serve their
community that are--
Mr. Green. If I may reclaim my time, we are talking about a
bill that would cover 90 percent of all of the banks in the
country, most of them are a billion and under, but this is
exactly where we go when we try to fashion the bill for the 90
percent. It becomes a question of, how do we get to the $50
billion banks?
I want to help and I believe that we could do something now
as opposed to continuing to put it off until we can get the $50
billion banks in. And $50 billion is a number that I am
throwing out and most of you know why. That is where the
trigger is. What trigger, you ask? The trigger for living
wills. The trigger for a SIFI designation.
Those are things that we could debate at a later time. If
we could help the 90 percent of all banks that are under a
billion dollars, these are the community banks, these are the
small banks that you talk about. But when we get ready to
legislate, we have to go to $50 billion.
So I am with you on the small-bank issue that you raise.
But it is just that when we try to do something for you, it
goes to $50 billion. At some point, you are going to have to
let them go. You will have to let them go. We will deal with
them. You don't have to carry their water. It is good water.
Let them carry it.
I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for the great
hearing.
And I appreciate the testimony from our witnesses. I am
actually asking you all to take a look at a slide that my
friends on the other side of the aisle have been displaying
during their questioning. And they are citing Federal Reserve
statistics and saying that business lending has actually
increased after Dodd-Frank, citing commercial industrial bank
loans at a record high.
I want to kind of dig deep at this, because as the ranking
member of the subcommittee pointed out, just the facts.
This, in my judgment, reading about trends since Dodd-Frank
is not just the facts. There are other facts, there is context
that I think we have to put into this.
About 25 years ago, small banks under a billion dollars in
assets, total industry assets were around 30 percent, $1
billion to $10 billion about 35 percent, and those bigger banks
over $10 billion about 35 percent. Today, it is a dramatically
different picture. Today, total industry assets for these
community banks under a billion dollars is less than 12 percent
of all total industry assets, as I look at the statistics. And
we know that since Dodd-Frank, we have 1,700 fewer community
banks than there were in 2010.
So what the real picture says is that lending from
community banks is off, it is much less. And so to the extent
there is business lending increasing, it is coming from the
larger banks and it is benefiting larger borrowers. So emerging
growth companies, small businesses, entrepreneurs, and sole
proprietors, the real engine of economic dynamism, the job
creators, that is off, that is way down. And that is what that
slide doesn't show.
And here is why that matters to me. I represent a district
in rural Kentucky. And three-fourths of all lending in rural
America come from those small community banks. In fact, the
community banks in my district, some of them are less than a
hundred million dollars in assets. And that lending is way off.
So that is where the concern is, small-bank lending in rural
America, small-bank lending where you are talking about half of
all small-business lending comes from these community banks.
So, Mr. Heitkamp, as the representative of the community
banks here, can you elaborate, is that analysis correct? And is
that an explanation for why this slide that my friends on the
other side of the aisle--why that slide is totally misleading?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, I think that is definitely a good
conclusion, that you are seeing a lot of larger credit unions
and larger banks happening, $5-, $10-, $15-, $20 million drive
up that data that is just hard data. And when you break down
the data, you look at the, like you said, community banks make
better than 50 percent of all small-business loans and I
believe we do that. It is getting harder for us to do because
of the credit box that we are in with the regulatory burdens.
We can't take that additional risk.
Years ago, 7 years ago, 10 years ago, 7 out of 10 small
businesses came out of the small bank. You look at some of the
Dells or you look at some of the big companies, seven of those
took the risk, some community bank took the risk with those
guys. And so that is why I think we are having the challenge
that we have today with the regulatory box that we are in.
Mr. Barr. We have lost one in five banks in Kentucky since
Dodd-Frank. That is a problem. One in five credit unions as
well. And I think that is compromising access to credit for the
small businesses and for rural America.
I want to switch over to Ms. Wade and Mr. Motley for a
minute, especially Mr. Motley on the portfolio lending
legislation.
Mr. Calhoun is concerned in his testimony that portfolio
lending is dangerous. With all of the exams that occur, and,
Mr. Heitkamp, you can weigh in here as well, with all of the
scrutiny and the supervision that is happening right now, is
Mr. Calhoun right that there is a risk with portfolio lending?
Mr. Motley. I think that there is the potential to put
loans in portfolio that might not be prudent over time. And
particularly if we are going to define a community bank by
size, size varies, asset sizes vary. And so if you set a
threshold of a billion dollars, let's say, and then you go
above or below and now you have different regimes of rules that
you have to comply with, I think that a better approach is to
make the QM rule, make a few revisions to the QM rule that
would be applicable to all players in the marketplace rather
than putting it in just whether or not it is in the portfolio.
Mr. Barr. In my remaining time, we see from HMDA data that
there has been a big drop in lending to manufactured housing
loans. Based on your knowledge in the marketplace, do you think
Congress should act to alleviate the harm to borrowers in the
manufactured housing space?
Mr. Heitkamp?
Mr. Heitkamp. We are in a coastal community, so we don't
have a lot of mobile homes because of wind storms rules. So I
can't really answer that.
Mr. Barr. Okay. My time has expired. I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Washington, Mr. Heck, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much.
I would like to begin just by making an observation about
something which Mr. Motley suggested, namely that there can be
risk involved in portfolio lending. I am painfully reminded of
Washington Mutual, which kept their mortgages or a good
percentage of them in portfolio, and it didn't stop them from
taking on risks that they thought they could stay ahead of
because those homes would be turned at some point and the dance
would never end. But of course, it did.
I actually want to ask about mortgages.
Mr. Motley, let me start with you, if I may. There seems to
be a new stubborn structural disparity between how many housing
units we are creating and what the demand is. And in certain
communities where never before have we had this structural
difference between supply and demand, we just can't seem to get
out ahead of it. Last I read, I think we are at an annual rate
of 1.2 million. Demand for that is obviously higher.
And as though I needed proof, and I don't, I have very dear
friends who bought a home in Seattle about 30 years ago. And
they finally decided to move into a senior-assisted center.
They sold their home on--and this was a modest, nice but modest
3-bedroom, cottage kind of home, bungalow kind of home--the
first day they listed it for $150,000 more than the asking
price. And that is what is happening in a lot of areas in the
Seattle market. And I am very concerned about this and about
what it is that we could do moving forward.
I am from the school that says that the reasons we have
this problem with lending and in fact in providing for housing
is almost always more three-dimensional and complex than most
people want to give it credit for.
But I am interested as, speaking on behalf of mortgage
bankers, what you might have to observe about this new
phenomenon of there being structural differences between supply
and demand, including in, for example, some Midwestern
communities that we had not gone through this quite as we are
this time.
So what can you say that might provide insight or help with
respect to understanding where we are in the housing market?
Fair question of you, Mr. Motley?
Mr. Motley. Okay, let me see if I can answer that or give
you my opinion on it. There are significant challenges in the
first-time home buyer market in the low-income area of housing
where people need to get in, want to get into housing, but
because of the cost they just can't do it. And what are some of
the issues that are involved in that cost?
Well, local regulations. Land costs, very, very high.
Regulations with regard to new construction have been imposed
and it makes it very, very difficult for builders these days to
build a low-to moderate-income house and make money at it.
Mr. Heck. And make any money at it.
Mr. Motley. Right, right. And so there is that supply
issue. But then also from the mortgage side, and this is one of
the things that I would ask you to consider about the QM rule,
the QM rule says that you cannot--and I am going to defer to my
friend Mike here on the exact formulation. There is an APR cap
that says that the interest rate or the APR cannot be more than
1\1/2\ percent over the average prime offer rate. That is a
very narrow range. And what happens when you go over that APOR
by 1\1/2\, is that it becomes a non-QM loan. Non-QM loans are
not liquid. They are not fungible in the marketplace. They are
viewed as toxic. And so one of the things that we proposed--
Mr. Heck. Excuse me, Mr. Motley, that is a very interesting
point. Thank you. But if I understood you correctly, you are
suggesting that in order to be a more liquid market and a more
attractive market to lenders that you need to be able to charge
more to the people who are on the low-income end of--
Mr. Motley. I am just saying that is the way the
calculation works out when you have a low-balance loan because
there are fees like title fees that are fixed fees, not a
percentage of the loan amount. You have to add those fees into
the calculation to get to that APOR. And if you go over that
threshold, it becomes a non-QM loan.
Mr. Heck. Mr. Calhoun, would you be supportive of that
change as well, sir?
Mr. Calhoun. We did support that and have for a long time.
It is in our written testimony. And the effect of giving that
50 basis points extra of cushion is equivalent in allowing four
extra points of closing costs. So it doesn't look like a lot,
but since it is an ongoing 50 basis points, that provides a
good bit of additional room without creating us one of those
places where we can tweak this without creating harm.
I would note, the CFPB has started its review of the whole
QM rule, as they are required to do on all their significant
rules every 5 years. And this is--
Mr. Heck. Thank you, both.
In my 4 seconds left, let me just say thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for the opportunity to use this hearing to say that
we ought to be spending a whole lot more time in talking about
how to meet housing needs and how to get housing starts up. And
it would solve a lot of problems in this economy and for the
average American.
And with that, I thank you, sir, and I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
They have called votes, but we are going to try and get two
more Members in before we leave to vote.
Mr. Williams from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all the witnesses for being here today and
especially my fellow Texans for coming up here to D.C.
I want to follow through on something Mr. Barr said
earlier.
Ms. Wade, you highlight the important role small business
plays in economic growth, accounting for about half of the U.S.
gross domestic product. Despite this importance, small
businesses have struggled to secure credit since the passage of
Dodd-Frank. I am a small-business person and I understand every
bit of that.
According to research by an analyst at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas using FFIEC data, small-business loans at U.S.
commercial banks have declined 15 percent since 2008, even
while total business loans have increased 33 percent. As a
result, small-business loans have shrunk by almost 40 percent
of the small-business loans portfolio in 2004 to 20 percent in
2016.
What has been the impact of reduced access to credit on
small business? And how will increasing access to capital help
small business?
Ms. Wade. Thank you. As I said, one of the problems is that
there is just a lack of demand, generally speaking, in the
small-business community where they don't have the confidence
in seeing opportunities to expand, grow their business or risk
not knowing what business conditions will be 6 months, a year
down the road. And they are not willing to bet their own money
on not a solid economic foundation in many of their
communities.
So, the low borrowing levels is one of our main concerns.
We did find, however, that there are more difficulties for
those who are in high-growth small businesses, so those who
have had over 50 percent growth in the last 3 years. Those
businesses seem to be finding, on average, a more difficult
time in accessing credit. And we are interested in looking into
that further.
That might be coming up against some of the regulations
that are restricting community and smaller banks in lending to
these businesses. And that is where a lot of our concern is
focused in these more high-growth businesses that are having a
more difficult time accessing credit.
But in creating policies that are more business-friendly,
those are the areas that we are focused on in allowing small
businesses to grow and improve their business in reinvesting so
that there is a strength in borrowing among the small-business
community.
Mr. Williams. All right, thank you.
Mr. Heitkamp, in your testimony, you spoke about bank
consolidation. Like many of the small businesses in my
district, which you are familiar with, I, too, am a borrower.
Can you tell me what these consolidations, these mergers mean
to borrowers and communities locally?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, sir. I think the mergers and
acquisitions is really hurting the people trying to get credit.
You see borrowers out there and today when you lose a merger
out of a community bank or it leaves that town, that town
doesn't have the access to capital. So a merger is a big issue
and the access to capital and those people in those communities
are not getting it. And so they are looking for other places to
go online and other places, so it is not really driving what we
need, real economic growth.
Mr. Williams. Mr. Motley, what has happened to your banking
services since passage of Dodd-Frank? And have you had to
reduce some books of business?
Mr. Motley. Have we had to reduce what?
Mr. Williams. Have you had to reduce some accounts, some
books of business?
Mr. Motley. What has happened in our business since Dodd-
Frank is that we have increased our staff of compliance
personnel dramatically by a factor of probably 10. We spend
these days, whereas perhaps prior to the crisis we might have
spent $10,000 to $15,000 a month towards compliance issues, we
now spend $350,000 a month in compliance, refunding QC, quality
control, areas. So it has dramatically increased our cost of
business.
In terms of have we had to turn business away, we never
were a lender of those no-income, no-asset type loans to any
significant extent. So when those products went away, it didn't
affect us, we didn't really do those loans.
Mr. Williams. And all that money that you had spent on
compliance could have gone to customers to build a business, to
hire people, put people to work, create more taxpayers.
Mr. Motley. It could have reduced the cost to consumers,
because when banks incur increased compliance costs or costs
generally, those costs are going to get passed on to the
consumer one way or the other. So the cost of origination, if I
could just take another second, has grown from $1,900 in 2004
for us to over $6,500 in 2016. The cost to originate a loan is
dramatically higher than it used to be prior to the recession.
Mr. Williams. Thank you for your testimony. And I yield
back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
We are going to try and get one more Member in here before
we recess.
Mr. Loudermilk from Georgia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will try to
be very brief with this.
Mr. Heitkamp, last year at the end of the year, statistics
showed that banks with over $100 million in assets saw a growth
in loans, but smaller banks saw a decrease. From a State that
has lost a lot of community banks, we have some counties in our
State that have no bank branch at all of a smaller community
bank. There has been a significant impact on Georgia. And with
this, it makes me just wonder, why are we seeing this trend of
larger banks are seeing an increase? And what are the
challenges of our smaller banks, our community banks?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, I think you are seeing the consolidation
that is making the decision if you are a small community, and I
think $100 million is even pretty small today. They are saying
you need to be half-a-billion dollars to survive the new
economic data or the regulatory burden that you need to survive
the increase costs.
Mr. Loudermilk. So it goes back to the regulatory burden
that we are putting on these guys?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, you are looking at our costs have gone
up 300 percent in the last 3 years on regulatory costs.
Mr. Loudermilk. And what I am getting from our community
bankers is, when I am asking about, under the CHOICE Act and
Dodd-Frank, what is it that we need to correct? The answer I am
getting is death by a thousand cuts. It is not just one thing,
it is a death by a thousand cuts. Could you elaborate a little
bit more?
Mr. Heitkamp. I think all these things you are talking
about, death by a thousand cuts, every time you turn around you
are getting 1,200 pages of regulation or other, you look at
HMDA, you look at increased data points there, you are looking
at the CFPB, you are looking at TRID, all the new things that
Washington is putting out to us. We can't take care of the
customer and take care of those costs, so you give to the
customer because you have to take care of the other things
because of regulations.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Motley, one of the things that I have also heard coming
from the banks is, tell us what the rules are, just give us
what the rules are. I remember when I was in the Air Force, we
played a game of softball. But what we weren't told is what the
rules are and the rules continually changed, so it was
impossible for you to win because every time you went to bat
you may be given one pitch, you may be given four pitches.
And I equate what they are saying, especially in the
mortgage industry, to we don't know what the rules are that we
need to play by because they are evolving. Does that kind of
hit where some of the problems are?
Mr. Motley. Yes, sir, it is. And it goes back to my earlier
statement. When you don't know what the rules are, you are
going to try to take the safest route and you are going to stay
away from the edges of the credit box. Because the penalties
for making a mistake under the know before you owe rule or
really any of the QM rules, the ability to repay rules, all of
those rules carry truth in lending liability. And that is
significant.
And so when we are not clear on what the rules are, we are
going to pull back. We can quantify credit risk, we can
quantify rate risk, we cannot quantify regulatory risk. And
that is why we need to ask for and I think we should expect to
get clear, written, reliable guidance from the CFPB. We get
that from the prudential regulators, we should be able to get
it from the CFPB.
Mr. Calhoun. And, Congressman, if I may add just for the
record that last year on the so-called TRID or know-before-you-
owe, the CFPB did issue a notice that they would engage in
formal guidance. They solicited comments, which I know MBA
submitted, we did, too, and you should expect in the
forthcoming months, if not weeks, that there will be further
official TRID guidance to help provide that clarity, because we
agree that unnecessary uncertainty has a high cost.
Mr. Loudermilk. Mr. Motley, how long have we been asking
for this directive?
Mr. Motley. Since the rule came out.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. So it has been quite a while, very
slow going.
I asked one of my lenders or one of our small banks back
just a few weeks ago, could you give me some incidences of
where you haven't been able to loan money? And they said, we
could give you many instances. For instance, there was a guy
that we had loaned for a mortgage many times and he paid, has
always been current, and he came and asked for a loan for a new
home and we had to deny him, but we really couldn't tell him
why.
And I believe it was because exactly what you were saying,
is they are taking the safe route because they don't know what
the rules are. And even though these directions may come out,
will they change again?
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman yields back.
With that, we are going to stand in recess until after
votes. I think there are about 4 votes, so we should be back
within, oh, 35 to 40 minutes, so sometime between 3:50 and
4:00. So if you will bear with us, we should return.
We stand in recess.
[recess]
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Let us go back to work. Again, thank
you for your indulgence. I apologize for the interruption, but
we actually had to go to work a while ago. So thank you so much
again for your patience.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Kustoff, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am a recovering attorney and a former U.S. attorney, but
also a former bank board member for a community bank, so I
appreciate the comments and the testimony that many of you have
offered.
Mr. Heitkamp, if I can, going back to you, since the
implementation of Dodd-Frank, in my opinion, we have seen a
one-size-fits-all regulatory regime, regardless of a bank's
size, that has had a profound impact on a bank's ability to
lend.
Where I am from in west Tennessee, I hear of many instances
where long-time customers of their banks or financial
institutions are unable to secure a personal or business loan
due to the stringent requirements of Dodd-Frank. Problems like
these as we have heard today are happening all too often and
consumers are finding it more difficult to access credit when
they need it the most.
If you could, in your experience, pre-Dodd-Frank and now
post-Dodd-Frank, can you talk about the type of individuals
that, just subjectively or anecdotally, you could loan to
before the implementation of Dodd-Frank and compare that to
today?
Mr. Heitkamp. I will give it a shot, sure. I think looking
back, I think I just did this in a talk the other day, talking
about what I did 10 years ago. Ten years ago, I took care of my
customers, grew my business, and tried to grow my bank.
Today, most of my time is spent trying to deal with new
regulations or old regulations and how it is going to affect my
bank. So I think that kind of sums up what you are talking
about. But from a customer standpoint, we talked about DTI, we
talked about the loan requirements that you have to do, the
hurdles you have to get over, for good customers, that you are
looking for those additional regulatory requirements that have
been put on us because of Dodd-Frank.
And I think that is our challenge is trying to help those
customers that you want to help and trying to figure out now
how to do it. And sometimes you just can't.
Mr. Kustoff. In my area of the world, and I talked to some
of the bankers around west Tennessee, in rural west Tennessee.
I talked to a banker in rural west Tennessee, and I have this
in quotes because we took it down verbatim, he told us that a
customer of his tried to refinance his primary residential
loan. These are his words, ``When we requested verification of
the income, the customer could not provide it because they had
lost their job in the past year. However, for the past 12
months the customer had made regular, timely payments on the
loan. He managed to engage in what he called odd jobs and make
the payments, but because of the requirements of the ability to
repay, our bank was unable to refinance the loan for this
specific customer.''
And if I could, Mr. Motley, maybe going to you, I believe
you had testified that in fact mortgage credit has tightened,
and the impact that it is had on customers, your customers,
particularly low- to moderate-income borrowers, minorities, and
first-time home-buyers. Can you elaborate, if you could, on the
various factors that have led to the constriction of credit in
general?
Mr. Motley. Was that directed to me? I'm sorry, I couldn't
hear you.
Mr. Kustoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Motley. Okay. Particularly in multicultural
communities, it is common for families to pool their funds.
That is not a standard way of documenting your ability to repay
using the Appendix Q. Were it not for the patch, the GSE patch,
the temporary patch, we would be very challenged to make the
kinds of loans and the number of loans that we have made
because the debt-to-income ratio that we have documented based
on the information that we have would be well-above 43 percent.
And yet we would see people who have perhaps made that housing
payment before, the housing payment that they are proposing to
have is equal to or maybe even less than, but it might still be
over that 43 percent level.
It is going to be more difficult when that patch goes away
in 2021 if we don't make some modifications to what the
definition of a QM is. And so we propose some minor
modifications, some tweaks that allow lenders to use
alternative underwriting decisions and use some other
alternative underwriting methods to demonstrate the ability to
repay without the very prescriptive rules that are in Appendix
Q and specifically the 43 percent debt ratio.
So there are a number of different prototypes, if you will,
or borrower types that I could go into, people who are recently
out of college, for instance, who are trying to get into their
first home, but they don't have a history of earnings, that
type of thing is problematic under QM.
Mr. Kustoff. Thank you very much.
And I believe my time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the distinguished gentleman from the ``Show Me''
State, Mr. Clay, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me start with a question for both Mr. Heitkamp and Mr.
Calhoun.
Some suggest the declining rate of community financial
institutions in this country is a recent phenomenon and one
that started with the enactment of Dodd-Frank. And yet, the
facts once again do not support this.
In the decades leading up to 1980, the total number of
commercial banks fluctuated around 13,000 to 14,000. Since that
time, there has been a steady decline at a rate of about 300
per year to just under 6,000.
More than 80 percent of banks that exited the market over
the past 30 years did not fail, but rather merged or
consolidated with another bank utilizing interstate branching
laws that were passed long before Dodd-Frank.
And, Mr. Heitkamp, aren't smaller banks being gobbled up by
larger banks as a result of the institution's prosperity and
success? Is that how you see this?
Mr. Heitkamp. No, sir, I don't. I see it as kind of the
opposite. I think when you start looking at mergers and
consolidations, I think the banks that are looking for that are
primarily because of regulatory burden that they are putting
on. They cannot survive and their costs are going up, so it is
driving them to make a decision for viability and for their
shareholders to sell their bank. And so you are seeing mergers
driven, in my opinion, based upon that decision.
We struggle with it ourselves. We are a $213 million bank.
Does it make sense for our shareholders to keep absorbing and
seeing our income go down?
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response.
Mr. Calhoun, how do you see it?
Mr. Calhoun. Well, a couple of points here. The biggest
impact on community banks has been the fallout of the Great
Recession. We saw almost 500 community banks shuttered. They
were the primary banks that got closed for financial
difficulties as a result of the Great Recession.
And then I think you have heard from many witnesses here,
the two biggest challenges in small-business lending are,
first, reduced demand because those businesses are still
recovering from the Great Recession, and one that hasn't been
mentioned yet, and that is extremely and artificially low
interest rates make it extremely difficult for us as small
lenders to take deposits and lend and make a living off the
difference when interest rates have been depressed so low.
That said, let me be clear, as I said in our written
testimony, we both support a two-tier approach to the
regulation and an expansion of the existing measures that have
been taken in that regard. And there are ways that can be done
carefully.
I think the points that Mr. Green was making, don't throw
the baby out with the bathwater because, again, the biggest
stress was that the housing boom took away so much of our
business from the unsustainable lender that the witnesses up
here were not willing to engage in. And the reckless lenders
took our business away and then crashed the economy, and we
took the hit for that and we are still feeling that pain.
And so sustainable, robust growth is what our goal is here.
And with some small changes in these places, you can make a
measurable impact there.
Mr. Clay. Thank you for that response.
Mr. Motley, you brought up some interesting scenarios in
your testimony about what could help the mortgage industry and
our housing industry, in effect. One would be the repay rule
that the CFPB has, the qualified mortgage. The Democrats have
proposed to exempt community banks from qualified mortgage
rules provided that their mortgages are held in portfolio.
Would you comment on that?
Mr. Motley. I think that, first of all, we appreciate the
idea or the concept that there might be some attempts to
stimulate lending. Portfolio lending is an important factor for
banks as investments. But I caution the use of portfolios to
add loans that are not standard. The QM rule could be adapted
for all lenders so that the consumer knows what to expect when
they go to a bank, whether it is a small bank, a community bank
or a large bank. The rules of the qualified mortgage, I
believe, should be the same for everybody.
Mr. Clay. Thank you so much.
My time is up.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Motley, you mentioned in your written testimony that in
recent years the Department of Justice has aggressively pursued
enforcement actions under the False Claims Act against lenders
participating in the FHA insurance programs. I certainly
believe that if you defraud the Federal Government, you ought
to be held accountable. And in regard to the FHA, we all want
to ensure that FHA is protected from risky loans and is on
solid financial footing.
But it is my understanding that the Department of Justice
has now sued and settled with nearly 30 companies for
violations of the False Claims Act. All of these companies were
accused of misrepresenting the quality of the loans to the FHA.
Those are pretty serious charges.
If the Department of Justice is finding issues this
widespread with so many of the program's participants, and I am
assuming that these were not intentional acts of crime,
shouldn't HUD step in and try to address the problem? In other
words, instead of shooting for settlements, it seems like it
would make more sense to ensure everyone knows how to comply
with the regulations so we can actually prevent real harm from
happening in the future.
I think if there were intentional criminal acts, those
people ought to go to jail and we ought not be making
settlements. That is how you really change behavior for the
future, but I'm assuming that is not the case.
Mr. Motley. I think the False Claims Act has been utilized
as a sledgehammer to kill a fly in a lot of, in many cases
because many of our members have been subjected to false claims
acts or errors in calculation of income, perhaps a minor
omission, non-intentional omission of a deposit or some credit
issue that we were aware of when the loan was made, and yet
when that loan, if it goes into default, it does go into
default, and then suddenly the lender is being faced with the
False Claim Act, and so now not only do you have the loss of
the loan and you have to indemnify HUD, but you also have
treble damages. So the penalty doesn't fit the crime in a lot
of these cases.
Now, we are not advocating, and let me be very clear, if a
lender is guilty of fraud or a conspiracy to violate the rules
on a regular basis, then that is an appropriate use of the
False Claims Act. But for one-offs, for errors in processing,
for mistakes that are going to happen, the rules are very, very
prescriptive, you start thinking about the loss mitigation
protocols that FHA requires, which are not standard, like Mr.
Calhoun was talking about earlier, they are different than the
agency's protocols for loss mitigation, we need to standardize
those loss mitigation protocols.
But if we make a mistake in an FHA loss mitigation process,
we haven't experienced it, we have other members who have
experienced it, that becomes a false claim when the loan goes
into default and they file a claim. And so that sort of
mismatch between the crime, the so-called crime, and the
punishment needs to be right-sized. And the False Claims Act,
we believe, should be used in a very limited, specific when
they are egregious activity.
Mr. Posey. Yes, I was going to ask you what steps HUD can
take, and I think you have already said it. Just probably be
much clearer and delineate exactly what is and what is not in
bounds or out of bounds on the False Claims Act.
Absent HUD providing clarity, how will the DOJ's aggressive
enforcement actions affect the lender participation and, more
broadly, access to FHA credit? Have you seen a negative impact?
Mr. Motley. We certainly have seen an impact. A number of
lenders, one that I am sure you have heard of, Jamie Dimon, has
been very vocal in his concerns about participation in the FHA
program. He has said, ``We can't be in the FHA program, the
risks are too great. And the reason for that is that there is
not a good protocol; what we need is a taxonomy of rules and
procedures in the FHA guide that will allow lenders to have
clarity and certainty in the way that they participate in FHA
lending.''
Mr. Posey. Yes. Do you know offhand, when they make these
stipulated settlements, do you know where the money goes? Do
you have any idea?
Mr. Motley. I'm sorry?
Mr. Posey. I am curious if you know where the money goes in
these stipulated settlements when they make them.
Mr. Motley. I don't know specifically. I think it goes into
the coffers of the Federal Government.
Mr. Posey. Yes, I am wondering if they are making bounty
hunters out of DOJ. I just have to wonder about that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see my time is up.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Ms. Moore for 5 minutes.
Ms. Moore. Thank you.
I just wanted to ask the panel--I know that smaller banks
were not the cause of our financial meltdown, and excuse me if
I ask questions that have already been answered, but we have
seen banks become more profitable, including smaller banks.
And so I guess I would want to hear from you all what your
thought is about analyses that suggest that part of the problem
for smaller banks has been an effort to try to develop growth
at a very fast pace. And a lot of the losses were due to
aggressive commercial lending because in Dodd-Frank, of course,
we exempted these banks from the CFPB, exempted and gave them
sort of a tiered structure with regard to regulation.
So I was wondering if you could just share with us what
lessons perhaps the smaller banks have learned with regard to
rebounding from the crisis, because I am not sure all of it is
because of Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Heitkamp. I will take a stab at that. I am not sure
rebounding is the right word, though, because I think earnings
are a thing that you can look at and say, okay, does that
balance everything but not really, you have regulatory issues
that we have been dealt with since Dodd-Frank, too, that is
adding in there.
So when you start taking and looking at earnings as a
whole, are you looking at larger-bank earnings? Are you looking
at community bank earnings? I know they have gone up. But in my
case, my earnings have not gone up. I am dealing with a lot
more regulation because there is a lot more expense I am having
to deal with today than I did before Dodd-Frank.
Ms. Moore. But you would also stipulate, you would also
recognize that a lot of the regulation for larger banks,
smaller banks have been excluded from it, and credit unions.
Mr. Heitkamp. You are saying, ``excluded.'' I am not sure
we have been excluded. Maybe there has been a box that we fit
in, maybe we get 50 basis points difference or something for
exclusion. But really as a whole, we are still subject to HMDA,
all the different things that we are having to do in a greater
degree.
Ms. Moore. So the tiering, you don't see that what we have
done is adequate enough? Is it the wrong approach totally?
Mr. Heitkamp. I don't think it is the wrong approach. I
just think it is not enough for small community banks and what
we are trying to do. I think that we need to push back and say,
hey, we need some real regulatory relief that will help us,
that doesn't add onto what we are currently doing. All we did
is get 1,200 new pages of regulation in each of the different
regulations that came out of Dodd-Frank.
Ms. Moore. I guess what I would like to hear from the panel
is whether or not you think that Dodd-Frank had a useful
purpose. And obviously, none of you are Wells Fargo or some of
the other actors that we have had to fine and there was a
tremendous amount of mischief leading up to the financial
crisis.
And so we have not wanted to penalize those actors that
were not a part of it, but I guess I am concerned about whether
or not you all think that there is something in between just
sort of jettisoning Dodd-Frank, if there is some concrete
improvements that we can make and not just say we don't need a
regulatory framework.
Mr. Motley. If I may, the MBA is not proposing that we
jettison Dodd-Frank at all. There are a few things that we
would like to see happen to make the QM rule a little bit more
inclusive for all borrowers, low- to moderate-income borrowers
who are stifled in many cases because of the treatment of
points and fees and the limited cap on that. So we would like
to see an expansion of that. We would like to see some
relaxation or some differences in how we interpret the debt-to-
income ratio. So we are--
Ms. Moore. So do you think this has an impact on minority
borrowers, who have suffered a lot?
Mr. Motley. It has a definite impact on minority borrowers
because of the--and I mentioned earlier before you were here.
What we find in multicultural families is that families will go
together, they will pool their resources in order to afford a
house. That is often very difficult to document and, in many
cases, it could be over that 43 percent debt-to-income ratio.
If for some reason that loan is not eligible for Fannie
Mae, then we can't go over 43, it will be an illegal loan. So
unless we wanted to keep it in portfolio, I suppose you could
do that, but then you have the risk of a loan that is not
nearly as liquid. It is frowned upon by the regulators. So
tweaks to the QM definition would be the thing most helpful, I
think, in expanding the credit box.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much.
My time has expired. And thank you for your indulgence, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Heitkamp is going to leave here in a second. Before he
leaves, there is one question that hasn't been asked yet. Ms.
Moore went to part of it, and I want to sort of jump in here
quickly and get a clarification before you do leave, Mr.
Heitkamp, and that is with regards to the subject of
profitability of the community banks.
I think from the standpoint that you have seen some
earnings go up, I think the point that you made a while ago,
and we need to clarify it just a little bit further, is the
fact that small banks, say $250 million and under, are the ones
that are really, really feeling the pinch of the regulatory
costs.
The FDIC did a study a few years ago which showed that they
didn't anticipate banks under $250 million even being around in
5 years. And so for clarification purposes, would you agree
with that statement or like to expound on it?
Mr. Heitkamp. Definitely, I think that is really important
to talk about today.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. So you are looking at banks with 750
to a billion, they are doing okay, but the littler guys are the
ones that we are talking about.
Mr. Heitkamp. I would even say $500 million and below, they
are really suffering. I think I heard a study that was, like,
$350 million, you had to be that size to survive today.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Okay, very good. Thank you.
I thank the subcommittee for their indulgence.
Mr. Heitkamp will be leaving here shortly.
But we are going to go to Mr. Tipton next. The gentleman
from Colorado is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, that is a great segue
actually to the questions that I had.
I come from a small community. And, Mr. Heitkamp, it
certainly captures my attention having participated in a small
community bank, when you are talking about a 300 percent
increase in terms of some of your regulatory costs.
I had one of our small community banks contact me several
months ago and said good news on the employment end, we have
made three new hires, the bad news is they are all for
compliance. And those are the real challenges really when you
say that our small community banks are really facing.
There was a recent Bloomberg News data which showed that
loans of a million dollars or less to Main Street-style
businesses has fallen to 20 percent of total business credit
from 35 percent in 2004. Consumer loans as well?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes.
Mr. Tipton. And have you seen an impact on small-business
formation? That is one thing I think that we forget in the mix.
Since we have been keeping records for the first time, we are
seeing more small businesses shut down than there are new
business startups. And as our chairman is often noted as
saying, it is hard to have capitalism without capital. You are
the liquidity in the marketplace.
Are you seeing that with your small businesses in Texas?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, we are definitely not seeing as many
applicants as we have had in the past. I think the people are
sitting on the sidelines, seeing what the regulatory issues are
and how they are going to impact them before they invest those
capital dollars. And so I think that is a deterrent to seeing
small business grow.
Mr. Tipton. When you are seeing some of the difficulties of
being able to make a loan that perhaps you would like to be
able to make, but regulatorily you are not allowed to make, do
you see them turning to alternative financing? And what might
that look like?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes. I think if they can't get the loan from
a commercial bank, they are looking for it in other places.
Sometimes they are going online, you see these online lenders,
things like that, but it is really not a good alternative for
them because at the end of the day it is going to come back to
haunt them.
Mr. Tipton. Higher costs?
Mr. Heitkamp. Higher costs.
Mr. Tipton. Higher costs and perhaps more business failure
there.
In your testimony you advocated for regulatory reform that
would require the Federal financial regulators to conduct a
cost/benefit analysis as part of the rulemaking process. How
would this improve the final rules, in your opinion?
Mr. Heitkamp. I think knowing, if you are doing the cost/
benefit analysis, to say, okay, does this make sense before you
apply a rule or regulation and making sure we talk about it, I
think that makes a lot of sense for us to say how the effect
will happen to that or what effect will become of that.
Mr. Tipton. You are probably trying to get out and that is
why we are all going to pick on you here in the short term.
[laughter]
Mr. Heitkamp. That is okay.
Mr. Tipton. But we recently had Chair Yellen and a variety
of regulators testify, and they have always noted the trickle-
down effect of regulations, but then they will cite that they
are doing everything they can to be able to relieve that
regulatory burden that people are facing.
I talked to a couple of community bankers just a few days
ago when they were in town and they were talking about the best
practices ultimately trickling down. Are you seeing that real
impact on you and impacting your ability to maintain that small
community bank?
Mr. Heitkamp. Yes, we are. The best practices are--I am
worried about the new ones that is going to come down the road
is looking at our small-business customers and the compliance
they are wanting to put on small business and gathering data.
And everything that you are hearing about that is starting to
gear up. We have had regulators start telling us, hey, gear up
for this. That is going to be additional costs and additional
burden that we are going to have to do if we have to get into
small-business lending like that.
Mr. Tipton. Just one final question from me so that you can
leave, if you must. What I think is really important for us to
be able to understand is that community bank. When you are
talking about the mergers, the acquisitions, it is always with
the idea of being able to get the benefit of synergy of a
larger entity. But what does a community bank, somebody that
you are describing, somebody who lives and works there and
understands the people that they are trying to be able to make
loans to, what is important about that?
Mr. Heitkamp. Oh, I think that is the key driver of a
community, knowing the people that you deal with, you have the
certainty of we have built that relationship over years, you
can trust one another, that is hard to get and that is very
valuable. And that is my opinion of community banking. That is
why it is so important that we keep these guys.
Mr. Tipton. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Heitkamp. I appreciate it.
Mr. Motley, I would like to be able to ask just one
question of you. You mentioned in your testimony the tightening
of mortgage credit availability and the increase in origination
and servicing costs.
We have a bank in Westminster, Colorado, that told me their
branch had to shut down the majority of their mortgage group,
from 15 to 4 people, because the business model simply no
longer made sense. According to them, they lost jobs because of
the regulatory burden. It was too much.
In your opinion, does the current regulatory framework for
mortgage lenders balance safety with access to credit for
customers?
Mr. Motley. I think it can be improved upon. I think by
making some tweaks in the QM rule, I think by providing
clarity, written guidance from the CFPB, we can do a better job
of expanding the credit box and allowing more people to qualify
for mortgages.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you.
My time has expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
With that, we go to the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Tenney, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses for being here to testify.
I had some questions for Mr. Heitkamp, or at least some
issues.
I, too, come from a small-business community, in rural
upstate New York, where I actually own a small business in the
area. And we have had many issues with access to credit. One of
the problems we have is so many of our small businesses and
smaller banks have been displaced because of regulations and
just the huge amount of compliance that we have had to deal
with in our business as well.
Coming from New York State, which is one of the highest
regulatory States, whether you are in banking, small business,
high energy costs, taxes, you name it. If there is an unfunded
mandate to send to our local governments or schools and our
small-business community, New York will find it.
[laughter]
So part of that, a question I had, and I was going to ask
Mr. Heitkamp, but I can put it to the panel or specifically
would like to say something to address Ms. Wade because my
family's business and dealing with financing. And one of the
problems we have had is trying to get access to capital with
banks because of the new regulations. And I find that some of
the community banks are really not in our league anymore.
And I just wondered if there is any evidence that you have,
and I know you may have spoken on this, and I apologize, but I
just wanted to hear it again, if there are other avenues that
you have cited or indicated in your testimony where small
businesses are going for credit if it is not to a banking
institution. And if you could just highlight a couple of those
that may be other alternative forms of credit as opposed to
using a bank.
Ms. Wade. Sure. Their primary source of funding for
expansion or reinvestment in their business is the revenue of
the business. So personal financing, savings, borrowing from
friends and family if they are new, those are the main sources
that they are drawing from. And then it is the bank that they
have their primary relationship with is where they are looking
to access lending.
I think one of the areas that is frustrating for many small
businesses in this new banking, regulatory scheme post Dodd-
Frank is the area of uncertainty, not knowing why they might
not be approved for the full amount that they are asking for
and not having a response from their bank representative being
able to explain if it is paperwork that they are not filing or
why they aren't accessing or why they are not able to access
all their credit and not realizing that maybe having a
relationship with a secondary bank might be important.
But they certainly draw on credit cards. More are looking
at online fintech lending options in accessing credit. But for
the most part right now, it is most of their financing is
coming from personal savings and revenue from their small
business.
Ms. Tenney. Right. Yes, you just described exactly the
circumstance that I myself have been in, maxing out my own
personal credit cards and getting a second mortgage just to get
past some of the cyclical nature of the businesses that we are
in.
On the fintech, that is something that is becoming talked
about often in Washington. And can you just tell me any
thoughts you might have on regulation in the fintech space and
how that would affect our small-business and banking community
in your opinion?
Ms. Wade. It is still a very small portion of lending for
small businesses. More are becoming interested in accessing or
learning more about what products are available through
fintech. And one of our concerns is overregulating this area of
financing before it develops into something that might be very
helpful for the small-business community as they are maybe
losing some of the relationships that they have with their
small, local banks and are forced to bank with larger banks,
that they have a less successful time accessing credit.
So some of that, I think, is spilling over to the fintech
arena. And making sure that is still a viable option is
important.
Ms. Tenney. So you are saying that the overregulation of
the fintech business could be causing the inability to get
credit on that side?
Ms. Wade. We are worried, we are certainly concerned about
overregulating of that industry where it wouldn't be a viable
option for small businesses to access financing going forward.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. I think I am out of time.
Thank you very much, I appreciate it.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Royce, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Royce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I could just say to the panel here that combating money
laundering and combating the financing of terrorism is
obviously something we all agree is critical to protecting our
citizens, protecting citizens throughout civilization. I am
concerned, however, that we are misaligning our resources and
hindering legitimate customers and businesses from accessing
capital in some situations, and I thought I would just bring
this up.
At least one recent study by The Clearing House concluded
that billions in bank resources, billions, are spent on AML/CFT
compliance that have limited law enforcement or national
security benefit. So clearly, the system as currently designed
is outdated and is ineffective.
And so my local banks tell me examiners are more interested
in quantitative measurements, like the number of compliance
officers that are hired, or the number of suspicious activity
reports filed.
And missing in that is a focus on the qualitative side,
which would be results-driven risk management which identifies
and catches bad actors. And we haven't seen much in the way of
that.
And so I was wondering if our remaining bank witness can
comment on suspicious activity report filings and other rules
and regulations and whether you think they are working. And
also, are there ways to better foster cooperation and
information sharing among banks or look at the beneficial
ownership rules so that we can catch the bad actors while still
facilitating access to capital and access to credit for small
businesses?
So I would just ask you, Mr. Motley, for your views on
that?
Mr. Motley. Thank you. I will try to briefly give you my
thoughts on that. We are primarily a residential mortgage
lender. We are a depository. We have eight depository branches
in the Dallas/Fort Worth area. So we take retail deposits. We
do savings accounts. We do traditional banking, but we are
primarily a mortgage banking participant.
But the AML rule really requires us to devote a huge amount
of resources to managing it. We could probably meet and talk to
every customer we have at least once a year and know exactly
who our customer is. But this AML rule is pretty onerous. And
we have to devote a single compliance person just to that one
activity.
We file suspicious activity reports whenever we run across
it, we find that more on our mortgage side than we do on the
depository side, because really we take great care in knowing
who it is that is opening up an account with us.
So for a bank like us, I think that rule is overbearing.
And there could be some opportunity for some relief.
Mr. Royce. I will ask you another question. Your bank
services mortgages, so you are in a unique position to offer, I
think, some perspective here on the proposed Basel III
increases in the risk-weighting for mortgage servicing rights.
So there would be really two points to you, and the first
would be understanding that there is some volatility in these
instruments as the interest rates change, do you believe the
risk to your balance sheet necessitates higher capital
requirements and different capital treatment?
And the second question I would ask you is, what is the
impact on your relationship with borrowers if you then are
unable to hold onto the servicing rights on the mortgages that
you originate? Maybe you can walk us through that.
Mr. Motley. Thank you. To answer your first question,
capital is important. Capital supports our business. We are a
highly capitalized institution. We are at 21 percent of assets
is our capital. And so we can support our mortgage lending
activity, but Basel III will prevent us from growing that
business that we have been in now for 65 years. We have 180,000
customers. We like having those customers. We have a high
concentration of mortgage servicing rights to capital. Under
the Basel rule, that would be restricted down to 10 percent.
And when that happens, that means we are going to have to--
one way to correct it is either grow a whole lot more capital,
we are a private entity, that is not so easily done, we are
also a family-owned bank. So the alternative is, is to let
those mortgages run off or sell the mortgages to somebody else,
to sell that relationship down the road to someone else. And
one of the things that many of our customers tell is is they
came to us because they wanted us to service their loan.
Mr. Royce. So that does impact directly your relationship
with them in the sense that this becomes the--
Mr. Motley. It absolutely does, yes, sir.
Mr. Royce. Yes.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. The gentleman's time has expired.
We have a gentleman here today who is not a member of the
subcommittee, but has a phenomenal background in financial
services, and serves on the full Financial Services Committee
and wants to participate in the hearing.
Without objection, the Chair seeks unanimous consent for
the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Hill, to be recognized for 5
minutes to question the witnesses. Without objection, it is so
ordered.
The gentleman from Arkansas is now recognized. Welcome.
Mr. Hill. I appreciate the chairman and the ranking
member's indulgence. Thank you for that. It is always nice to
have an interloper drift into your subcommittee, so thanks for
letting me participate.
Thank you, panel, for being with us, and sticking with the
cause over this long afternoon.
Chair Yellen testified before the Senate and the House in
the last couple of weeks and was just emphatic that there is no
lending problem in our country, that lending is at an all-time
high and that small-business people, Ms. Wade, are not
complaining about access to credit. In fact, she says that only
less than 4 percent of small businesses say they have no access
to credit.
Senator Warren described that was the real facts and that
anyone who disagreed with Chair Yellen was in fact proposing
alternative facts.
So, Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter in the record some
alternative facts, an article entitled, ``Why We Must Base the
Banking Regulation Debate on Real Data,'' by Paul Kupiec from
AEI.
In that article, it says that the Federal Reserve's own
data shows that small-business lending is 14 percent below pre-
crisis levels from $700 billion in 2008 to $600 billion today.
The Fed's own research shows that smaller banks play an
out-sized role in providing small-business credit. And without
effect, the largest banks have not filled the lending gap. The
dollar volume of small-business loans made by banks with more
than $10 billion in assets declined by 5 percent over the same
period.
So I would like the panel's views on commercial paper
markets in this country before the crisis were $2 trillion
weekly; now it is about $900 billion. So it is my view that one
of the biggest contributors to this CNI loan number up there
are loans to the biggest companies in our country, our Nation
that used to finance themselves through commercial paper.
Does anyone have a view on that?
Ms. Wade?
Ms. Wade. We have certainly seen low borrowing levels. That
is the missing component when folks talk about the 4 percent
not being able to satisfy their borrowing needs is that there
aren't borrowers as we would normally see in an expansion.
The reasons that there aren't as many borrowers, they don't
feel it is a good time to expand their business. They aren't
optimistic about business conditions in the next 6 months and
they are not willing to risk their profits and resources in
investing in their business without a full understanding that
the economy is going to grow at a rate that they will be able
to pay back these loans and use the resources effectively. So I
think that is one of the biggest missing components in the
conversation for small businesses.
And then, again, for those who are seeking credit and are
able to access loans, not understanding what is asked of them
from the small-banking community or the small banking
community. For the small banks having that level of
uncertainty, when there is uncertainty in the small banks and
there is uncertainty in the small business, it is a terrible
circumstance to facilitate growth in the small-business
community and grow their businesses.
Mr. Hill. We have certainly seen that in my district where
we only, since the summer of 2007, only have 1,300 more people
employed in my congressional district than we did in July of
2007 and only 5,000 more people in the workforce. So it is a
very slow growth, as you point out, recovery, so there are not
very many prospects.
I want to talk about TILA-RESPA, Mr. Motley. The Urban
Institute thinks that there would be about 5 million more
mortgages made if we didn't have the combination of TILA-RESPA,
QM, ability to repay in that period. And if you look at S&P
data, home equity loans since 2011 have declined 3 percent per
year in that period of time.
And there is no doubt that one of my constituents in my
district reported that just over the last 3 years, his
qualified mortgage loans since 2013 have dropped 15 percent a
year in eligible credit because of the rules.
What do you think we can do to improve TILA-RESPA? And I
know you have already put on the record ability to repay and
QM. So what are your thoughts on TILA-RESPA?
Mr. Motley. The penalties of failing to execute the TRID
rule disclosures properly can be catastrophic for a small
lender because that loan is going to end up being most likely
non-salable, not going to be able to be delivered to another
investor, private investor.
While Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac don't regulate
disclosures, they do expect lenders to follow the rule. And
without Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the GSE patch that we
have right now, lenders would be hurt quite badly because the
rules are so specific. Investors are reluctant to buy non-QM
loans because of the penalties that are associated with it.
So I think that what we could do to improve upon it, first,
is to provide better written guidance that can be relied upon
by the CFPB. I think that would be the best thing we could do.
And then the second thing we could do is to expand in a
moderate way the definition of a QM loan specifically as it
impacts low- to moderate-income borrowers.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the time,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Thank you for joining our
subcommittee today.
And with that, we are at the end of our hearing, and I
would certainly like to thank our witnesses. We had a great
panel today, with a lot of great information.
One point of clarification, Mr. Motley. In your testimony,
you talked about the increased cost of doing a mortgage loan.
And my calculations said that it increased about 70 percent in
the last 7 years. Would that be pretty close?
Mr. Motley. That would be pretty close, yes, sir.
Chairman Luetkemeyer. Just rough ballpark figures there.
That is breathtaking. If you look at that cost having to be
passed on to consumers, it is a significant enough cost that I
am sure that it makes a difference to some people's ability to
even take out a loan. So I thank you for that information.
Also, I know during the hearing, points were made with
regards to the Community Reinvestment Act, the Bank Secrecy
Act, and appraisals. A lot of you made points on those three
things. And those are going to be items that we are going to
talk about in succeeding hearings. They have been brought to my
attention by a lot of other banking groups, people in the
financial services industry, that there are concerns, problems,
issues with those that we need to take a look at.
And so we appreciate your testimony along those lines
because, again, it points out that I think your testimony shows
that there is an interest and there is a problem there that we
need to take a look at. So I thank you for that as well.
But again, thank you for your participation here. It has
been great.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
And with that, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:41 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

March 28, 2017

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
