- ADMINISTRATION PRIORITIES FOR THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADMINISTRATION PRIORITIES FOR THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MONETARY

POLICY AND TRADE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 8, 2017

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 115-57

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
31-284 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

JEB HENSARLING, Texas, Chairman

PATRICK T. McHENRY, North Carolina,  MAXINE WATERS, California, Ranking
Vice Chairman                        Member
PETER T. KING, New York              CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York
EDWARD R. ROYCE, California          NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             BRAD SHERMAN, California
STEVAN PEARCE, New Mexico            GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL POSEY, Florida                  MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri         WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts
SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
STEVE STIVERS, Ohio                  AL GREEN, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri
DENNIS A. ROSS, Florida              GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     KEITH ELLISON, Minnesota
ANN WAGNER, Missouri                 ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado
ANDY BARR, Kentucky                  JAMES A. HIMES, Connecticut
KEITH J. ROTHFUS, Pennsylvania       BILL FOSTER, Illinois
LUKE MESSER, Indiana                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado               JOHN K. DELANEY, Maryland
ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas                KYRSTEN SINEMA, Arizona
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio
MIA LOVE, Utah                       DENNY HECK, Washington
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                JUAN VARGAS, California
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York              VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
DAVID A. TROTT, Michigan             CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia            RUBEN KIHUEN, Nevada
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
THOMAS MacARTHUR, New Jersey
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
TED BUDD, North Carolina
DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

Kirsten Sutton Mork, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade

ANDY BARR, Kentucky, Chairman

ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas, Vice          GWEN MOORE, Wisconsin, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York
BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan              BILL FOSTER, Illinois
ROBERT PITTENGER, North Carolina     BRAD SHERMAN, California
MIA LOVE, Utah                       AL GREEN, Texas
FRENCH HILL, Arkansas                DENNY HECK, Washington
TOM EMMER, Minnesota                 DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia   JUAN VARGAS, California
WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio                CHARLIE CRIST, Florida
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
November 8, 2017.............................................     1
Appendix:
November 8, 2017.............................................    25

WITNESSES
Wednesday, November 8, 2017

Malpass, Hon. David, Under Secretary for International Affairs,
U.S. Department of the Treasury................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Malpass, Hon. David..........................................    26

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Malpass, Hon. David:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Heck........................................    37

ADMINISTRATION PRIORITIES FOR THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

----------

Wednesday, November 8, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Andy Barr
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Barr, Williams, Huizenga,
Pittenger, Hill, Emmer, Davidson, Tenney, Hollingsworth, Moore,
Sherman, Heck, Kildee, Vargas, and Waters.
Chairman Barr. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time, and all members will have
5 legislative days within which to submit extraneous materials
to the chair for inclusion in the record.
This hearing is entitled ``Administration Priorities for
the International Financial Institutions.'' I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes to give an opening statement.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Mr. David Malpass, Under
Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs. This is
the under secretary's first appearance before the committee
since his confirmation this summer. We congratulate you on your
confirmation, and our subcommittee looks forward to working
with you.
Mr. Malpass is responsible for overseeing U.S.
participation in the international financial institutions,
which includes the World Bank, the IMF (International Monetary
Fund), and regional development banks. This subcommittee has
emphasized that these organizations need to focus on clear
objectives and demonstrable results, not chase money at every
turn or reward their employers for just pushing funds out the
door. Take the World Bank as an example. For at least a quarter
century, the bank's own management reviews and evaluations have
pointed out that staff incentives prioritize churning out
loans, not producing results for the poor or generating useful
lessons to help them grow their way out of poverty.
This subcommittee has also examined, on a bipartisan basis
I might add, shocking lapses in basic project management, as
well as the use of World Bank assistance in support of
governments that are contemptuous of their citizens' economic
freedom. In addition, the bank keeps lending to middle income
countries that have easy access to resources. Two and a half
billion dollars have already been committed to China this year,
even as Beijing has set up rival development institutions.
Meanwhile, the World Bank's leadership is now suggesting it
needs a capital increase to spend more money in this fashion,
despite their receiving a capital increase as recently as 2010.
All of this leads to the impression that the World Bank is more
excited about fundraising than it is about showing its
shareholders what it has actually achieved. A case in point,
the media reported earlier this year that the bank has stripped
its chief economist of control over its research division due
to his critique of the bank's communications style.
As anyone who has suffered through the bank's endless
jargon knows too well, this just underscores how out of touch
the World Bank risks becoming. Earlier this year, the Financial
Services Committee passed a World Bank Accountability Act,
which attached some of the most significant reform requirements
ever to an IDA authorization. It had been more than a decade
since the committee acted in this manner, underlining the
weight we place on seeing changes at the bank.
Mr. Malpass, Congress has better uses for limited funds
than empty rhetoric and budget support. I, therefore, look
forward to hearing how you propose to exercise leadership at
the bank.
At the same time, the World Bank is not alone in its lack
of focus. Looking to the IMF, we have seen a 7 year long
involvement with Greece that has tarnished the fund's
reputation as the IMF's own evaluation department has shown in
detail.
I am pleased that the IMF has recently expressed skepticism
toward committing additional resources to the Euro zone's
bailout of Greece. As we look ahead, I hope that the Treasury
Department will use the Greek disaster in order to push for
clearer guidelines governing the IMF's interaction with
regional financing arrangements.
As we all know, the international financial institutions
coexist with an increasing number of multilateral
organizations, including the Asian Infrastructure Investment
Bank, the European Stability Mechanism, and others. While some
have used the emergence of these organizations as an argument
for more U.S. Funding to fight back potential rivals or to push
for a more expansive mission at the international financial
institutions, I would point to an alternative conclusion. It
seems to me that exerting U.S. leadership in the world and
ensuring that the IFIs (international financial institutions)
preserve their legitimacy means advocating that they
concentrate on clearly defined objectives and are held
accountable for results.
Leadership at these institutions doesn't boil down to who
can open their checkbook the fastest. Leadership means
demanding economic growth, institutional transparency, and
responsible project management that puts its beneficiaries
first. In short, we need a back-to-basics approach. I am
optimistic that the Trump Administration views things
similarly.
Looking beyond the IFIs, I am also hopeful that the under
secretary and his colleagues will provide new energy in
advancing U.S. interests with our international partners. It is
encouraging to have an Administration that looks at economic
diplomacy through the lens of economic growth. We have an
opportunity to rein in the regulatory overkill of the past 8
years. I am confident Mr. Malpass will help us seize this
opportunity in the talks he leads with his counterparts around
the world.
I look forward to working with the under secretary to
advance these priorities, and I thank him again for his
testimony.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee, the gentlelady from Wisconsin, Gwen Moore, for 5
minutes, for an opening statement.
Ms. Moore. Good morning. Thank you so much for joining us.
I am very eager to hear your testimony. I have had the
opportunity to peruse some of your comments.
Under Secretary, I want to say first that your discussions
of the benefits of private capital flows over development
finance seems to misstate, perhaps, my view or the nature of
development finance.
Former World Bank president James Wolfensohn testified to
this difference. As an investment banker, he said he never once
had a conversation with the government about their social
policies or their economic policies. But when the World Bank
comes in, it looks at what is happening to the people in the
country, what is happening to social stability, and what is
happening on issues like governance and inequality. So I think
it is important to not just look at these types of finances as
always interchangeable.
Your discussion of private capital is the engine of many of
the innovations that have produced the greatest measurable
results in fostering growth and lifting people out of poverty.
Stems from, I believe, an outdated belief that unfettered
markets, laissez-faire, of kind of the discussions we are
having in Congress now, trickle down, will only create wealth
and stability, but also solve almost any social problem through
a trickle-down benefit to others in society.
I am struck that in all of your discussion about global and
domestic growth, you never mention the growing problem of
inequality. Excessive inequality not only undermines social and
political cohesion, it has also been shown to have negative
effects on growth. We can go back, Plato, Adam Smith, Brandeis,
Plutarch, as far back in history as you want to, and we hear
some of the greatest minds talk about a destabilizing impact of
inequality.
Our current Fed chair, Janet Yellen, has been before this
committee many times, and talked about inequality being a huge
problem. I would appreciate hearing from you what you believe
would be an appropriate set of public policies that we would
need to have in place, both domestically and internationally,
to rein in the excesses of the market, maintain stability, and
assure that the benefits of capitalism are broadly shared.
Thank you so much. I yield back my time to Mr. Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Barr, I enjoyed working with you on the
World Bank Accountability Act, which passed the committee
unanimously, and look forward to bringing it to the floor.
I would point out that the World Bank loaned some $880
million to Iran from 2000 to 2005. Finally, we were able to get
that stopped. But it is important that we not let that happen
again. Even for those of us who are advocates of the bank, you
can imagine how painful it is to then go back to your district
and say, we put money in here, and Iran takes money out of
there. That is a pain I experienced last decade, and I don't
want to experience it next decade.
I join the Ranking Member in belief that World Bank finance
plays an important role that cannot be substituted for just by
the private sector. I look forward to learning what we are
doing so that the World Bank is not financing middle income
countries that can afford to do it themselves, but particularly
those middle income countries like China that are expanding and
competing for jobs or unfairly taking jobs from the United
States.
With that, I would yield to any member. Seeing none, I
yield back.
Ms. Moore. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady yields back.
Today, we welcome the testimony of the Under Secretary for
International Affairs at the U.S. Department of Treasury, David
Malpass.
Under Secretary Malpass oversees policies in the areas of
international finance, trade, and financial services,
investment, economic development, and international debt
policy. He also coordinates financial market policy with the
group of 7 industrialized countries.
He previously served as Deputy Assistant Secretary of the
Treasury under President Ronald Reagan; Deputy Assistant
Secretary of State under President George H.W. Bush; and Chief
Economist at Bear Stearns. In addition to his Treasury and
State Department positions, Malpass served as Senior Analyst
for Taxes and Trade at the Senate Budget Committee and
Republican Staff Director of the U.S. Congress' Joint Economic
Committee.
He holds a bachelor's degree in physics from Colorado
College and an MBA from the University of Denver, and studied
international economics at Georgetown University, School of
Foreign Service.
Without objection, your written statement will be made part
of the record. Under Secretary Malpass, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes to give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE DAVID MALPASS

Mr. Malpass. Thank you very much, Chairman Barr and Ranking
Member Moore. It is a pleasure to be here with members of the
Financial Services Monetary Policy and Trade Subcommittee. So
thank you for holding this hearing.
One of the Trump Administration's top objectives is to
achieve faster U.S. and global growth in ways that improve
after-tax wages for American workers. Median income we would
like to see go up. This involves ambitious reforms for taxes,
regulation, trade, energy, financial regulation,
infrastructure, and the budget.
A key driver of growth is the effectiveness of the
financial regulatory framework so that small- and medium-size
businesses are able to get the working capital they need to be
more productive and create more jobs. As Secretary Mnuchin said
in October, our agenda is aimed at restoring much needed
dynamism to the U.S. economy.
In today's testimony, I will focus primarily on the World
Bank and the IMF, but each of the international financial
institutions, the IFIs, presents its own set of challenges and
opportunities. The context for today's discussion is an
improvement in global growth in recent quarters, though it
remains well below its true potential.
Following the 2008 financial crisis, there was an unusually
weak recovery, both in the U.S. and abroad. Per the IMF, world
GDP, which stood at $73 trillion in 2011, was stuck at just $74
trillion in 2015, and $75 trillion in 2016. We welcome the
recent U.S. acceleration to 3 percent growth in the second and
third quarters, and believe faster U.S. and global growth rates
are possible, sustainable, and will be a key factor in
improving wages for American workers.
With growth accelerating and the world financial system
relatively stable and liquid, now is an opportune time to
discuss the appropriate role of multilateral development
finance in global growth and in prosperity. As a preface, I
want to make clear the distinction between isolationism, which
we oppose, and our view that globalism and multilateralism have
gone substantially too far to the point that they are hurting
U.S. and global growth.
In his remarks to the United Nations General Assembly in
September, President Trump articulated a vision of
international affairs in which each country's government has a
responsibility, first and foremost, to its own people. Out of
this self-interest emerges a constructive international order
in which nations and their people are enriched through trade,
cooperation, and innovation.
The President is traveling in Asia this week promoting
growth, investment, security in the Indo-Pacific, and trading
relationships that are fair and reciprocal. It is very clear
that the U.S. benefits from freer, more prosperous neighbors,
trading partners, and like-minded societies around the world.
We recognize that successful international relationships
include multilateral institutions. But the challenge for them
is to have a clear, focused mission, and deliver results
effectively, and with accountability to the participants.
Three important transformations have occurred in
international finance since I was last at Treasury. The
securitization of sovereigns, the lengthening of maturities for
local currency debt, and the decline in the structure of
interest rates. These foster market-based capital flows that
should add materially to global growth and prosperity. As a
result, the role of the MDBs (multilateral development banks)
has to change dramatically so that they focus less on the
volume of finance that they provide and more on the goal of
providing high-quality services that are not available
elsewhere.
The World Bank has asked the current Administration to work
toward large capital increases for the IBRD and the IFC.
Treasury believes that the World Bank currently has the
resources it needs to fulfill its mission and that the bank
should develop proposals in which the bank's organic capital
accumulation alone could be sufficient to support future
lending targets.
The state of the world, that of capital markets, and that
of countries is vastly different today than when the World
Bank's capital structure was developed. We think now is an
opportune time to rethink the structure and mission.
In the interest of time, I want to mention the other topic,
the IMF. It operates in the same global context as the World
Bank. It is an improving global outlook with an unusually high
availability of private sector capital. It faces the challenge
of redefining its role at a time when it currently has ample
resources, but faces unknown future challenges.
So, in conclusion, the uptick in global growth and the
relative calm in international markets has presented us with an
opportunity to advance policies to further stimulate both
domestic and global growth. Notably, we included new language
in recent communiques citing exchange rate stability as a goal
of sound policies and as a contributor to strong and
sustainable growth and investment. Exchange rate instability
has been a major cause of investment uncertainty and the cost
of cross-border investments. Currency stability supported by
strong fundamentals should encourage investment and growth
worldwide.
I look forward to working with you to improve the growth
trajectory for the global economy and for the benefit of all
Americans. Thank you. I am pleased to take any questions, Mr.
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Malpass can be found on page
26 of the appendix.]
Chairman Barr. Thank you, Mr. Under Secretary.
The Chair will recognize himself for an initial round of
questioning for 5 minutes.
You just touched on this but, Mr. Malpass, I do want to
revisit this issue of capital for the World Bank. As you know
and as you just said, the World Bank is considering a request
for a general capital increase, or GCI, in the amount of up to
tens of billions of dollars. But the bank has just had a
capital increase in 2010. Prior to the 2010 increase, it had
been 21 years since the previous GCI. So let me repeat that.
Twenty-one years.
Mr. Malpass, why should Congress even entertain the idea of
a World Bank capital increase just 7 years after the last one?
Mr. Malpass. So the World Bank has asked members to comment
to them, and so at this point it is not before your committee.
We have notified the committee last week, I think, that it
qualifies under the law as the potential for a negotiation with
the World Bank.
My view is that there needs to be substantial amount of
information from the World Bank on what they are thinking.
Specifically, there was the mention of the graduation policy.
You know, the World Bank has 25 countries now above the per
capita limit or trigger point for their lending. China itself
was the biggest borrower in 2017. It has a per capita income of
nearly $12,000 versus the trigger point of under $7,000 for the
World Bank.
So I think the World Bank has a lot of work to do before we
are at the point of discussing with the committee an actual
capital increase.
Chairman Barr. To that point, the subcommittee has
examined, in addition to the China issue, management failures
of the World Bank that really are unacceptable to any
development organization, and that is why this committee marked
up, out of this committee, the World Bank Accountability Act by
a unanimous vote of 60 to 0.
One of the problems we found was that, for decades, the
bank faced criticism for incentivizing staff to generate loans
as opposed to actually evaluating the results of reducing
poverty. These aren't even external critiques, they come from
the bank's own management reviews and internal evaluations.
So why should Congress put more money into the World Bank
if it doesn't even evaluate staff according to its impact on
poverty?
Mr. Malpass. Yes. The metrics--these are, I think, areas
that need to be discussed firmly with the World Bank. One
metric that they should be looking at is how many countries
actually graduate from borrowing status at the bank. Instead,
their track record has been to try to keep countries borrowing
as long as possible as part of the effort to raise the loan
totals.
Getting that mindset changed, that success at the World
Bank means countries do well enough to not need borrowing from
the World Bank, that change alone would be huge and I think is
necessary.
Chairman Barr. Final question, and this is shifting to a
different topic related to the Administration's efforts to
advance U.S. interest in international negotiations. Two
distinguished former members of this committee, Scott Garrett
and Spencer Bachus, have been nominated by the President to the
board of the Export-Import Bank. As you know, many supporters
of EXIM state that foreign export subsidies make the United
States export credit agency a necessary evil. On the other
hand, the Obama Administration showed no interest in taking a
hard line to negotiate these subsidies down.
So what are your priorities as the new under secretary for
global export subsidy negotiations, and how will the
Administration go about advancing the interests of U.S.
businesses?
Mr. Malpass. In the ideal, and to Ms. Moore's well-
articulated points, if we are going to get to a situation where
there is a higher real median income for people around the
world, which is a way to address income inequality, if you can
bring up the median, that usually means you have brought up
most of the people in a society, and that is very important. I
think the best way to do that is to have markets functioning. A
challenge here is governments like to function even when
markets are functioning.
So for the World Bank, we want it to be very careful not to
be crowding out the private sector. One could say the same
about the Export-Import Bank. Just this week, the African
Development Bank is considering equipment financing for the
purchase of airlines--of airplanes in Africa. That raises very
real concerns, because equipment financing, which is at the
shorter end of the curve, is available in plentiful capacity
around the world.
So you have a government organization, in effect, moving
into an area where private sector could operate. So I will make
the same point on EXIM Bank. It is going to be a real challenge
to have it provide financing where financing would not
otherwise be available. I have questions whether that can
really be done effectively.
Chairman Barr. Thank you for your answers.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Wisconsin, the
Ranking Member, Ms. Moore.
Ms. Moore. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Sir, I want to start at the United States before I go
globally here. I was looking at your testimony, and you said
that the IMF forecast that was released earlier this week
talked about the growth in the global economy that is gaining
momentum. But the outlook for the United States' economy has
weakened.
Back to some of the comments that I made on opening, I am
just asking, what occurs to me is that what might help our
growth is a comprehensive immigration policy where people are
not working undercover, but they are actually openly
contributing. Maybe a trillion dollars over the next decade
from immigration reform. Infrastructure, which I understand the
World Bank has been advising the Trump Administration on how to
go forward with that. Certainly, taking these students out of
debt as opposed to giving the wealthiest people in our country
a tax cut that they don't need. What about helping people get
out of debt so that they can buy homes, so that they can use
money in other ways, so that we can incentivize kids to go into
physics and create the next generation of whatever, instead of
being--not being able to do it?
Why don't you see investing in people as being the number
one method of growing our economy?
Mr. Malpass. Thank you. Well, I do see investing in people
as being very important for countries to grow, and that can be
done in many ways. That is done at the home, that is done in
schools, in primary schools, in secondary schools, and so on. I
think some countries around the world are making good progress
in that area. I met--
Ms. Moore. Do you think it would help the U.S. economy, for
us to do that?
Mr. Malpass. Well, we invest, in dollar terms, probably
more than almost anyone in the world. So a challenge also is
making it effective, making it effective so that literacy is
higher, so that people have skills that can be used in the
current economy. That is one of the--
So as we think about where the Administration is trying to
get reforms, these include reforms in the education area that
would allow skills to be added to.
But I want to go back to your original point of the IMF's
forecast for global growth accelerating, which is good, and
looking at the U.S. not accelerating in their forecast view.
That gets right to the core of where economics is. There is, at
the IMF, sometimes, the view that taxes don't matter so much in
how people allocate capital or how they choose their education,
how they interact with companies. My view is that tax systems
matter a lot.
So the IMF has explicitly said that the tax reform being
considered in the U.S. won't be that instrumental. I think that
goes--
Ms. Moore. All right. Let me move on. I have 1 minute, 30
seconds.
Mr. Malpass. Yes.
Ms. Moore. Trickle down historically has not worked, so if
it works this time, I will be happy to say we are wrong, but it
hasn't worked. It has just created deficits.
I was here in 2008 when Lehman Brothers collapsed. What are
the most serious risks facing the global economy today, and
what should we do to ensure stability in the global economy?
Mr. Malpass. Yes. Thank you. So that was a terrible period
for the world that hurt not only financial markets, but they
had hurt real people, and so I share that concern. That is part
of what government does and should do in terms of looking for
vulnerabilities in the world economy.
I guess one that is relevant to us today is
overindebtedness by countries around the world.
Ms. Moore. We are overindebted in the United States. So is
this a time to give tax breaks to rich people, considering that
we are in debt, $1.5 trillion?
Mr. Malpass. So I think it is time to push for faster
growth than what we have been experiencing. So the U.S. has
been in a very slow--
Ms. Moore. Faster growth. Maybe infrastructure instead of
tax cuts?
Mr. Malpass. I think the biggest obstacle to faster growth
right now is the corporate tax rate is 35 percent.
Ms. Moore. People don't pay that. Some corporations pay
nothing.
Mr. Malpass. Yes. But even if their effective rate is below
the 35 percent, they are often employing rafts of lawyers in
order to reduce that effective rate. The statutory rate of 35
percent blocks investment in the U.S. and job creation in the
U.S., and it is a powerful deterrent.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the Vice Chair of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here this
morning and for your testimony on the Administration's
priorities for international financial institutions. We
appreciate your service.
The International Monetary Fund's bailout in the aftermath
of the Greek debt crisis has left Greece in a predictable
situation. They are still hundreds of billions of euros in
debt, and there is an unlikely repayment for the IMF and the
European partners. As you are well aware, when a country joins
the International Monetary Fund, they are assigned a quota,
which dictates the percentage of their GDP that they can borrow
annually or cumulatively. The rates allow for a country to
borrow 145 percent of their quota each year and up to 435
percent of their GDP. These guardrails are in place to protect
a country from being overcome with debt and foreseeably an
inability to repay. However, in Greece, the IMF authorized over
3,000 percent in the wake of the government debt crisis.
So, Mr. Secretary, using Greece as an example, what are the
lessons learned in terms of the IMF lending to a member nation
during a financial crisis? How might the United States use its
voting power within the IMF to ensure that a similar bailout
never occurs again?
Mr. Malpass. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Williams. That was an
exceptional period for Europe, and the IMF provided what they
call exceptional financing. Those rules, to some extent, have
changed since then. If we look back on that period, my concern
and criticism was that the program that was prescribed for
Greece wasn't focused and wasn't implemented very well. So you
ended up in this very difficult situation of people lending
huge amounts of money, new money, to Greece, without the growth
reforms that would actually make it worthwhile.
I guess a good response is, I don't expect that to happen
again under the current rules that are at play in the IMF.
There has been a change in the IMF's thinking about whether
that would be a good idea. So we can look back on 2010 and say,
mistakes were made, but one of those was the amount of money
lent. But I think, very importantly, the structural reforms
simply were not focused and were not implemented in Greece. So
that we can do a better job into the future if there is another
crisis.
Mr. Williams. Thank you. Mr. Secretary, in your testimony
you state that the U.S. benefits from freer, more prosperous
neighbors, trading partners, and like-minded societies around
the world. I fully agree with your statement that highlights
the importance of acting in the self-interest of the United
States to unlock all of these benefits.
So the previous Administration did not prioritize the
reform and modernization of things like NAFTA or World Bank. So
as we begin to do so under the Trump Administration, can you
briefly summarize why negotiating these agreements are so
important to the American taxpayer and business?
Mr. Malpass. Yes, sir. As I mentioned in the testimony,
there is a place for multilateralism. So as we think about
cooperation on a world basis, it is vital that the U.S. play a
leadership role and be involved, and that is what we plan to
do. The question is, how do you keep those organizations
focused? That is a tough challenge that their tendency is to
grow as much as it can, and that ends up costing money to the
U.S. taxpayer and diluting their mission so they are not
actually accomplishing what they were set out to do.
So the way I can try to influence that is in the work of
Treasury. My group in Treasury alone has nearly 100
organizations and workstreams that we have staffed that travel
to, spend time on, work on--and so one of our goals is to
downsize the sprawl, the sprawl that has occurred in this
particular area of government. That allows us then to focus
harder on the things that really matter.
One of them that is important to me is that programs,
country programs, focus on how do you bring up the median
income. You know, these organizations have often prescribed
programs to countries, and you could look at the program and
say, if the country does that program, the median income, the
average guy in the country is going to go downhill, not uphill.
Why would you want to do that?
We can look at actual programs and try to have them focus
on raising real median income. That is one of my goals.
Mr. Williams. Thank you for your response. I yield my time.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman.
Mr. Sherman. Mr. Under Secretary, we do have a stake in
economic growth worldwide. On the other hand, the World Bank
can cost us money, at least we have to put money into it. One
way we can promote economic growth worldwide is for us to sign
tax treaties with countries that stand ready to do that with
us.
I realize this is an inch outside your portfolio, but I
hope you will go back to the Treasury Department and reiterate
that the Republic of Armenia is ready to sit down now and sign
pretty much our model tax treaty. The fact that we can't get a
tax lawyer to take a meeting is hurting the very efforts you
are here to promote, which--and, by the way, would not only
cost us nothing, but would actually add to the U.S. economy.
As the Export-Import Bank was mentioned, and I will point
out that the Export-Import Bank has a different mission; it is
promoting American exports. Very often it will make a loan
where the buyer could get a loan somewhere else, just the lower
rate on the Export-Import loan is designed to get them to buy
the American goods.
I am disturbed that China is borrowing from the World Bank.
Are these loans to the sovereign government or do they tend to
be to entities? Because I have seen U.S. businesses do business
in China, and once an entity owes you money, it goes out of
business, and then you go bankrupt--so is there this credit
risk from lending to shell entities or what could become shell
entities in China? Do you know?
Mr. Malpass. Mr. Sherman, those are all very good points.
So, in China, my understanding is quite a bit of the bank's
lending now is below the sovereign level. That means to what in
the U.S. would be State and local governments, in China it is
different terminology, but some--
Mr. Sherman. Does the national government guarantee these
loans? If they are not willing to take the risk, why should the
World Bank?
Mr. Malpass. Yes. So--China has been through waves of, call
them bailouts or crises at the sub-Federal level. In the 1980's
and 1990's there was a big one called the IDIX. There was a
JEDIC failure, and there was a partial bailout by the Federal
Government. In terms of the loans that are now being made by
the World Bank, they are often guaranteed by a big enough
entity that the credit risk is bought down in effect. But then
that gets into the point of what benefits is there--
Mr. Sherman. If these--
Mr. Malpass. --If you have a good borrower, right?
Mr. Sherman. If these are good projects, the national
government of China can borrow an awful lot of money on the
U.S. markets and lend it to its own local entities.
Mr. Malpass. To take the World Bank's side just for a
moment, they would say, yes, but think of all that they learn
at the local level by having us come and visit them. Our role
and your role and the committee's role is to say, wait a
minute, can the U.S. taxpayer really do that, and why does that
country need?
Mr. Sherman. If the Chinese want the World Bank to visit
them, they will pay for the airplane ticket and listen to the
advice. If the visit is imposed upon them--I have had a lot of
clients where the banker needed to talk to them before they
made the loan, but they weren't listening, they just took the
loan.
Currency manipulation. One of our objectives in
renegotiating NAFTA deals with currency manipulation. Has
Canada or China in recent memory manipulated the currencies?
Mr. Malpass. I am sorry, sir, what is the question?
Mr. Sherman. Has either Canada or Mexico manipulated its
currency in recent memory?
Mr. Malpass. So the Treasury does a twice-a-year report on
currency manipulation and did not find that either had
manipulated their currency. But the point is part of trade
promotion authority. Congress passed authority to the Federal
Government--to the Executive Branch, and that includes a
requirement that we look at currency manipulation.
Mr. Sherman. Well, one country that does manipulate its
currency, according to many, is China. Is that the same report
that says that China isn't manipulating its currency and hasn't
recently?
Mr. Malpass. Yes, sir, same report.
Mr. Sherman. We are paying money for that report?
Mr. Malpass. That report is generated by Treasury, and,
yes, the taxpayer is paying money for people to generate that.
But to your--
Mr. Sherman. You know, with Amazon, I can download fiction
for like a buck or two a book. A report from the Department of
Treasury saying that China is not and has not recently
manipulated its currency would be in the fantasy section of the
fiction offerings of any bookstore online or brick and mortar.
Mr. Malpass. So in the past, China did manipulate its
currency. It becomes important in your question of what is
recently. So the report that comes out from Treasury is within
this last year. Our finding is, under the way that report is
set up, China did not manipulate its currency. I--
Mr. Sherman. That is slightly less fanciful than perhaps
some other reports, but it is still in the fiction section.
I yield back.
Mr. Malpass. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Barr. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
I appreciate members' indulgence in allowing me to allow that
exchange to continue a little bit longer.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan,
Chairman Huizenga.
Mr. Huizenga. Mr. Malpass, good to see you again.
Mr. Malpass. Very good to see you, sir.
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. Actually, if you want to take 30
seconds, if you want to finish that thought out. I think there
is bipartisan concern about China's past, certainly attempts at
currency manipulation and the charges that they have been out
there. So if you wanted to finish that thought, we can take a
few moments here.
Mr. Malpass. I think relevant to us now is President Trump
is very aware of the past problems that burdened our trading
relationship with China, and that's a subject of his visit to
China, which is coming up later this week.
To Mr. Sherman's point, I think we could all agree that
there are problems that were occurring. Our goal now is to
avoid that kind of problem going forward. China, I think their
currency practices have changed a lot in recent years.
Mr. Huizenga. I am going to move on to a couple of other
things here in the remaining few moments. In a report on the
European Stability Mechanism earlier this year by Transparency
International, a report that the ESM welcomed, one should add,
the ESM is twice described as a lender of last resort. The
report concludes that during its interventions, and this is a
quote from the report, ``The ESM emerged as a lender of last
resort for euro area sovereigns facing serious bond market
pressures.''
So if the ESM is truly the lender of last resort in Greece
or other places, then presumably the IMF wasn't. In addition,
the fund's involvement in the country over the course of 7
years showed it is not in the business of quickly resolving
balance of payments crises.
So my question is this. How does the Trump Administration
get the IMF back to its core mission ensuring that its programs
are independent, effective, and, maybe more importantly,
temporary?
Mr. Malpass. Yes. Good point. So at the peak in 2011, the
IMF had committed 70 percent of its quota, and that included
the exceptional access that we discussed to Greece. Now, that
number today is under 25 percent. So the IMF is much more
liquid, because Greece has repaid a lot of those loans. So I
think our challenge is--
Mr. Huizenga. But they were not the intended target,
correct? European nations like that were not the intended
target of the IMF?
Mr. Malpass. That is correct. So that was done in 2010, and
we can look back and say, maybe that wasn't the way to go. So
our challenge today is, going forward, would we do that again?
I think the answer is no. Then, do we have the capability to
help the IMF figure out that decision properly this time
around? I think the answer is yes.
Mr. Huizenga. I know that there is a reluctance. I know
that there is a reluctance with the IMF. They did not feel
good, or many within the organization didn't feel good about
that.
But I am kind of curious also, I want to talk very briefly
about the regional financing arrangements. You know, the latest
entry is the contingent reserve arrangement, which is China,
Russia, India, South Africa. What kind of rules or principles
do you think that the IMF should follow and put in place as it
determines limits of future cooperation with these regional
groups?
Mr. Malpass. The IMF is trying to think about what its role
is with those regional groups, and so we can help them think
about that. As you think about a global crisis, and we
discussed earlier, I think we want to look for vulnerabilities
in the world system. We can wonder what order--if there were a
crisis, in what order would people tap their emergency reserve?
So, a first reserve, often is a central bank, a second
reserve is international reserves of a country, and then in
these regional relationships, they can tap that fund that has
been set up. This gets into your point, the lender of last
resort is the ESM, the European Stability Mechanism, truly the
lender of last resort in Europe. Well, it is a finite fund. It
is not large, compared to the debt of Europe. In reality, I
think there are more lenders of last resort in Europe.
So as we look at each of the individual regional
relationships, I think we want to look at what is in U.S.
National interest and our role in the IMF in seeing inside
those regional groupings.
Mr. Huizenga. Mr. Chairman, with your indulgence, I just--
maybe we can follow up in writing on a few of those sort of
rules and principles. I would love to learn more where Treasury
is headed with that.
So, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Malpass. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Pittenger.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you, Chairman Barr. Thank you Under
Secretary Malpass for being with us today and providing your
testimony before the committee.
Mr. Under Secretary, according to remarks given by the
World Bank president, Jim Yong Kim, quote: ``The World Bank
group very proudly supports the Government of China's
ambitious, unprecedented effort to light up that night sky,''
end of quote.
Referring to the Chinese efforts to the One Belt, One Road
initiative.
The One Belt, One Road initiative connects China with over
60 nations on a transcontinental scale that collectively
accounts for 62 percent of the world's population and 30
percent of global GDP. This initiative, if completed, will
result in the expansion of China's trade and global influence
at, frankly, an alarming rate.
Does the Administration support President Kim's praise of
the One Belt, One Road initiative?
Mr. Malpass. No, sir. So the problems with One Belt, One
Road are several fold. One is that a lot of the financing that
China is providing is coming from its State-owned institutions
and is not provided at terms that are reasonable to the
borrower, and that will be arms-length in terms of the
relationship. An even bigger problem is many of the contracts
that come out of those projects are not--not market-based
contracts, meaning, you are often going to see Chinese
suppliers putting the money in for excessive government money,
Chinese Government money that is setting up the contracts. So
you end up with projects that are not in the best interest of
the countries that are the borrowers.
What we would rather see the World Bank talking about is
creating good quality projects. I think Mr. Barr, in his
opening statement, made the point that the quality of the
development finance and the projects has to be improved. That
is where I would put that.
Mr. Pittenger. Yes. Back in the 1990's, as you would well
recall, we granted China most-favored nation trading status.
Looking back, do you believe that this was the right response,
the right initiative? It was a bipartisan effort. It was
something that was initiated by Jimmy Carter many years ago,
and advocated by many Presidents, and finally with President
Clinton and the Republican House, they consummated that.
At the end of the day, we took a fledgling country and that
was basically a garden snake and made it into a boa
constrictor. We have a $350 billion annual deficit with them,
at least in 2016 that was the number.
How do you relate to our role and our responsibility
relative to China and concerns that many of us have regarding
human rights, religious liberties, freedoms of conscience,
things that we believe are an anathema to our society and our
culture, and yet we have allowed that to go unabated, in
essence, in our continual support for them?
Mr. Malpass. So if we roll the dial back into the 1970's
and 1980's as that process started it was called most favored
nation, but what it often meant was normal trading relations. I
think, as the U.S. was--
Mr. Pittenger. They applied for it every year until they
were granted that.
Mr. Malpass. Until they were granted. We were in the midst
of the cold war. There was the idea that China could be an
offset, and so there was a process toward MFN that was set out.
I guess what I would--if we look back, I think mistakes
were made at many points in the relationship with China. One of
the focuses now is, as it entered the World Trade Organization,
which that was done in the 1990's, and we ended up with a
relationship that is not reciprocal.
The President will be discussing that this week a lot; that
we have ended up in a situation, in part, due to their entry
into the Word Trade Organization and how that was done, that is
unbalanced. That ends up with them having better access to the
U.S. Market and better ability to invest in the U.S. than we
have.
Mr. Pittenger. I think this gets back to the point that I
made at the beginning, that their ability to launch this major
initiative that connects 60 countries, frankly, was generated
by our support and our efforts on their behalf.
Mr. Malpass. Yes. It is troubling that the multilateral
development banks or the heads of them, and it is not just Mr.
Kim, but some of the others have made similar statements
currying favor with China, and that is troubling. Because I
think there are better ways to do development than that.
Mr. Pittenger. Thank you. My time has expired.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Washington, Mr.
Heck.
Mr. Heck. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Under Secretary Malpass, thanks for coming today. Although
I believe the international financial institutions are
tremendously important, I want to use my time today to discuss
the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States, or
CFIUS.
I raised this issue when Secretary Mnuchin came to talk to
us in July, and I was pleased to see him agree that CFIUS
reform was a pressing issue, and that he was prepared to work
in a bipartisan manner to fix it. When I met with Assistant
Secretary Tarbert a few weeks ago to discuss this issue, he
affirmed your intention to work in a bipartisan way on CFIUS.
So I have heard a lot of commitments thus far for
bipartisanship, but so far, I have been extremely disappointed
in you. You have not followed through on those commitments. I
have offered constructive suggestions and asked technical
questions about Treasury's position on a number of CFIUS-
related issues for the last 2 months, and never received a
single substantive response. Not one.
If Treasury wants to move forward with this issue in a
bipartisan way, you need to do a better job of following
through on your commitments. I plan to file several CFIUS-
related questions for the record after today's hearings, as I
want to be sure any future committee action is informed by
Treasury's views.
So, Mr. Assistant Secretary, will you commit to providing a
response to my questions by December 8th, 1 month from today?
Mr. Malpass. Hello and good morning, Mr. Heck. So with
regard to the process that is going on, as I understand it,
Senator Cornyn and Senator Feinstein have--
Mr. Heck. Again, completely unresponsive to my question.
Will you answer my questions in a substantive fashion within 1
month, or just admit for the public record you are not
interested in working in a bipartisan way?
Mr. Malpass. We are interested in working in--
Mr. Heck. Will you provide substantive answers within 1
month?
Mr. Malpass. You know, there will be a full committee
process with the Banking Committee on the Senate side and the
Financial Services Committee on the House side.
As far as the 1-month deadline, I haven't seen how many
questions you are going to do, and that is my--I will commit to
doing our best efforts with the questions that you provide,
yes, sir.
Mr. Heck. I think it is urgent that we address this issue,
and I hope we can move forward in a bipartisan way. You have
not performed to date. Full stop. Period.
I believe we should stay laser-focused on passing
legislation, which addresses our core national security
vulnerabilities, before we talk about or if ever we talk about
asking CFIUS to weigh economic questions.
I believe both Congress and the Administration have a
responsibility to make sure that CFIUS is adequately resourced,
both to make sure we can identify a risk with particular
transactions, but also to ensure that transactions, which are
not problematic, can flow smoothly.
Given the tremendous power the CFIUS statute vests in the
President and the Executive Branch, and the bipartisan concerns
which have been raised about how that discretion has been used
in the past, I believe it is important that any CFIUS
legislation ensure accountability and transparency to Congress,
and to the greatest extent possible, by extension, to the
public, for how that power is actually being used.
At the same time, while I am concerned about giving the
Executive Branch too much discretion on a transaction-by-
transaction basis, at the strategic level, I do recognize that
the Executive Branch can move more quickly in reacting to new
tactics used to evade CFIUS review. I want to make sure you
have the appropriate tools to do that because, frankly, I see a
disturbing trend in the use of those tools to evade CFIUS
evasion--or review, rather.
This issue is only going to get bigger going forward. I
would caution you that, if we want to adopt the reforms
necessary in order to most safeguard or best safeguard our
country, the sturdiest way to do that is by working in a
bipartisan way, and you haven't.
So I believe that the principles provide a strong basis for
us to work together, which is, frankly, why I find it
inexplicable that your department has not engaged in any
substantive way. I hope you will do better. I think the country
needs for you to do better. This isn't about partisanship. This
is about doing the best by the people of this country to help
keep us secure. You have a role in that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. With that, I yield back the balance
of my time.
Mr. Malpass. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Minnesota, Mr.
Emmer.
Mr. Emmer. Welcome, Mr. Under Secretary.
I want to take a little different approach. I want to go
back to your written testimony. Just to put it in context, I am
a big supporter of foreign assistance, and I recognize the
humanitarian and national security benefits. However, when we
have more than $20 trillion in debt, the assistance that we
provide must be smart and effective. I think that is what you
were trying to outline, or at least that is what I got from
your written testimony.
In your written testimony at page 4, you have a paragraph
that begins with a statement that: The role of the multilateral
development banks has to change dramatically so that they focus
less on the volume of finance they provide and more on the goal
of providing high-quality services that are not available
elsewhere.
Then you continue that the MDBs must improve the tools and
methods they use to analyze additionally, guard against
crowding out, maximize development impact, and you have some
other suggestions there.
When I went to the next page of your testimony, it looked
to me like what you were suggesting really was they should
provide, in an efficient and smart method, assistance to allow
customer countries in need to develop projects that are going
to improve their economic position. But the policies that the
Trump Administration is trying to put in place would wean them
off, hopefully, of the public assistance so that they could
start to not only become self-sufficient, but access private
capital. Do I have that correct?
Mr. Malpass. Exactly right, sir. That was better put than I
included in my testimony. The difficulty with that--so as we
talk about the quality of the services provided by the MDBs,
one thing is they are often very expensive. So you are hiring
people from around the world and paying them very high
salaries, and then trying to have them interface with countries
that are far away, that are very different from their own
countries, and that proves to just be a difficult task. How do
you add value?
That gets into this idea, especially as more and more of
the value that they are doing is not infrastructure finance,
the way it was in the old days, but it is actual technical
services on how they can do a better job with their accounting
system for their pension, for their social safety net. Those
are plain hard to do. It raises the question, can you really
have a government--if my government advises your government,
are you really going to get the value that you are charging?
Mr. Emmer. So how would you fix that?
Mr. Malpass. One is the graduation policy. So one of the
things that we have to get the World Bank to do is let
countries stop borrowing so that those resources are more
available to the countries that actually are in need. It has
resisted doing that.
You know, from their standpoint, they are trying to get
their lending totals up, so they want to lend to China and to
big borrowers. Brazil is a big brother. Getting them to break
that circle is one of our goals.
Then another is simply the pipeline of loans. You know,
right now, it is not very transparent, and there was some
discussion of that. So I think actually getting people to dig
into the loans and say this kind of loan isn't actually going
to help the country.
I mentioned earlier the IMF role--they work together, IMF
and World Bank--and having it be focused. If you look at a
country, what are the two or three things that are most
important for them to do, and then let's see a program that
actually operates on them.
Because, for example, the World Bank recently made a $400
million loan to Turkey. When you look--and we opposed the loan,
but it goes forward anyway. When you look at the loan, it was
diffused. They doled out money to a lot of different government
agencies in Turkey, and you can just imagine what happened to
that money.
Mr. Emmer. Not necessarily for infrastructure?
Mr. Malpass. That was not infrastructure. That was what
they call assistance--government assistance loans. So then you
wonder, from the taxpayer--U.S. taxpayer standpoint, how is
that in our national interest, and how do we create an
organization that won't bring forward that kind of loan?
Mr. Emmer. Well, I see my time is running out. We look
forward to your recommendations as you go forward, and we look
forward to working with you on trying to put them into effect.
Thank you.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Davidson.
Mr. Davidson. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Malpass, thank you for being here. Thanks for your
expertise. It is good to know you are onboard there at
Treasury, and I look forward to the work that you guys can
accomplish, particularly with our international relationships
with IMF and the World Bank.
As we put capital into this--and we continually hear calls
for more capital, from donor nations, like the United States,
to help others. So at some form it is redistributive across the
global system.
We have talked a little bit about--our Ranking Member
talked about income distribution around the world. Have you had
a chance to assess how effective the World Bank and the IMF
have been doing at improving things?
You just mentioned Turkey distributed capital, but really
fundamentally promoting capitalism versus socialism. At some
point, are we subsidizing failed economic models in some of the
developing economies we are helping?
Mr. Malpass. I think the answer is yes to that, and so then
a question is how do we change that. The problem is--now, not
to get too ideological, but we can think of a spectrum from
capitalism to socialism and say different types of loans would
fall in different spots along that.
If we define socialism as the idea of either ownership or
operation by a government of various services, a lot of the
lending is going in that direction. My analysis of that or the
way you can quantify that is real median income doesn't go up
under those circumstances. Real median income is the middle--
the amount earned by the middle of the society.
A primary goal should be getting that to go up, as opposed
to the rich going up, as opposed to--so getting that to go up.
A lot of these loans are simply not doing that, and so we see,
I think, a lag.
Now, to be self-critical of the U.S., we saw the odd
situation in the 2009, 2010, and 2011. We had an economic
recovery going here, but real median income was actually
falling in the U.S. So we had programs in place that are high
tax rates that the rich can avoid better than average people
can avoid. So you end up having a bias in the system that
caused real median income to actually go down in the U.S.,
which is the first time in history that we have seen a recovery
where the average guy did worse. So we can work to avoid that
in other countries.
Mr. Davidson. So in 2012, the IMF's charter expanded to
take into account all issues, all financial sector issues that
bear on global stability of the financial system, originally
more focused on a system of exchange rates, international
payments. Do you see any issues with that shift in focus, or
what are the implications as that shift has occurred?
Mr. Malpass. Sir, I am not as familiar with that shift. One
of the things going on often is the institutions often say what
they think the donors want to hear in--and then that was part
of--if that was an IMF shift, you remembered they were trying
to get the U.S. to put money in. At that time, there was a
major quota increase that had been negotiated. I think it may
be--have related to that. But then, as soon as the money comes
in, which it did in 2016 from the U.S., the quota increase was
concluded, then the institution loses its focus. So maybe we
can discuss that.
Mr. Davidson. Right. When you look at the effectiveness of
some of the things they are doing, whether it is the type of
capital system they are supporting or the scope of the other
metrics they are trying to apply--I guess, one of the big
things that is at the center of this balance of payments that
the International Monetary Fund helps facilitate is flow of
goods and services, flow of capital, intellectual property, via
a common means of exchange. Working capital is one of those
things that is facilitated. Frankly, it is one of the things
that countries do that distort behavior as well and the fact
that they--in their trade relationships subsidize some of that
trade.
So how do you view our role in influencing a more market-
oriented behavior?
Mr. Malpass. I mentioned in my written statement that China
has--is a critical factor in this. They used to be liberalizing
in that they have--that has--that seems to have stalled or
reversed.
That gets very much into the question of how do you have
the world move in a market-based way that allows the payment
systems to allow the little guy in countries to actually get
access to credit? I think the IFIs, in general, could do a much
better job on that, despite the--I am not as familiar with the
reform that you are talking about.
They do look at the payment system. They are kind of aware
of this issue, but my impression is it is not the highest
priority. We should make it a much higher priority to find a
way that small businesses and average individuals, even in poor
countries, can find access to credit or to be part of the
financial system.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Hollingsworth.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Good morning. Thank you so much for
being here. I won't take my full 5 minutes.
I appreciate very much what you have said. A lot of what
you have said this morning, I couldn't agree with you more,
both on your responses with regard to potential tax reform, as
well as the continued conversation about how we ensure that
these bureaucracies around the world focus on the mission by
which they have been handed from their members and not their
own mission.
I especially love what you talked about in the sprawl of
bureaucracy. It is the duty of members and especially large
donor countries to ensure that the mission of that bureaucracy
isn't just its own expansion of power, its own expansion of
resources, but instead, the mission of ensuring, as you put it,
that median incomes around the world, and specifically in
countries that are being targeted, continue to go up in a
meaningful way. I certainly appreciate that.
I also like what you said about how, if we fail to do that
and we enable mission creep to where then we look at the World
Bank and the IMF to do a whole host of functions, the primary
function for which they are each responsible will be eroded
because we have resources that are now diversified over very
many functions or very many missions.
I certainly appreciate your work and effort toward that end
and ensuring, what I know Hoosiers back home are concerned
about domestically, regulatory bureaucracy that continues to
push forward its own expansion of power into the everyday lives
of Hoosiers back home and the businesses that they own,
operate, or work in, but also internationally how challenging
your environment in work, I am sure, is.
One of the reasons you, I am sure, mentioned median income
versus average is because you're trying to exclude outliers,
right?
Mr. Malpass. Yes.
Mr. Hollingsworth. You want to push back against some of
what Ms. Moore talked about with regard to inequality and focus
on the very middle individual in the income distribution in
pushing their income up.
I like what you said as well about making sure we do it in
a sustainable way. You can certainly ensure government gives
dollars to those individuals and their income will go up, but
it won't in a sustainable way, and focusing on those projects.
Is there anything else that I haven't covered that you
wanted to add that you have really pushed in your testimony
today?
Mr. Malpass. Thank you, sir. With regard to median income
versus average, you stated it exactly right. The importance of
that is, if we look at income inequality, the way it is often
done, you won't actually get--it is very complicated to
calculate. So allowing the IMF, the World Bank to actually
calculate median income and see if it is going up--
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Mr. Malpass. --That helps us a lot.
The one other point I would put is the importance of
dependable currencies, which I mentioned in my statement. For
too long, we have had the view and the IFIs allowed the view
that you could gain competitiveness by weakening your currency.
So the central bank got in the habit of printing money--
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Mr. Malpass. --That hurts, desperately hurts the median
income--
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Mr. Malpass. --Because your--the value of the money--so--
and we can see today, Venezuela, for example, is moving toward
hyperinflation.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes.
Mr. Malpass. Median incomes crashing because they don't
have money that average people can get to. Only rich people can
get to U.S. dollars--
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Mr. Malpass. --Preserve their capital.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Agreed.
I really applaud the work that you are doing and really
love the fact that you have a clear metric for success, I
think, in managing bureaucracies and in managing mission creep,
ensuring that you have a clear metric by which you are going to
determine every project, right, by which you are going to
determine success or failure for that bureaucracy. I think it
is hugely important and a very big step in the right direction.
So I appreciate your work.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Malpass. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the distinguished Ranking Member
of the full committee, the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Waters.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
I have a question for the Honorable David Malpass, Under
Secretary for International Affairs, and I thought I would come
and share with you my concern.
I am concerned by the statement in your testimony that the
United States is not expecting to make any future contributions
to the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program, and that
this program should be wound down with future reflows returned
to donors.
This program is a unique fund with a clear value added, and
is on target to reach 12 million farmers in the poorest
countries. I am struck by your claim that the MDBs could
continue these projects without separate donor support at the
same time that the Administration has proposed cuts across the
board at nearly every MDB, as well as massive proposed cuts in
our bilateral aid programs.
So this brings me to one strong disagreement I have with
your reform agenda, and, in particular, with the statement you
made in your testimony that reflects the Administration's
approach to international economic cooperation. You said that,
quote, ``Globalism and multilateralism have gone substantially
too far, to the point that they are hurting U.S. and global
growth,'' end quote.
Of course, I disagree with this. I don't think we have gone
too far at the international financial institutions. I don't
think we have done too much to help feed people in the world
who are starving, who are experiencing food insecurity. We have
not done too much to help alleviate desperate poverty and
suffering in other parts of the world, including that of
millions of children and other vulnerable people in Africa,
Latin America, and Asia who continue to go without food.
What do you know about the lack of a need for this kind of
assistance and that this assistance can be eliminated without
causing great harm?
Mr. Malpass. Yes. Thank you, Ms. Waters. Other parts of my
statement emphasized and explained how important it is for the
U.S. to be a leader in the world in finding ways to raise
people's living standards. We do that in a number of ways: We
do that by participating in organizations, by leading by
example where we can, and by being engaged. The U.S., I think,
remains--the U.S. is the world's largest economy and, in many
ways, remains the world's strongest leader in the poorest
countries, and will continue to do that.
So the sections that you highlighted are ones where we have
allowed multilateral organizations to take over that role, and
they don't do it very well in a lot of cases. So they spend a
lot of money. They are not very efficient. They are often
corrupt in their lending practices, and they don't get the
benefit to the actual people in the countries.
They get the benefit to the people that fly in on a first-
class airplane ticket to give advice to the government
officials in the country. That flow of money is large, but not
so much the actual benefit to normal people within poor
countries, and that is what I would like to see change.
Ms. Waters. Do you have an example of that?
Mr. Malpass. Well, for example, we have countries such as
South Africa that are deteriorating rapidly as their government
is unable to provide efficiency and effectiveness.
We have, of course, Venezuela. That is not so much an issue
for the international financial institutions in that they have
basically blocked themselves off from advice from outside for
years and years, which is unfortunate.
In the poor parts of Africa, we just saw Gambia have a--
there are numerous examples where countries that were closely
engaged with the multilateral financial institutions find
themselves going downhill.
Ms. Waters. I didn't understand the example of South
Africa. What was that? What were you trying to tell me?
Mr. Malpass. That South Africa is heavily indebted and not
making progress and is not being well served by its
relationships with the international financial institutions.
Ms. Waters. Any other examples?
Mr. Malpass. I mentioned a recent government turnover in
Gambia, which just comes to mind, where the international
community is trying to figure out what to do in a country that
has severe problems.
What is one--so we--so I work in countries around the
world. I am just back from Vietnam where I met with people,
with the Thai finance minister, and they are all engaged with
the international financial institutions. I have to tell you
that, in many cases, it is not benefiting the people of the
countries.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Barr. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr.
Hill.
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
David, it is good to see.
Mr. Malpass. Hello, Mr. Hill.
Mr. Hill. Welcome to the committee. It was a privilege to
both be younger and more handsome many years ago as we were
both deputy assistant secretaries for President Bush, 41, so it
is good to have you back in government in this important
position.
Mr. Malpass. Nice to see you.
Mr. Hill. I want to start out and talk a little bit about
this comment on multilateralism. With your deep experience, I
wondered if--what conversations you have had in the
Administration about the future of something like TPP (Trans-
Pacific Partnership), as we have the President in China today,
as a way to ring-fence and project American power in Asia. What
thoughts do you have there? What do you see is the
Administration's strategy on select use of multilateral trade
aspects?
Mr. Malpass. Thank you, sir. One challenge, as you get many
players involved, as was done with TPP, it becomes a hugely
difficult negotiation. I am giving you something on the
agreement that you are giving Mr. Barr something, and then in
TPP there were 11 countries each giving each other something,
and it became abstract. Then in the end, you get a deal that is
not going to benefit American workers.
So what the President has pointed out is that a more likely
way to get benefits for us is to have a bilateral--so two
countries talking together about how they can improve their
circumstances.
That is where we stand today. We are looking for--the U.S.
is looking for trading relationships that are fair and
reciprocal where we get benefit and the other trading partner
gets benefit for our workers and for their workers. That is
hard, but it should be doable. There are a lot of areas where
we can liberalize our markets if the other guy--if the other
country liberalizes their market.
Mr. Hill. Thank you.
One of my assignments when I was at Treasury, in those dark
ages, was in the area of technical assistance. This is an area
that reports to you at the Treasury, but also is so critical in
the development bank world we are talking about today. That
responsibility of effectively providing multilateral
assistance, development loans, or technical assistance has to
be done with the very best people and with the very best
accountability.
This subcommittee has investigated, over the years, this
horrible World Bank scandal in Uganda that really resulted in
sexual abuse of children, as well as safety problems, and the
World Bank's loan program there that resulted in five deaths.
It uncovered a real cesspool of management challenges,
personnel challenges in the World Bank.
My question for you is, how can the Treasury, as lead
director there, and America as a major contributor to the bank,
ensure that the bank's employment processes are a meritocracy?
What is your view on that?
Mr. Malpass. As I recall, sir, you were--you ran a medium-
sized bank, right, and so those challenges are ones that--you
are actually very well qualified to help give us thoughts on
how to do that.
So within these sprawling organizations, it really is very
hard. Once they have set their direction on growth, it is very
hard to keep the governance controls and the personnel controls
and so on and do them effectively. So my view on it is, if we
get the organizations to focus on the graduation policy,
meaning have a beginning and an end of a relationship with a
country that succeeds, if they get success, then they move on
and try to share that experience elsewhere. That will help the
focus of their mission.
So that is one, meaning, if you can simply stop expanding
for a moment, you can improve the quality of what you are
doing. So I guess that is where I stand on that. I take your
point well on--we don't know how deep the problems that you
identified there go in other country programs.
Mr. Hill. Well, there is strong bipartisan support, as
evidenced by our votes on this committee, to withhold funding
for our development banks if they don't cleanup their mission
and deliver on what we expect. So we have high expectations. We
appreciate your oversight, and thanks for being here today.
Mr. Malpass. Yes. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Barr. The gentleman yields back.
I would like to thank our witness for his testimony here
today. I appreciate your forthright answers. We certainly
appreciate your testimony here today, that the Administration
views successful international relationships that include
multilateral institutions, but that in order to promote a more
free and prosperous world, the international financial
institutions must have clear focused missions and deliver
results effectively and with accountability to participants.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing a now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

November 8, 2017
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
