- AN EXAMINATION OF THE VA OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL'S FINAL REPORT ON THE INAPPROPRIATE USE OF POSITION AND THE MISUSE OF THE RELOCATION PROGRAM AND INCENTIVES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN EXAMINATION OF THE VA OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL'S FINAL REPORT ON
THE INAPPROPRIATE USE OF POSITION AND THE MISUSE OF THE RELOCATION
PROGRAM AND INCENTIVES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-693                         WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN,
American Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, October 21, 2015

Page

An Examination of the VA Office of Inspector General's Final
Report on the Inappropriate Use of Position and the Misuse of
the Relocation Program and Incentives..........................     1

OPENING STATEMENT

Jeff Miller, Chairman............................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Linda Halliday, Deputy Inspector General, Office of Inspector
General, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs...................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    21
Mr. Danny Pummill, Principal Deputy Under Secretary for Benefits,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affair

Accompanied by:

Ms Diana Rubens, Director, Philadelphia and Wilmington Region
Office, VBA, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
Mr. Robert McKenrick, Director, Los Angeles Regional Office,
VBA,
U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
Ms. Kimberly Graves, Director, St. Paul Regional Office, VBA,
U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

And

Mr. Antione Waller, Director, Baltimore Regional Office, VBA,
U.S.
Department of Veteran Affairs

AN EXAMINATION OF THE VA OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL'S FINAL REPORT ON
THE INAPPROPRIATE USE OF POSITION AND THE MISUSE OF THE RELOCATION
PROGRAM AND INCENTIVES

----------

Wednesday, October 21, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives
Committee on Veterans' Affairs
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to other business, at 10:30
a.m., in Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff
Miller [chairman of the committee] presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JEFF MILLER

Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Walorski, Abraham,
Zeldin, Costello, Radewagen, Bost, Brown, Takano, Brownley,
Titus, Ruiz, Kuster, O'Rourke, Rice, McNerney, and Walz.
The Chairman. I first want to recognize a guest in the
audience. We have the National Commander Dale Barnett from
Georgia with us today.
Commander, thank you for your attendance and thank you for
your service. We thank you all for what The American Legion
does. And, Commander, thank you for your service and thank you
for being here with us today.
I think it is important for members to have an opportunity
to listen to the IG and what they found in their report as well
as the recommendations that they have made to the secretary.
This report lays out pretty clearly the intent of two
senior executives, Ms. Rubens and Ms. Graves, to move to
Philadelphia and St. Paul respectively, and that they appear to
have used their own positions of authority and their own
relationships with the former under secretary to their
advantage.
Also according to the report, two subordinates, Mr. Waller
and Mr. McKenrick, were then forced to move to positions they
did not desire leaving their positions open for their
superiors.
The report concluded that not only did Ms. Rubens and Ms.
Graves use their positions to inappropriately make these RO
director positions available, they also manipulated the
relocation system to spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to
move to their respective locations.
I want to make it clear that based on our reading of VA's
policy prior to this IG report that the relocation program was
available for all SES employees within the department, which by
the way I believe is an abuse of taxpayer dollars. Regardless,
I understand that since Ms. Rubens and Ms. Graves are both SES
employees they are both eligible to receive this program under
that policy.
The report, however, makes it very clear that the IG
believes they orchestrated the whole transfer for their own
personal and financial gain. Last April we first discussed VA's
relocation program, specifically Ms. Rubens' move, a move in
which she received more than $288,000 in relocation expenses,
and we requested the IG to look into allegations concerning
financial benefits and preferences that may have been given.
Until the IG report came out in September the department
strongly supported Ms. Rubens' move and her role in her
official capacity in Philadelphia. It was not until the report
came out that VA decided to backpedal on this and concur with
all of the IG's recommendations. As I said before, this report
is damning and it deserves to be examined by this committee.
We cannot the request the IG to do an investigation, a
thorough one at that, and then once they are done refuse to do
anything about it while we await actions on the department's
behalf. That is why we are here this morning. This is our role
as an oversight committee. We are not here to hold VA's hand
and bend to their every request. That has happened far too
often in the past under both parties and has contributed to the
current situation that we are in. We are here to look at the
facts before us and to fairly ask the right questions to ensure
transparency between this committee, the department, and the
American public.
Although our other witnesses are not here today, we will
hear from the VA Office of the Inspector General and I hope all
members will take this opportunity to learn more about what is
in the final report and the recommendations that have been made
to the Secretary.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown, do you have any comments before
Ms. Halliday begins?
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown, you are recognized.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. This morning we will be considering a report issued by
the VA Inspector General on September 28th, 2015 regarding the
inappropriate use of the position and misuse of reallocation
programs and incentives. I am very concerned about the
allegations contained in this report. I also believe that VA
employees deserve to have a process that is fair and enable
them to process necessarily to reach a fair conclusion. I have
urged the Secretary to take suitable action after the VA has
considered all of the evidence.
The VA is still in the process of making a determination. I
understand the sensitive nature of this decision and I want to
stress again that I am not urging a certain action but rather
that a suitable action be taken at the appropriate time. I know
that all members of this committee realize the sensitive nature
of this morning's hearing and the balance we are trying to take
between the committee's important oversight duties and the VA's
ongoing investigation of these matters.
I look forward to the discussion of the VA IG's report on
this matter. We know that the vast majority of all Veterans
Benefits Administration employees, many of them veterans
themselves, work hard everyday to provide veterans with the
benefits they have earned. This is why the allegations and
conclusions of this IG report is so troubling. We need to work
together to ensure all Veterans employees, from senior leaders
to front line employees, know that they will be rewarded for
working hard and that any abuse of a position or authority will
simply not be tolerated.
So let us discuss the VA IG reports. We are also waiting
the VA determination regarding the issue raised in this report
and the results of the VA review of incentive and relocation
processes. This is the area where the committee has a direct
oversight interest in to make sure that relocation incentives
are used properly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Brown. Thank you
again members for being here. With us this morning is Ms. Linda
Halliday, Deputy Inspector General, if you would, Ms. Halliday,
please come up, with the VA Office of the Inspector General. We
have heard her testimony on other issues in the past. We
appreciate you being here today. And you are recognized for
five minutes for your opening statement. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT OF MS. LINDA HALLIDAY

Ms. Halliday. Thank you. Mr. Chairman and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss the results
of the OIG's recently published report on the use of the
relocation program and incentives within VBA. The report
detailed results of our administrative investigation of
allegations that VBA senior executives inappropriately used
their position for personal and financial benefit and that VBA
misused the VA relocation program for the benefit of its senior
executive service workforce.
Our statements and comments will be limited in order to
preclude any allegation that our testimony unduly influenced VA
or the Department of Justice regarding potential administrative
or criminal action.
I am accompanied by Mr. Nick Dahl, the Director of the
OIG's Bedford Office of Audits and Evaluations; and Ms. Linda
Fournier, Director of the OIG's Administrative Investigation
Office.
In March this committee and the Senate Veterans' Affairs
Committee requested we review allegations concerning the
relocation of a VBA headquarters senior executive to the
position of the Philadelphia VARO Director. The allegation
included questions about the relocation package and the
retention of salary, even though the VARO Director position had
decreased responsibilities. We were also asked to conduct a
broader review of VA's permanent change of station, or PCS,
relocation expense program.
I would first like to share some background information.
The federal travel regulation states that an employee
transferring in the interest of government from one agency or
duty station to another for permanent duty that is located at
least 50 miles from their duty station is eligible for
relocation expense allowance. Examples of the relocation
expenses include transportation, shipment and storage of
household goods, real estate expenses. Employees can also be
eligible for temporary quarters, subsistence expense, which
would include temporary lodging, meals and tips, dry cleaning
expenses.
Federal agencies can offer employees assistance through the
appraised value offer program, known as AVO, which is designed
to help employees sell their primary residence. The program
operates as follows: while the employee's property is for sale
two separate appraisals are conducted to estimate the value of
the home. The average of the two appraisals serves as a backup
offer for instances when the employee does not sell their home
in a timely manner. If the home does not sell after being on
the market 60 days the employee may accept the AVO. In these
instances a contractor buys the property from the employee for
the average appraised value. Each VA administration defines
which employees are authorized to participate in the AVO. The
then Under Secretary for Benefits told us that all VBA SES
employees were offered AVO benefits when making a PCS move. If
the employee accepts the AVO, VA pays a contractor a home sale
acquisition fee. In fiscal year 2014 this fee was 27.5 percent
of the AVO.
One last piece of background information pertains to VA's
SES pay structure. In 2004 VA established a pay band structure
for SES pay. In 2014 VA's SES salaries ranged from
approximately $120,000 to $181,000. VA categorized their SES
positions into three different pay bands based on the scope of
responsibility for each position, with pay band one
representing the highest level of complexity and pay band three
representing the lowest.
The position of Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations
is a VA central office based SES pay band one position located
in Washington, DC. The position is responsible for the
oversight of four area offices and 56 VAROs within VBA. The
Director of the Philadelphia and Wilmington VAROs is an SES pay
band three position and involves significantly less
responsibilities than the Deputy Under Secretary for Field
Operations.
VA paid a total of about $274,000 related to the move of
the Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations to move from
the Washington, DC., area to the Philadelphia area. The
payments included about $33,000 paid to Ms. Rubens, who held
that position, primarily to reimburse her for lodging, meals,
tips, and dry cleaning expenses. Payments to other entities
totaled approximately $241,000 and included about $212,000 to
the home sale contractor, $16,000 to the company that moved and
stored Ms. Rubens' goods, and about $13,000 in service fees
that went to VA's Financial Service Center and the VA
Technology Acquisition Center.
Ms. Rubens did retain her pay despite the decrease in job
responsibilities. But according to the federal regulations, the
SES rate of basic pay for a career senior executive may only be
reduced if the senior executive has less than a fully
successful annual summary rating or has failed to meet the
performance requirements of a critical element. From fiscal
year 2009 to the time of her reassignment the Deputy Under
Secretary for Field Operations was rated better than fully
successful on all performance appraisals. Therefore we
concluded that all critical elements were met. Based on
applicable federal regulations we determined VA could not
reduce the annual salary upon reassignment despite the decrease
in the scope of responsibilities.
We also conducted a limited assessment of VBA's use of the
PCS relocation program. We determined VBA's reassignments of
seven general schedule GS-15 employees who were promoted to
SES, and another 15 SES employees who were moved to different
SES positions. We determined that VBA management used
reassignments through the PCS program as a way to increase SES
pay.
It is important to note from fiscal year 2010 to 2013 the
U.S. Office of Personnel Management guidelines precluded all
SES employees from receiving annual pay increases. Further, in
2012 the then VA Secretary determined no VBA executive would
receive performance awards based on concerns over excessive
backlog of veterans disability claims.
Twenty-one of 23 reassignments included salary increases.
These VBA reassignments resulted in annual salary increases
totaling about $321,000, which averaged about $15,300 per
individual. We identified concerns with the salary increases
because they did not seem to consistently reflect changes in
the position's scope of responsibility.
We also found VBA paid seven employees relocation
incentives when they moved to new positions. The seven
relocation incentives totaled $140,000. We determined that VBA
did not properly justify these incentives. Five relocation
expenses were not justified because job vacancies were not
announced, or the positions were filled before candidates who
applied were considered. The two other incentives were not
timely justified as justifications were signed months after the
job announcements were posted. The then Under Secretary for
Benefits and the then VA Chief of Staff approved the VBA's
relocation incentive justification and payments.
VBA paid relocation expenses for 20 of the 23
reassignments, which included AVO related expenses for 11 of
the moves. Specifically VBA spent about $1.3 million on
relocation expenses for these moves. While these reassignments
resulted in significant cost to VA, these expenses were
allowable under the federal relocation program. VBA also spent
a total of $1.8 million for the 23 reassignments we reviewed.
While we did not question the need to reassign some staff to
manage a national network of VAROs, we concluded VBA
inappropriately used VA's PCS relocation program for the
benefit of its SES workforce.
In conclusion our findings demonstrate the need to
strengthen controls and oversight in order to improve financial
stewardship in the program and we are pleased to see the
department is reviewing the evidence and taking this report
seriously. But at this point I do not have specifics as to how
they are going to implement the 12 recommendations. They did
give me implementation dates that spanned October 31 through
December 31 and I expect more detail at that time.
This concludes my statement and I will answer any
questions.

[The prepared statement of Linda Halliday appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much. All of my questions this
morning for the IG are based on the evidence used to complete
their report. Ms. Halliday, at the hearing on April 22nd Mr.
Pummel testified that the AVO program was necessary to fill the
Philadelphia RO position because it was, quote, tough to fill.
In your opinion was the AVO used in Ms. Rubens' case because it
was tough to fill?
Ms. Halliday. No. I believe that the Philadelphia VARO
offered significant management challenges to whoever took over
the leadership. But you have to advertise positions and there
were candidates. I think our report says there were
approximately 120, but do not quote me on the number.
The Chairman. At the April--did you find it?
Ms. Halliday. No, I have the Philadelphia one.
The Chairman. That is all right. At the April 22nd hearing
Ms. Rubens testified that the AVO program was, quote, part of a
benefit program that VA offers to ensure transition in as quick
and as smooth as possible to an office that needed leadership
changes, end quote. Based on your investigation is this the
reasoning that VA used the AVO program in Ms. Rubens' case? And
if not, what was their reasoning?
Ms. Halliday. I believe the reason went to Ms. Rubens
saying that she would not execute the move without the AVO.
Originally she agreed, she volunteered for the position and
agreed to take it. And then a few days later she said she would
not take the position without the AVO benefit. And that was
pushed through and approved by I believe the VA Chief of
Staff----
The Chairman. Should that document have been signed prior
to accepting the position?
Ms. Halliday. You would hope so.
The Chairman. In your opinion did Ms. Rubens and Ms. Graves
use their positions of authority to move Mr. Waller and Mr.
McKenrick for their own personal and financial gains?
Ms. Halliday. We concluded that in our report.
The Chairman. Were Mr. Waller and Mr. McKenrick essentially
forced to move to Baltimore and to Los Angeles respectively?
Ms. Halliday. There are different facts that go into each
move. We did, we interviewed those individuals. We believe we
got sufficient information, feedback from them, that they felt
that they were pushed to take those moves.
The Chairman. Did Ms. Rubens indicate to the IG that Mr.
McKenrick reached out to her to volunteer his name for the Los
Angeles position?
Ms. Halliday. I believe Ms. Rubens said that her and Mr.
McKenrick spoke and he mentioned he had interest in the LA
position. But this was right on the heels of being part of the
review panel tasked to fill the vacancy. And when we spoke with
Mr. McKenrick he flat out said he did not want to go to Los
Angeles. He was given only a week to effect the move and that
it put him further away from his children.
The Chairman. What were your conclusions about the role
that the current Deputy Under Secretary for Field Operations,
Ms. McCoy, played in moving Mr. Waller out of St. Paul so that
Ms. Graves could take that position?
Ms. Halliday. I think the actions were inappropriate.
The Chairman. According to the report you have made a
criminal referral of evidence from this investigation to the
U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia for possible
criminal charges. Can you tell us what led you to take this
action and what update you may have received from the District
Attorney's Office if they will pursue the case?
Ms. Halliday. What led us to making this referral was
because it was a misuse of position that cost the federal
government almost half a million dollars when you look at the
two, both Ms. Rubens' and Ms. Graves', actions. That seemed to
be sufficiently high enough, and to look like there was
manipulation in the email information that we received that
they pushed the two individuals out. I have no information as
of this point from the referral for Department of Justice other
than they are evaluating the evidence.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. The report tells us that the VA could
pay as much as $280,000 in relocation expenses to move Ms.
Rubens from VA's central office in Washington, DC., to
Philadelphia. Once all PCS claims are processed, why did it
cost so much to move Ms. Rubens from Philadelphia, since it is
so close? Can you give us a break down of the cost?
Specifically, who received what and did you find anything
improper about the amount of reimbursements? Basically, did Ms.
Rubens make any money on the move?
Ms. Halliday. Okay. For the amount of money that we
identified, the $274,000, Ms. Rubens only received
approximately $33,261. And she is paid for temporary lodging,
her real estate expenses, travel costs en route, and
miscellaneous expenses associated with the move. Our general
consensus is that the majority of those expenses were allowable
under the federal travel regulations and there really was not a
problem with the reimbursement. We did find two expenses, one
for alcohol and one lacking receipts. I considered them
somewhat de minimis but they are unallowable. And you know, you
have to justify that. Federal travel regulations are what they
are.
The next big amount that everyone should be aware of is
there was an amount paid to Brookfield and it is for the 2014
home sale fee. And that is the 27.5 percent of the average
appraised value of the $770,000 for her house. That does not go
to Ms. Rubens, that goes to a contractor that is under a GSA
contract, not a VA contract.
Ms. Brown. On that point, on that very point, that is my
concern. Because General Service, as I mentioned before and I
mentioned it to you when you were here before, this is a
government wide program. All of the agencies operate under this
program. Now as of October 1, 2015, the VA will not longer
offer this program to the VA employees. This raises the larger
issue as to whether this program is being administered properly
across the government, not just VA. I am concerned that the
program as well, if it is not working for the VA, are they
administering something wrong? Or is it a problem across the
board?
You indicated you only could speak to VA. I am writing a
letter to the GAO and asking them to give us an update as to
how this program is working government wide. Because I think it
is unfair if all of the other agencies are administering this
program and it is working, and the VA employees are going to be
left out. And we are talking about top level. But this program
is available for all VA in the program that are moving and this
is allowed for them. How is this going to affect the VA
employees?
Ms. Halliday. First, I think your actions to ask GAO are
very appropriate. I think you should look at this. There is a
substantial amount of money in the AVO, the percentages paid
for these home acquisitions. And depending on the competitive
market that has rising prices versus dropping, sometimes it is
a benefit, sometimes it is not.
As far as VA deciding not to participate in the AVO
program, I believe that is their choice. They have a couple of
choices, not to participate or to put appropriate levels of
controls in place so the type of activities that we described
in our report do not continue to happen. My understanding is
that they are looking at other recruiting tools that might be
more appropriate but I do not have information on that at this
time. As I said earlier, I am expecting more detail from VA. I
do not necessarily think that the AVO program is the only
program that could be effective here. But at this time I think
that it is important to have some recruiting tools to get the
best of the best to the positions they need to be in.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
leadership and the ranking member's leadership and questions.
We really need to get to the bottom of this and I think there
have been some excellent questions so I will just build on what
has already been asked. And thank you for the work that you
did.
To follow on what Ranking Member Brown just asked you, it
looks to me like there is some abuse going on. Was this unique
to the VA or a subset within VA? Or is this potential out there
for the entire government, and maybe there is abuse in other
departments?
Ms. Halliday. I would think the potential exists and that
each department, it would be dependent upon whether they had
adequate controls in place to process all of the requests and
authorizations made under the program. As far as what
percentage they may pay for a company to pick up the home sale,
this is in the contract. GSA puts the terms of those contracts
and all federal agencies rely on it.
Mr. Lamborn. So at a minimum you would urge us to look at
requiring the VA to rewrite its regulations in this area? And
at a maximum take this to the rest of the government, maybe go
to the OGR committee for instance?
Ms. Halliday. I would think it should be looked at
government wide. I would also say that I believe VA is
rewriting it.
Mr. Lamborn. Now that is the AVO program. Also I think it
does not make sense that if someone volunteers for a lower
position, that is a lower responsibility position, they keep
the same high salary. Now this is not maybe going to happen
everyday. But what would keep someone from sort of checking out
and really kind of abdicating their responsibilities, taking a
really low responsibility job? I mean, in this case it was
$15,000. Normally it would be the lesser salary, but way, way
less. I mean, is there, what kind of potential is there for
abuse here?
Ms. Halliday. I think there is a lot of potential. But it
would not be abuse at this point, since that is allowable under
OPM regulations. I definitely think it should be looked at.
When you look at the private sector, your pay is commensurate
with your responsibilities. I see no reason why it would
change.
Mr. Lamborn. And once again, is this unique to the VA? Or
is it government wide?
Ms. Halliday. No, government wide, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. And do you have any evidence that other
departments have seen this happen? Maybe that never hit the
news?
Ms. Halliday. I have no evidence to that. My scope of
responsibility stays within the VA.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. And then a real specific question on the
facts right in front of us that led to this whole hearing
today. Let me see, where did I have it? Okay. In your report
you found that in March, 2014 Ms. Rubens requested a market
analysis of her DC., area home from the VA's AVO contractor,
Brookfield. Did the evidence gathered give you any indication
as to why she requested this analysis when she did?
Ms. Halliday. I would have to take that for the record. I
am not sure.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. If you could, please. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Takano, you are recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Following on Mr.
Lamborn's questioning, your report states that according to Mr.
Pummel, quote, the VA Chief of Staff at the time said that an
SES employee's salary could be increased as long as the
executive was moving to a different location, end quote,
despite OPM guidelines preventing SES employees from annual pay
increases and establishing a salary cap. Was the VA Chief of
Staff correct? I understand that for many other transfers you
examined, employee responsibility decreased, which was not
reflected in their salaries. And it is essentially a similar
question that Mr. Lamborn asked. So was the Chief of Staff's
statement correct?
Ms. Halliday. Partially.
Mr. Takano. Okay.
Ms. Halliday. I think there was too broad of an
interpretation applied here. I do not think, I think if they
asked the Chief of Staff again can the salary increase if the
responsibilities of the position drop substantially, the answer
would be different.
Mr. Takano. Okay. I would like to know if under current OPM
policy SES employees are allowed a pay increase when being
transferred?
Ms. Halliday. Yes, if they go to a different position.
Mr. Takano. They go to a different position and it is more
responsibilities.
Ms. Halliday. Yes.
Mr. Takano. All right. Well how can the VA ensure that when
employees transfer into a position with less responsibility,
their new salary reflects that decreased responsibility? Is it
through the rewrite of regulations? Or----
Ms. Halliday. I believe that that has to be addressed with
the Office of Personnel Management, who set up the guiding
rules for pay setting for SES.
Mr. Takano. So that must be systemic. It has to be beyond
just the VA. It has to be a systemic policy determined by the
Office of Personnel Management. Well----
Ms. Halliday. VA may have more executives that transfer
because it is in such a large decentralized environment, and
there are many openings across the nation, where maybe some
other federal agencies are more headquarters based. So we have
a lot of that in the VA.
Mr. Takano. The PCS and AVO programs were created for a
reason, to help ensure that the federal government is able to
get the right people into the right jobs and to fill vacancies,
particularly in high level positions. I know that the VHA in
particular has had a tough time filling vacancies. Do you know
if VBA faces a similar problem as the VHA?
Ms. Halliday. From my understanding, but I do not have
empirical evidence, VBA does face the same problem in filling
the vacancies across its 56 VAROs.
Mr. Takano. You already answered that there was not, in the
particular example in Philadelphia, that there was not a
shortage of candidates. You had 120 candidates. But I want to
ask a more general, is there, might that be an exception? Are
there, is there a shortage of suitable candidates for high
level positions at VBA? Or you are not able to really answer
that question?
Ms. Halliday. I would not have the evidence on that. I
looked at two positions, what was advertised for Los Angeles,
what was advertised for Baltimore here.
Mr. Takano. Okay. My last question was does the VBA have
trouble recruiting talent? And that is probably something----
Ms. Halliday. That is something for the department to
answer.
Mr. Takano. Okay, thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. A quick question, was
the Philadelphia RO position ever advertised?
Ms. Halliday. Yes, it was. No, I am sorry. It was not. It
was not. I am getting Baltimore and LA confused.
The Chairman. I appreciate it.
Ms. Halliday. But Philadelphia was not.
The Chairman. So the position where Ms. Rubens went was not
advertised. Thank you. Dr. Roe.
Dr. Roe. I thank the chairman. I am going to bring us down
to, Ms. Halliday, thank you again for being here and providing
this information for us. One of the things I think you see
across the country is a loss in faith of government, and I
think this is a poster child for it. You have a situation where
we have our social security recipients are getting no increase
this year at all. I am going to tell you about a couple of guys
I know back home.
One is Bud Pate. He is a retired Baptist preacher, a
Marine, lost his arm in Vietnam. Randy Kingston, both of these
guys are friends of mine. Randy is a paraplegic, a young man,
had not married, became a paraplegic after, in Vietnam during
an explosion, a battle. And this young woman married him, who
knew him ahead of time, knew him when he was whole, but married
him, has been faithful together all these years. And these
veterans that we see out there are having to struggle to get
their benefits of a few hundred dollars or a few thousand
dollars a month. And then I see things where we are paying
somebody $33,000 to drive up the road 140 miles and live in a
hotel for a few days until they can get a house. If you paid 55
cents a mile that is a $77 trip, not a $33,000 trip. And if you
eat at the Four Seasons every night, I do not see how you can
spend $33,000. And that is not what average people do out
there.
When average people like me, that go out and work for
themselves for 30-something years, and I do less, next year I
get paid less. That is what happens in the real world. And that
is not what is happening here. And I go home and see these
injured and disabled veterans. And then I come up here and hear
where these senior officials, it seems like they have
manipulated a system that they know how it works to, the VA has
shifted people around. When we said, no, you cannot raise
people's salaries during this particular time so we can sort
all this out, but they figured out how to do it. And that sort
of cynicism is really pervasive, I think, when you go home and
try to explain.
And listening to your testimony, which has been extremely
compelling to me, I just want to get that on the record. And I
think we have a lost trust. And so I understand this program,
two people come in and appraise your house. I looked up, while
we are doing this, on the web. The average time is about 60
days on the market around here for a home. If I sell my home
here, a private citizen does, they just got to wait until they
sell their home. If it is 60 days or if it is 160 days. They
have got to wait, just like you probably do if you sell your
house here. So the way I understand it is this program they
have got is you go out and get your house evaluated at
$800,000, or whatever it is, you pay this, basically this
contractor, 27.5 percent, that is $200,000-something that they
got. They can discount that house $100,000 and sell it quickly
and make $125,000 without blinking an eye. I mean, am I correct
on that? Is that how they do it?
Ms. Halliday. That could happen, yes.
Dr. Roe. We need to look at that because----
Ms. Halliday. That is a GSA contract.
Dr. Roe. Yes. I think the one expense in this that I saw
that looked pretty reasonable was the poor guy that sent his
people down and moved all the furniture. I think that is a
fairly reasonable $16,000 to pack up a big home like that and
move it, I think was reasonable. These other things look to me,
many of them, look to be over the top. And I simply say that
because of the people that I go back home and see every single
week when I go home. And veterans that cannot get in to the
Phoenix VA right now or get the care they need, and they see
this. I think this is very telling to me.
Anything else in the report that we have not talked about?
I think we have pretty well seen what it is, is it looks like
that this position was a position that Ms. Rubens wanted to go
to and essentially worked her way around in the system, knew
how the system worked, and was able to obtain that system. Am I
correct in that?
Ms. Halliday. That is our general conclusion.
Dr. Roe. Is the conclusion. That is what I thought. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Ms. Halliday. Thank you, doctor. Ms. Brownley, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Halliday, for your report this morning. According to table
seven on page 30 of your report, the incoming Los Angeles
Regional Office Director received a relocation incentive of
$20,000. As I understand it, relocation incentives are only
supposed to be paid in cases where qualified applicants cannot
be found or the position is hard to fill. However, and your
report states that 168 applicants, five of whom were considered
best qualified, had applied for the Los Angeles position. So
according to the VBA policy should a relocation incentive have
been offered in this case?
Ms. Halliday. Since there was not a final conclusion to
whether those five individuals that were considered best
qualified could actually fit there, I would have to say, agree
with you that that relocation should not have been paid.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. And then one other question is
when an SES employee is offered a reassignment, what are their
rights to refuse that reassignment? And what is the process to
discuss the reassignment with the VBA leadership?
Ms. Halliday. Generally the position should be advertised.
The individual should apply and be considered in the pool of
competitive candidates. There are occasions when there is a
discussion that someone would like to go to another spot and
knows that it is open. I think at that point you can have a
discussion, you can identify your interests. But if you have a
specific interest, we in the IG if someone raises that we do
not pay moving expenses. We do not pay the expenses associated
to, you know, for the travel there. We say, okay, you can go to
that position but that is at your choice. That is not at the
government need. I think once the government need comes in, and
in this case what happens, and I am not sure if I am going to
give you all the detail on this and I will add anything for the
written record. But it is called a management directed move. I
do not want to go the position but then you have to go. When
you do a management directed move the government then agrees to
pay the expenses.
Ms. Brownley. So there are, I mean, in some sense if that
was that strategy or protocol is implemented then there are no
rights of the employee to refuse a reassignment?
Ms. Halliday. In a management directed move, once they pay,
a person really feels that they are at risk of losing their job
if they do not accept it. That is almost the last thing you can
do.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Is it safe to assume that one of the easiest
ways to be fired at the VA is to refuse to move with a
management directed move? You do not have to answer. Thank you.
Ms. Halliday. Thank you.
The Chairman. Dr. Benishek, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ms.
Halliday, for being here today. Can you elaborate? Is there any
role that Ms. Hickey had in any of this that you are aware of?
Was she, was there communication between her and Ms. Rubens?
Ms. Halliday. I believe there was communications between
Ms. Rubens and Ms. Hickey when Ms. Rubens said I am interested
in the position. And General Hickey had said that she will do
anything she can to help that, you know, make that happen. Like
it is noted in the report there. The other role that was played
is as the approvals for the transfer in position go up, she has
to sign that, it then moves on to the VA Chief of Staff. So
there is a documentation trail on the approval and the approval
of the AVOs, things like that.
Mr. Benishek. I think you recommended that the Secretary
try to recoup the $300,000 that was given to Ms. Rubens. Could
you elaborate on that recommendation a bit more?
Ms. Halliday. That is recommendation number nine. And what
we did was it was the OIG's position, because there was, we
believed there was manipulation to get that vacancy open so
that individual could take that spot, that the government had
lost $274,000 because it paid that amount. General Counsel will
have to go in and weigh the logistics, VA General Counsel, as
to how much of that is recoverable. That decision, I do not
know what is going to happen yet.
Mr. Benishek. Recoverable? What does that mean? I mean is--
--
Ms. Halliday. That someone would have to pay that back.
Mr. Benishek. Right. But I mean if that is truly the case,
that this position was not a management mandated, should not
all of it be recoverable?
Ms. Halliday. That is why we put the $274,000 in there. But
it is clearly going to be out of our hands at this point.
Mr. Benishek. Right. Right. No, I understand. I understand.
Can you tell me a little bit more about as I understand it the
VA has their own home loan program that sells thousands of
homes a year for less than this 27.5 percent service fee. Are
you familiar with any of that? Or----
Ms. Halliday. Are you talking the ones for veterans?
Mr. Benishek. Yes. Is that----
Ms. Halliday. That is clearly different than this is.
Mr. Benishek. That is different. Okay.
Ms. Halliday. This is what the federal government has put
in place to move senior executives around to fill key
vacancies.
Mr. Benishek. All right.
Ms. Halliday. So I could not mix the two. One is an
entitlement program and this is administrative.
Mr. Benishek. But this Brookfield, that is a contract with
the General Services Administration? That is a general
government wide type?
Ms. Halliday. Yes. My understanding it is on the federal
supply schedule. It is a contract that is awarded by GSA and
then used by the federal agencies that participate in the
program.
Mr. Benishek. Do you happen to know how many transactions
occur, either within the VA or the government as a whole that
use this service a year?
Ms. Halliday. I do not have that information. That would
probably be vested in GSA.
Mr. Benishek. All right. I think that is all I have for you
now. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back the remainder
of my time.
The Chairman. Ms. Titus, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Halliday, thank
you. My understanding about the report is that it is limited to
SES employees but it includes a few GS employees who, 15 who
were moving up. And this is damning enough. But I am concerned
that this practice of moving people into jobs with less
responsibility but the same amount of money is occurring at
other levels as well. And I will just give you an example.
Ed Russell, who was previously the Director of the Reno
Regional Office for VBA, which was one of the worst in the
country, was put on paid leave. He stayed on that
administrative leave for almost a year. Then they could not, or
would not, get rid of him, so a brand new position was created
in Washington. They called him a senior advisor in the Office
of Field Operations, but he teleworked from Reno. He did not
even move back to Washington. Now I cannot find out for sure
what his salary was, but I doubt if it went down. Now the
responsibility that he had as senior advisor while teleworking
from Reno had to have been less than being the Director of the
Regional Office. So I am concerned that as VA pushes this
initiative called My VA if it is full of just patronage and
cronyism, that is totally contrary to the image that it is
trying to create and its efforts to restore faith in VA. And I
wonder if you have any sense that this is more widespread than
just the Reno office? Or if you would be willing to look into
it if that would be appropriate or even possible?
Ms. Halliday. I do not have any evidence as to whether it
is widespread. The view focused on these, the VBA moves. With a
congressional request we would look into it.
Ms. Titus. And would that, it would be something that you
could do, though, right?
Ms. Halliday. We could.
Ms. Titus. If we requested it? Thank you very much. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Ms. Walorski, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ms.
Halliday, for being here yet again.
I guess I am, I would call this report, this IG report a
crisis in confidence again with the VA and with some of these
senior level executives. And I guess I echo back to what
Representative Roe said. The discrepancy that is happening in
this country between these high level VA executives and the
veterans that are in the districts that we all sit in here and
represent today, to me it is reprehensible. And we are looking
at yet another crisis in confidence.
I have been here, I am only in my third year. I am one of
the youngest members on this panel. You have been here since I
have been here. When you look at yet another, yet another one
of these examples of egregious spending, benefits that people
in the private sector do not even have, people in my district
cannot even relate to these issues of paying people to move, at
the exorbitant amount of money. Do you look at this at any
point, as the Inspector General, and say there is an issue with
confidence here with these senior executives?
And I guess to my other colleagues' point, you know whether
this is nationwide or not, I would have to suspect based on
just the data that we have seen in the three years we have been
here, this is just the same old, same old, status quo behavior.
There has not been a whole lot of shake down when it comes to
what kind of federal benefits are given to these senior
executives in the VA. Do you see a confidence issue here as you
look at these, at the tangible data that you have?
Ms. Halliday. I think every time the IG identifies a
situation where they question the cost, the necessity of those
costs, or the validity of those costs, it erodes the trust of
veterans.
Ms. Walorski. I agree. And I can tell you that my office
number still rings every single day in Indiana's Second
District with veterans that need help. They need our help in
mitigating a system and bringing down the mountains of
bureaucracy just so they can access the basic services that
they were promised by this government when they signed up to go
fight for freedom. And I think that it is just another
egregious example that I look at this as a huge crisis in
confidence yet again. That we feel like we have taken a couple
of steps forward and we go backward when we look at egregious
spending. And that is where the Americans do disconnect. That
is where our veterans simply cannot trust this government. And
I think that it is an atrocity that as we continue to dig deep,
further in the weeds on this issue that we have got to hold
additional people accountable and make sure that the actions of
the senior executives of the VA are absolutely transparent to
the American public. And so we have a long road ahead and I
yield back my time, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Walz, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commander Barnett, I
would like to thank you for being here and let you know your
team here in Washington is doing a fabulous job. And we
certainly appreciate it. And my 2016 dues are on the way, so
that email you sent. So you do a good job of reminding me, so
we will get them.
But Ms. Halliday, nice to see you again as always. And I
appreciate your time. And I want to thank the chairman and the
ranking member for I think once again elevating this committee
above the partisan politics, for bringing it to the point of
trying to improve the care for veterans.
I also think it is noted that together we are doing what we
are supposed to do. Reports are being done. We are doing our
oversight. Changes are being made. An Under Secretary is no
longer an Under Secretary. And I certainly cannot say if it was
in direct result of this, but I think people can draw their
conclusions. I also would say that Deputy Secretary Gibson's
willingness to come here at every case, and his volunteering to
come here, and I think the chairman was very clear and
sufficiently stated why that was probably not the right case
here because he has got a job to do. And I am grateful that I
think my colleagues here have both, did the accountability
piece, the subpoenas were correct, we have created space, we
let Deputy Secretary Gibson do his work, and we will have some
answers by November 2nd.
So I kind of want to, this is taking care of it. There are
some good questions being brought up. The ranking member
brought up a great point about across the board on this issue,
which I think is very important to look at. I want to ask more
specifically about the role of the IG and this committee
stepping up to do its oversight responsibility.
I do think it should be noted we are approaching 700 days
without someone in the top job at the VA Inspector General.
That in itself is inexplicable to me. With that being said, the
broader issue of the IG, the IG's role and this committee's
role of getting aggressive to do what we are doing today, and I
am proud of that, I want to ask a couple of specifics on this.
How many investigations has your office conducted on personnel
issues at VBA? That is an off the--to get back to us? Or----
Ms. Halliday. I would have to get back to you on the record
on that.
Mr. Walz. Would you know in a general trend has it
increased or decreased? Again maybe----
Ms. Halliday. I think my division for my administrative
investigations is inundated with work.
Mr. Walz. Okay. Because I think this is an important one
for us and I would ask my colleagues on this. I have been an
unabashed supporter of the VA and the role, and you and I
talked about some of these where it goes back to the VISN to do
some of them because you have to triage those.
Ms. Halliday. Right.
Mr. Walz. You had I think some very strong vision, the next
Inspector General that comes in, that you work with them. I
kind of want to know, for you to help me understand this, how
does it work when you complete a report? Because I think the
public is starting to see, and one of the questions we are
asking, is what do we do with this and how do we implement
change? So what happens when you send a report over to the VA?
Ms. Halliday. Okay. That is a good question. I will send
the report over to the VA. The recommendations in this
particular report were directed to the Deputy Secretary because
everyone else in the chain of command was involved at some
level of the decision making and the actions that occurred. The
department gets a specific period of time to review the
recommendations.
Mr. Walz. Who reviews that?
Ms. Halliday. Well that would be the choice, I sent it to
the Deputy Secretary. He could task whoever he wants to review
the details of the report. You know, he might have General
Counsel involved----
Mr. Walz. Does the evidence file go with it?
Ms. Halliday. We do send evidence over. We did. We sent the
evidence over and I know General Counsel and the Office of
Accountability Review were involved in looking at the evidence.
Mr. Walz. And you and I talked about then and on that is
that how you go about committing to implementing your
recommendations. That is kind of our role, is that correct? Is
that what you see? I see this as where the disconnect is. You
do the investigation, you put it out. You send it over to
people. People in charge look at it. They can either implement
or not implement. This is where I think the disconnect is. This
is where I think it is where we step in and there is, people
who are proposing another board between us and them, that came
up at a hearing we had here recently, kind of a new oversight
board especially dealing with health. Is it your interpretation
of how this is supposed to work? This is where we are supposed
to step in and make sure the implementation is happening?
Ms. Halliday. I think that you are in the best position to
make sure people are held accountable to implement those
recommendations. Our internal operations has a follow up
review. We track the actions to determine how long a
recommendation is going to stay open, and is the department
taking responsible actions to actually correct the problem. But
in cases where you want quick action, yes, I think that is the
role of the congressional committee.
Mr. Walz. I agree. And I think in this case, I think we
have got the right people. I think Deputy Secretary Gibson,
yourself, this committee see ourselves as partners on fixing
this. But at the end of the day I have been saying, and I think
the committee has executed that, it is our responsibility by
virtue of the public vote and confidence and statutorily in
this office for us to do that. So I would argue today is what
you are seeing especially on this specific case, the system is
working as it is supposed to with vigorous push by us when we
are in agreement. So I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Walz. Mr. Coffman,
you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly welcome
the Commander of the American Legion here today. Unlike Mr.
Walz, my dues are paid up.
I want to go over these relocation expenses just for a
minute here. They totaled $274,019.12 for a Deputy Under
Secretary of Field Operations to move from Washington, DC., to
the Philadelphia area. And here is my issue with that. When I
look at the relocation expenses that we pay our military, that
the Department of Veterans Affairs is there to support and
serve, that the highest one can receive I think is around
$4,000. If we look at the pay scale for an O-10, which is a
four-star flag officer, that individual would receive a
relocation allowance of $4,514.29 and that is with dependents,
an O-10 with dependents, that is four-star. I retired from the
Marine Corps as a major. And so that would be the Commandant of
the Marine Corps would receive that $4,514.29. They would
receive mileage and they would obviously have their household
goods moved, 14,000 pounds, the government would pay for that
expense.
I mean, that is incredible. How did this get so out of
control, Ms. Halliday?
Ms. Halliday. That is a pretty broad question.
Mr. Coffman. Yes.
Ms. Halliday. Without being able to lay the services that
are supported through a military move against the private
sector and against the VA, I cannot really answer that. I would
think that the contracts are set up. We saw that the
percentages paid were the percentages per the contracts. It is
possible, I think you should pursue GSA----
Mr. Coffman. Sure.
Ms. Halliday [continuing]. And is there another option
available that still would not inhibit senior executives moving
from one position to another.
Mr. Coffman. See, for our military personnel there is no
compensation in terms of if you lose money on the sale of your
home, there is no compensation for that. Yet for VA executives
when the move is directed there is compensation for that. And
what we can see is that in compensation, this level of
compensation is so high that it incentivizes this culture of
corruption where we have an example of a senior executive who
is indented to move and forces somebody else out of their
position just to move to get the compensation. And I just think
that that is extraordinary.
And I, you know, what is so upsetting about this I think is
the fact that you do not have leadership at the top of the
Veterans Administration that seems to be concerned about
reforming this process. That it is always the whistleblower
that comes up with this, or you as the Inspector General's
Office, from the Inspector General's Office, that comes up with
these issues. And that the VA is so slow to respond. And we had
testimony today of individuals that were involved in the
appointment wait time scandal that are still with, that were at
the top of the scandal, that were complicit in the scandal by
all observations, that are still on paid administrative leave
and this issue happened last year.
Can you, I know that right now you are focused on this
issue. But what is the VA's policy on SES personnel that seem
to be placed indefinitely on paid administrative leave?
Ms. Halliday. I cannot answer that. I am sorry.
Mr. Coffman. I just think that that is extraordinary. Well,
I think, I commend you on your work. I certainly hope, I think
that clearly the fact is that this was manipulated by virtue of
forcing people out of their positions, not advertising the
positions as open as they should have on a competitive basis,
and then moving simply to get this extraordinary compensation
that is so excessive. That clearly I think there is criminal
wrongdoing in this and I hope it is pursued by the Justice
Department. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Costello, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the outset I
would like to pick up on the comments that my colleagues Mr.
Coffman and Ms. Titus made relating to some of the gaming of
compensation within the VA. It almost seems like friends are
rewarding friends rather than focusing on reforming the VA. And
so I would just reiterate that I think that we really need to
get to the bottom of how pervasive that may be in the VA. But
that is something obviously I am sure all of us as members will
discuss a little bit more.
I also want to commend you for your continued work in
providing accountability and shining a light on the abuses
there. Typically this committee will have witnesses before them
that we can ask questions who either were culpable or who can
actually speak to how they are either reforming the challenges
or what mistakes were made along the way. But today we do not
have that, we just have you. So I do not, I am sure it is a
little bit odd that you are here delivering bad news, we are as
outraged as anyone, but we do not have anyone really to direct
that outrage to.
Let me start with a couple of really fact specific
questions just for the record. First, with respect to
Philadelphia and Ms. Rubens, as well as Ms. Graves and St.
Paul, any evidence that family considerations were part of the
reason why they wanted to relocate to those facilities?
Ms. Halliday. You would have to ask them.
Mr. Costello. All right. I just know that in the past I
believe there was some testimony by Ms. Rubens indicating that
family was nearby, but there was nothing, you were not able to
unravel anything more to that?
Ms. Halliday. No.
Mr. Costello. Okay. During your review of Ms. Rubens' move
to Philadelphia, were you able to determine when she placed the
deposit on the construction of her new home in Philadelphia?
And the reason I am asking that question is because I would
like to know whether that was before or after her reassignment
took place.
Ms. Halliday. I will take that for the record. I am not
sure if I have it or not.
Mr. Costello. Okay. Next, and this is as much about me
making sure that I describe this accurately when I leave this
room as anything, you had testified essentially that the VBA
basically had a process to circumvent the pay freeze and bonus
freeze mechanisms that were in place, is that correct?
Ms. Halliday. The practice they were using did exactly
that.
Mr. Costello. So it is fair to say that I believe the
reason why we had pay freezes and no more bonuses was sort of
the VA's attempt to say we are going to take responsibility
here, the wrongdoing that has been uncovered we are going to
get to the bottom to and we are not going to, in the process we
are not going to receive bonuses or increased pay, and yet they
basically just did it, right? They just did it anyway?
Moving forward, you had said at this point in time you do
not have recommendations on how to prevent that from happening
moving forward. At some point in time will you issue
recommendations to that effect? Or is this really just people
doing the wrong thing and you can put all the rules in place,
and if they are going to do what they are going to do and
violate the rules, they are going to violate the rules?
Ms. Halliday. Being in my occupation, you can always
circumvent the controls if you want to. I hope to say this is
the exception and not across the board. But the two we looked
at we had problems.
Mr. Costello. Okay. In your position, looking at the rules,
not looking at these specific facts, but just looking at those
rules, do they make sense? Would you look at them and say this
is sufficient, there are sufficient enforcement mechanisms here
to make sure that people do not get pay increases, people do
not get bonuses? Or do they really have to go further?
Because----
Ms. Halliday. I think if people act with integrity,
generally the rules were strong enough. But you are always
going to have some that do not.
Mr. Costello. That is a brilliant point. Because I asked
myself, how many rules can we put in place? And if people are
acting with integrity we may not have to put that many more
rules back in place. But if they are not acting with integrity
we are going to put all the rules in the world in there and it
still will not matter. And that is the frustrating thing.
And I will just add I am not going to get into the IG
report on what is happening in Philly. But it really bothers me
to hear that we have apparently made some progress in
implementing some of the reforms at the Philadelphia VARO but
the person who was there spearheading that has done what she
has done. And so the veracity of which just further calls into
question the credibility of the reforms that have been made.
And it really is, I am flabbergasted by this report. Absolutely
stunned. But I commend you for your ongoing work on behalf of
the VA.
Ms. Halliday. Thank you.
Mr. Costello. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Costello. I would
draw members' attention to page 18 of the report, where Ms.
Rubens said that she grew up in Delaware and that the
Philadelphia RO was close to home. She also testified in this
committee that her mother was just a few miles down the road.
And Ms. Graves, on page 22 it states that she stated that the
move to St. Paul got her closer to her mother. So that answers
those questions. Ms. Brown, do you have any closing comments?
Ms. Brown. No, sir. I think that we are going to move
forward in looking at the entire program through General
Services and making sure that VA employees are not penalized.
But if the program is not working overall then we need to look
at it. Because we have 13 agencies that use this program. And
perhaps we are bringing something to the attention that
everybody needs to double down on and take a look at. So thank
you very much, and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this
hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And Ms. Halliday, thank
you for appearing before this committee. There are no further
questions so you are excused.
And I just want to summarize for the members this morning
that the committee has voted to issue a subpoena to the five VA
employees that we requested to appear before us today. They
will now be required to testify at a hearing on November 2nd at
7:30 p.m. and be prepared to respond to questions. As a
reminder, I will also be requesting the presence of former
Under Secretary for Benefits Allison Hickey at the hearing to
testify in her role as a private citizen. I would ask unanimous
consent that all members would have five legislative days with
which to revise and extend their remarks and add any extraneous
material. And, without objection, so ordered. And now this
hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
