- EXAMINING THE QUALITY AND COST OF VA HEALTHCARE

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE QUALITY AND COST OF VA HEALTHCARE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 28, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-996                         WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American
Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH

DAN BENISHEK, Michigan, Chairman

JULIA BROWNLEY, California,
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida,               Ranking Member
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              MARK TAKANO, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, January 28, 2015

Page

Examining the Quality and Cost of VA Healthcare..................     1

OPENING STATEMENT

Dan Benishek, Chairman...........................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    27
Julia Brownley, Ranking Member...................................     2
Prepared Statement...........................................    28

WITNESSES

Matthew S. Goldberg, Deputy Assistant Director, National Security
Division, Congressional Budget Office..........................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    29
Carl Blake, Associate Executive Director for Government
Relations, Paralyzed Veterans of America, On behald of the Co-
Authors of the Independent Budget..............................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    47
Louis Celli Jr., Director Veterans Affairs ` Rehabilitation
Division, The America Legion...................................     7
Prepared Statement...........................................    57
James Tuchschmidt M.D., Acting Principal Deputy Under Secretary
for Health Veterans Health Administration, U.S. Depart of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    64

EXAMINING THE QUALITY AND COST OF VA HEALTHCARE

----------

Wednesday, January 28, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Health,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Dan Benishek
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Benishek, Bilirakis, Huelskamp,
Coffman, Wenstrup, Abraham, Brownley, Takano, Ruiz, Kuster, and
O'Rourke.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN DAN BENISHEK

Dr. Benishek. The subcommittee will come to order. Good
morning and thank you all for joining us for today's oversight
hearing, ``Examining the Quality and Cost of VA Healthcare.''
This Congress I am honored to return as the chairman of the
Subcommittee on Health, and to be joined once again by my
colleague and friend Congresswoman Julia Brownley as our
ranking member. And Ranking Member Brownley and I are joined by
several senior and returning committee members and one
freshman, Dr. Ralph Abraham. Five of us are doctors, five of us
are veterans, and all of us share the same primary goal: To
create a Department of Veterans Affairs Healthcare System that
provides timely, accessible, and high-quality care that our
veterans can be proud to call their own.
Our work will require open and ongoing cooperation and
communication with veterans, stakeholders, and most
importantly, VA leaders. Unfortunately, it became painfully
apparent last year that the Veterans Health Administration,
which operates the VA Healthcare System, was either unable or
unwilling to provide basic information about the services it
provides.
Using a simplistic equation, dividing the 9.3 million
veterans who are enrolled in the VA health system by VHA's
annual budget of $57 billion, the VA spends just over $6,000
per veteran patient. However, we know from the VA's own data
that fewer than 30 percent of veterans rely on VA for all their
healthcare needs, meaning VHA's providing for the total
healthcare needs of approximately 2.4 million veterans at a
per-patient cost of more than $23,000.
This is obviously a very rough calculation that I am sure
the VA will argue fails to take into account certain unique
aspects of the veteran population and the VA Healthcare System.
However, that is the granular data that we need in order to
move the VA Healthcare System forward.
Recently, the Congressional Budget Office released an
analysis comparing the cost of VA health system with the cost
of the private sector healthcare system. In their report, the
CBO found that, quote, ``Limited evidence and substantial
uncertainty make it difficult to reach firm conclusions about
the VHA's relative costs,'' unquote. The limited evidence and
substantial uncertainty that CBO references is the direct
result of the VA's failure to provide the information that is
needed to assist policymakers and the public in evaluating the
efficiency and the effectiveness of VA services.
VA's lack of transparency is echoed in the disappointing
testimony, absent substance or detail, that VA provided for
this morning's hearing. Coming on the heels of last year's
astounding access and accountability failures, the VA's
testimony provided for this hearing is unacceptable, and I have
begun examining measures that will require the VA to be much
more open with the American people moving forward.
Today's hearing is just the first in what will be a year-
long effort by this subcommittee to achieve greater clarity
into the cost considerations that impact VA's Healthcare budget
and therefore the care our veterans receive.

[Prepared statement of Chairman Dan Benishek appears in the
Appendix]

I thank you all for being here today. And with that, I now
recognize Ranking Member Brownley for any opening statement she
may have.
Ms. Brownley.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER JULIA BROWNLEY

Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning to everyone, and thank you all for being
here today in support of military veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing. I look
forward to working with you this Congress to better the lives
of veterans and their families.
According to the Veterans Health Administration's report,
``Blueprint for Excellence,'' veterans enrolled in the VA
Healthcare System have a significantly greater disease burden
than the general population, even after accounting for age and
gender mix. Forty percent of the nearly 9 million enrollees
have service-connected disabilities and their care in fiscal
year 2013 accounted for about half of VHA's $54 billion in
total obligations. Clearly there is a high reliance on VA
Healthcare for veterans who are disabled.
Today, we will examine the quality and cost of VA
Healthcare. The Congressional Budget Office released a report
late in 2014 that looked at comparing the cost of the veterans
healthcare system with private sector costs. What CBO found was
that it is very difficult to compared costs because of a
variety of factors. Veterans who are enrolled in the VHA system
receive most of their healthcare outside the system, about 70
percent. Veterans have different clinical and demographic
characteristics, and cost-sharing requirements are much lower
for VA care than for care received from private sector
providers.
Another very important point to remember is that VHA's
mission is to address the total health of veteran patients, not
just provide care for illness or disease. This is a much
different approach than the private sector practices.
Additionally, CBO points out in their report that there are
differences in financial incentives for providers. For example,
most private sector providers, whether in hospitals or
physicians practices, generate revenue for each unit of service
that they deliver. Because of that, they may have a financial
incentive to deliver more services, whereas the VA providers do
not.
CBO suggests that an annual report, much like that of the
Department of Defense's TRICARE health system, which includes
operating statistics, trends among beneficiaries, and their
demographics, among other things, would facilitate comparisons
between VHA and the private sector. However, these comparisons
would still be challenging, in part because private sector data
might also be incomplete or unavailable or difficult to make
comparisons with VHA data.
Instead of looking at comparing costs to the private
sector, I think we should focus on improving access to veteran
healthcare, ensure that veterans receive the best care
possible, and continue to hold important oversight hearings on
the quality and safety of the care provided to veterans. We
absolutely need to complete and be transparent in terms of
costs within the VA, and there is still much to learn from the
private sector and their practices, particularly when it comes
to IT and better access to healthcare within the VA.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I yield back.

[Prepared statement of Ranking Member Julia Brownley
appears in the Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Ms. Brownley.
We have these votes this morning that we are going to have
to go deal with, but I would like to get as much testimony in
as possible before we have a recess.
Joining us on our first and only panel is Matthew Goldberg,
the deputy assistant director of the National Security Division
of the Congressional Budget Office. Carl Blake, the associate
executive director for government relations for the Paralyzed
Veterans of America, who is testifying today on behalf of the
coauthors of The Independent Budget. Louis Celli, Jr., the
director of Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation Division for
the American Legion. And Dr. James Tuchschmidt--I hope that is
right.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. That is very good.
Dr. Benishek. The acting principal deputy under secretary
for health for the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Thank you all for being here this morning.
Mr. Goldberg, could you please proceed with your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW S. GOLDBERG

Mr. Goldberg. Thank you Chairman Benishek and Ranking
Member Brownley and members of the subcommittee. Thanks for the
opportunity to testify on CBO's understanding of the cost of
healthcare provided to veterans by the Veterans Health
Administration, VHA.
CBO regularly examines issues related to veterans
healthcare, as well as other benefits that are provided the
Veterans Benefits Administration, or VBA. Most recently, in
December 2014, CBO released a report to compare the cost of
healthcare provided directly at VHA facilities with the cost of
private sector care. My submitted statement today reprises that
report.
Although the structure of VHA and some published studies
suggest that VHA care has been cheaper than care provided by
the private sector, limited evidence and substantial
uncertainty make it difficult for CBO to reach firm conclusions
about those relative costs or whether it would be cheaper to
expand veterans' access to healthcare in the future through VHA
facilities or in the private sector.
CBO also produces budgetary baselines and cost estimates
for legislative proposals that would modify veterans' benefits.
Among other measures, over the past 8 months CBO has estimated
the budgetary effects of the Veterans Access, Choice and
Accountability Act of 2014, including earlier versions of that
legislation, and the Department of Veterans Affairs Expiring
Authorities Act of 2014, which amended certain portions of the
earlier legislation.
In recent years, at the request of both the Senate and
House Committees on Veterans' Affairs, CBO has reported on
several related topics. First, veterans' disability
compensation. Second, the VHA's treatment of post-traumatic
stress disorder and traumatic brain injury among recent combat
veterans. And third, the potential costs of providing
healthcare to veterans of all eras.
Among the many analytical challenges in conducting those
studies are the problems CBO sometimes encounters in obtaining
appropriate data from the VHA or the VBA. For instance,
comparing healthcare costs in the VHA system and the private
sector is difficult, partly because the VA has provided limited
data to the Congress and the public about its costs and its
operational performance.
Additional data, particularly if it was provided on a
regular and systematic basis, could help inform policymakers
about the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of VHA's services.
For example, the Department of Defense, in response to a
statutory requirement established in the National Defense
Authorization Act for fiscal year 1996, publishes an annual
report to the Congress about its healthcare system known as
TRICARE. The most recent of those reports contains more than
100 pages of operating statistics, including trends among
beneficiaries and the demographics, funding by appropriation
category, use and cost of inpatient, outpatient, and pharmacy
services, beneficiaries' cost sharing, and patient satisfaction
with their care.
A virtue of the annual recurring nature of those reports is
that each contains consistent trend data from previous years
and a longer data series can be compiled by comparing past
years' volumes. A corresponding annual report on VHA, if one
existed, would facilitate comparisons between VHA and the
private sector.
Another example is CMS, which administers Medicare, through
its Research Data Assistance Center provides individual level
data to researchers who can demonstrate the utility of that
type of data to their research design, who agree to handle the
data in a way that preserves patients' confidentiality, and who
consent to possible audits and publication restrictions. That
information provided by CMS is used by a wide variety of
researchers to study the health of American seniors, the cost
of providing their care, and the effectiveness of different
treatments in managing their health.
The best study that CBO could identify to compare the cost
of healthcare directly provided by VHA with the private sector
was published in 2004, based on data from 1999. The authors of
that study had access to detailed administrative data from six
VHA medical centers and the clinical charts from veterans
treated at those centers in 1999.
CBO cannot replicate that study with more recent data, both
because it had limited time and resources to perform its
analysis and because, with few exceptions, VHA does not make
either administrative data or clinical records, even with
personal identifiers removed, available to researchers in other
government agencies, universities, or elsewhere.
Additional system-wide data from VHA would have facilitated
the comparison of costs between VHA and private sector care.
For example, it would be useful to know the average salaries,
performance pay, and other elements of compensation that VHA
provides to its physicians in various specialties and for its
other clinicians, the number of patients its clinicians treat
per unit of time, for example in a typical week, and the length
and intensity of those encounters, and the average prices that
VHA pays for pharmaceutical products. But VHA does not report
that systematically and publicly.
Again, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for inviting me, and
I look forward to taking your questions.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you very much, Mr. Goldberg.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldberg appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. Mr. Blake, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF CARL BLAKE

Mr. Blake. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Chairman Benishek,
Ranking Member Brownley, and members of the subcommittee, on
behalf of the four coauthors of The Independent Budget. I would
like to thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
We believe that two clear conclusions can be drawn from the
CBO report. First comparing the cost of healthcare administered
by the VA to care provided by the private sectors is not an
apples-to-apples comparison. The second observation that can be
drawn from the report is that it expresses no definitive
conclusion on the question of which model of healthcare is more
cost-effective, and any assertion that it does is simply
rhetoric.
The CBO report clearly outlines some important distinctions
that further explain why a direct comparison between VA
Healthcare and private sector healthcare is difficult, to say
the least. Foremost among these distinctions is the fact that
VHA serves a patient population that is distinctly different
from the general U.S. population. The entire VHA system is
designed to address this situation.
Representatives of private sector healthcare organizations
have testified to this very issue. In fact, last summer at a
hearing before the full House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, a
number of the witnesses representing private healthcare
organizations and entities expressed their challenge in
understanding veterans as patients. They admitted that they
would gladly provide services to veterans seeking care, but
they also admitted that they could not guarantee care that was
veteran specific.
The second major distinction that the IB coauthors believe
is the crux of this problem deals with how the VA is funded
versus how the private sector determines its funding mechanism.
Under ideal circumstances, this would not be a challenge if the
administration requested and Congress provided necessary
resources to meet all demand placed on the system, but we know
that this does not really happen.
Congress has asserted in recent years that it has provided
all the resources the administration has requested. The IB
cannot dispute that assertion. However, we also know that the
administration rarely has requested the resources that VA
needed to properly address the demand. We only need to
reexamine the unacceptably long wait times and the lack of
access to healthcare that was exposed last spring and summer to
prove that point.
Deputy Secretary Gibson offered an interesting observation
before the full House VA Committee last summer that has long
been a complaint of the IB. Secretary Gibson testified at that
hearing that the VA has been in the business of managing to
budget, not to need. We have the Office of Management and
Budget to thank for that fact.
Ultimately, we believe the central question when comparing
VA Healthcare to private sector healthcare should focus on the
quality and value of care. While we recognize that there is
much debate underway about the quality of care being delivered
at VA medical facilities around the country, we believe that
the private sector healthcare system by and large could not
stand up to the same level and intensity of scrutiny that the
VA is under.
We will not dispute the idea that timely access to high-
quality care remains a clear objective VA is not achieving in a
satisfactory manner. Let me repeat that. We will not dispute
the idea that timely access to high-quality care remains a
clear objective that VA is not achieving in a satisfactory
manner.
Access to healthcare, along with the cost and quality of
care, are generally considered the three major indicators for
evaluating the performance of a healthcare system or provider.
Prevalent delays in delivering timely care result in patient
dissatisfaction, higher costs, and an increased risk of adverse
clinical outcomes.
However, while an argument could be made for primary care
or other types of care for some veteran patients to be
delivered outside of VA, it is an indisputable fact that most
of VA's specialized services, such as spinal cord injury,
blinded care, amputee care, and polytrauma care, are
incomparable resources that are not duplicated and not
successfully sustained in the private sector.
Are there similar systems that attempt to provide this type
of care? Yes. But they are not duplicative of what the VA does
and not on the same level.
Moreover, the viability of the VA Healthcare System depends
upon a fully integrated system in which the organization and
management of services are interdependent so that veterans get
the care they need, when and where they need it, in a user-
friendly way to achieve the desired results and provide value
for the resources spent. There certainly could be some question
about whether VA care is user friendly these days, but by and
large we believe it is. And yet, CBO points out that fully
integrated systems are not particularly common in the private
sector.
The CBO report in previous discussions and hearings make it
clear to the IB coauthors that comparing VA Healthcare and
private sector healthcare is at a minimum complicated and at
the most a fool's errand. Too many uncontrollable variables
would confuse any outcomes or conclusions. A common refrain we
hear from those clamoring for increased access is the lack of
data from the VA on its services and performance. I won't even
disagree with that fact. Clearly they need to be more
transparent about the data and information that is available.
However, the CBO report clearly explains that comparisons
would be challenging because private sector data also may be
incomplete, unavailable, and difficult to make comparable with
VHA data. To be clear, the IB coauthors believe that VHA should
be more forthcoming with its data that allows a thorough
examination of the timeliness and quality of services and the
capacity that the VA needs to meet those demands. However, the
concern over VA's apparent lack of transparency on data cannot
be set aside when the private sector does not always choose to
provide the same data.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank you for the
opportunity to testify, and I would be happy to answer any
questions that you may have.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you very much for your testimony, Mr.
Blake. I truly appreciate your perspective.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Carl Blake appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. At this time we are going to head off and do
our voting. I ask your indulgence for the remaining panel
members to wait until we return. We will recess for the time
necessary it takes to do this voting. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Dr. Benishek. We will call the subcommittee back to order.
Is it Celli.
Mr. Celli. It is Celli.
Dr. Benishek. Mr. Celli, would you please proceed with your
testimony?

STATEMENT OF LOUIS CELLI JR.

Mr. Celli. I will, thank you.
And I quote, ``All told, CBO expects that if the bill was
fully implemented, some veterans would ultimately seek
additional care that would cost the Federal Government about
$54 billion a year, after accounting for savings to other
federal programs . . . Thus, CBO estimates that the
implementation of sections 2 and 3 of the House bill would
roughly cost $500 million in 2014, $16 billion in 2015, and $28
billion in 2016.''
Chairman Benishek, Ranking Member Brownley, and
distinguished members of this Health Subcommittee, on behalf of
Commander Helm and the 2.4 million members of the American
Legion, I thank you and your colleagues for examining CBO's
recent analysis in an attempt to achieve greater clarity into
the cost considerations impact the VA Healthcare has on its
budget, and as well the quality and care and patient
satisfaction.
The CBO estimate I just read came from the original
estimate from the Veterans Access to Care Act of 2014, a bill
that many of us here in this room worked on together. The
shocking $54 billion price tag that is quoted, which includes a
$7 billion credit based on a discount to other federal programs
that CBO talks about, is a savings to the Medicare account,
because when Medicare-eligible services are performed by VA, VA
is statutorily prohibited from billing Medicare for
reimbursement, regardless of whether the care provided was
service connected or not. So VA would have to eat those costs
as well.
The analysis goes on to say, ``Because the bill would
increase enrollment in VA Healthcare in 2015 and 2016, the
demand for VA Healthcare services would probably increase in
2017 and subsequent years. If lawmakers wanted to accommodate
that increase in demand, additional appropriations would be
necessary after 2016. This estimate does not include those
costs of providing such care and additional services after
2016,'' end quote.
There has been a lot of discussion over the years that
suggests that veterans might be better off if we privatized
some or all of VA. The American Legion believes that this
concept is shortsighted, prohibitively expensive, and fails to
take into consideration the specialized care that veterans
receive and deserve at VA.
Those who suggest that veterans would be better off if VA
were privatized, we ask only that you take a moment to look at
DoD's TRICARE program for retirees, and then let us know if you
still think that veterans should trust that a privatized VA
would be there for them or their sons and daughters the next
time we are all asked to share in some fiscal budget belt
tightening.
Veterans have been battling Congress and the administration
every year for the past 10 years trying to stave off TRICARE
reduction attacks, and every year for the past several years we
have been losing more and more of the retirement benefits we
spent 20-plus years of our lives working to earn. So now, some
think that it might be a good idea to see if we want to start
taking more and more services off VA campuses too? Really?
As CBO has clearly demonstrated in past reports, and as
highlighted by my written testimony here today regarding this
report, despite an embarrassing lack of comprehensive data
available from VA, contracted care, even at Medicare rates,
which a large number of private providers refuse to accept,
will ultimately cost American taxpayers 30 to 40 percent more
in the short run and even more long term, because one of the
consequences of private care, as CBO and others consistently
point out, is less frequent trips to the doctor, resulting in
future complications and an overall increase in acute care
needs.
In addition to saving taxpayer money and having one of the
highest patient satisfaction rates in the industry, VA is a
driving factor in innovative technology and serves as a
teaching hospital for hundreds of doctors every year. No
commercial healthcare system in the United States can say the
same.
Chairman Benishek, Ranking Member Brownley, and members of
this committee, the American Legion has worked for more than 80
years to build and support a comprehensive Department of
Veterans Affairs worthy of the sacrifices our veterans have
made to protect the freedoms every one of us here in the United
States and abroad enjoy today. We will continue to work toward
that goal with this Secretary and this Congress and with the
next hundred Secretaries and Congresses to come. Thank you. And
the American Legion looks forward to working with you and your
staff as we build a better VA in the 114th Congress.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Celli, for your perspective
and your testimony.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Louis Celli appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. Dr. Tuchschmidt, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES TUCHSCHMIDT

Dr. Tuchschmidt. Thank you. Chairman Benishek, Ranking
Member Brownley, and distinguished members of the House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs Subcommittee on Health, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss with you the Department of
Veterans Affairs' cost of healthcare provided to our patients.
VA is committed to providing safe, high-quality,
accessible, and efficient healthcare for America's veterans.
Our most important mission is to make sure that veterans know
that the VA is here to care for them.
Recently the Congressional Budget Office conducted a
limited examination of how the costs of healthcare provided by
VHA compares with the costs of care provided in the private
sector. As stated in the report, distinctive features of the
VHA system, such as its mission, mix of enrollees, and
financing mechanisms, complicate cost comparisons with other
sources of healthcare.
The VHA system is designed to serve a unique patient
population, veterans. These veterans have carried the burden of
war. As a result, they suffer from a disease burden that is
higher than the general population. Many have more than one
injury or disability, incurred during their military service.
And 40 percent of our patients have a major mental health
diagnosis. Others lack social support or face socioeconomic
challenges.
This unique patient population has complex needs, and we at
the VHA are committed to providing them with really
unparalleled care. VHA provides a large social support system
to a vulnerable population addressing many of the social and
economic causes of poor health. The social programs provided by
VHA, our outreach to the homeless and those at risk, fall
outside of the typical scope of healthcare provided to patients
in the private sector.
VHA's social workers provide individual assistance
connecting veterans to a range of resources, such as financial
assistance, housing, job training, and the like. Our caregivers
support program and our readjustment counseling services
provide counseling and financial support to veterans and their
families. Beneficiary travel payments are available to veterans
who meet eligibility criteria to help them get to their medical
appointments. These are all examples of our mission to address
the total health of our veteran population, and it is not
simply to take care of illness and disease.
VHA is a world leader in treating combat-related issues and
disabilities. We offer access to a variety of services and
benefits. Our services are not widely covered under most
insurance plans, including Medicare and other public forms of
insurance. An example of this is our robust mental health
programs, particularly for post-traumatic stress disorder and
substance abuse treatment. VHA also provides the most
technologically advanced prosthetics for those veterans who
need those assistive devices. Some private insurance plans
cover prosthetic services, but generally not to the extent and
kind that we provide America's veterans.
Veteran care is complex, and these are just some of the
reasons why it is challenging, I believe, to fully compare VHA
care with private sector. We realize that access to care has
been our Achilles heel. We are thankful for the Choice Act,
which has provided funding and resources to help us address
many of these issues.
We have been working diligently with your staff to discuss
the lessons learned and will continue to do so. As the CBO
report stated, VHA currently does not publish a yearly report
about our healthcare system. I understand that we used to. I
don't know what happened to that and why we don't do that
anymore. But I commit to you today that we will produce an
annual report. We thought the TRICARE report was an outstanding
document.
But you have my commitment today to work with your staff,
with the veteran service organizations and other stakeholders,
to figure out what should be in such a report, and we will
produce that report on an annual basis.
I meet with committee staff on a weekly basis to discuss
the deployment of the Choice program, and that has, in my
opinion, been a fantastic relationship. Certainly helpful to me
in terms of understanding intention and collaboratively trying
to figure out where we go with that critical program. And you
have my commitment today to sit down with your staff and figure
out what data you would like to see about the cost of VA
healthcare, and we will do our very best to get that together
for the committee.
In conclusion, VHA has made I think many distinctive
contributions in clinical care, in medical research, and the
education of future healthcare providers. VHA recognizes the
uniqueness of the veteran's health needs and provides a
continuum of services to address not just the medical needs,
but the psychosocial needs of this population. We are proud of
our documented record in the health industry, and VHA, I
believe, provides high-quality, safe, and effective care for
veterans.
I thank you for the opportunity to be here today, and I
will do my very best to answer your questions.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Dr. Tuchschmidt.

[The prepared statement of Dr. James Tuchschmidt appears in
the Appendix]

Dr. Benishek. I will now yield myself 5 minutes for
questions. And let me just say I really appreciate you guys
being here today and your perspectives, especially from the
veteran service organizations.
I worked at the VA for 20 years off and on, and I realize
that the VA provides a service to our veterans that can't be
duplicated in the private sector. Yet we need to have some sort
of idea beyond the total amount of money we are spending at the
VA and what we are getting, because, frankly, I have in my
career seen a lot of money which I think has been wasted. There
are a lot of things that we could do better, that money could
be put to use for, and I want to make that happen. With that
spirit, I have a couple of questions I want to go for.
Mr. Goldberg, what specific data would you need to see in
order for the CBO to complete a better cost comparison between
the VA and the private sector?
Mr. Goldberg. Mr. Chairman, there are three levels of data
that we think would be useful, not only for our work, but for
the committee's oversight role, and in fact to bring in the
broader research community to look at VA, because just as it
has done in DoD and particularly in Medicare, I think that is
very healthy, to have a lot of people looking at your system.
So the first level of data would be basic demographic and
systemwide data, how many veterans are being seen, what are
they being seen for, and to what extent are we providing care
for service-connected disabilities and to what extent are we
providing care for non-SCDs. In other words, to link up the VBA
and the VHA data so they talk to each other. And we can make
sure that at a minimum we are caring for the service-connected
disabilities. That would be high-level data.
Second level is more detailed data. There would be things
like the panel sizes and the compensation rates of the
different personnel, the staffing levels by medical specialty.
For example, information about facilities, information about
overhead and accounting practices. This is finer data that
would probably be of interest to us as analysts, not
necessarily the broader committee. It is the kind of data that
some of it goes a little bit deeper than the TRICARE report,
but it is the kind of data that we would really need to take a
close look at VHA and ask why is it, what is the plausible case
that perhaps VHA is cheaper than the private sector. Well, if
we knew about panel sizes, if we knew about how many patients a
provider sees in a week, that sort of thing, we could start to
tell that story better. That is the second level.
The third level of data would be the kind of data that CMS
makes available to researchers as was studied in the Medicare
program, individual level data, so that you can actually look
at a veteran who is seen in VHA and a veteran who is seen out
in purchased care and look at the treatment regimen and look at
the number of visits and the costs. And there are privacy
issues with providing individual level data, but those issues,
I think there is a good precedent in the way that CMS handles
the Medicare data. For example, a researcher has to submit a
plan how they would use the data, how they would guard the
confidentiality. They have to destroy the data often at the end
of the project, and there are limitations on cell size that
they can report data in, table size, so that we can bring in
the broader community.
And it was really an opportunity for natural experiment,
because with the Veterans Choice Act we have a lot more
veterans who will be seen in the private sector, and there is
language in, I think, Section 101 of the Veterans Choice Act
that calls for high-level reporting, like how many veterans are
being seen. But if we got individual data on the veterans being
seen in the private sector, we could ask, if a veteran has a
certain condition, like diabetes, and is seen in the VHA, look
at utilization, and look at the costs there, and then take a
matched group with similar comorbidities and similar
demographics that is being seen out in the private sector and
see what kind of care they are getting and what the health
outcomes are, and to match that would be a great research
project.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, but I want to ask another question
and there are limits on my time.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. do you know what the average cost for
specialty care is for the VA, for example like a routine
colonoscopy within the VA versus in the private sector?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I don't have that in my head. We can
probably get that kind of information.
Dr. Benishek. I don't think you can. See, that is the whole
point of what we are doing here, is that we don't know what it
costs to do some of the routine things within the VA, because
we have inquired on this in the past, and I think that is the
kind of data we need to have, and we need to be able to provide
oversight. I agree with these other gentleman here, the VA
provides care to our veterans that can't be provided in the
private sector. And yet, a lot of the stuff that we do within
the VA can be. In those areas I think a comparison is in order
so that we can provide the best specialty care for our
veterans.
I am unfortunately out of time, so I am going to yield 5
minutes to the ranking member, Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I will try to
follow up on your line of questioning here.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. the CBO just gave three recommendations in
terms of the type of data that would be helpful to the
committee, to the VA, and certainly our oversight going into
the future to continuously improve the quality of healthcare to
our veterans and with the best amount of efficiencies that we
can yield from it. Is that something that you think that you
would be able to begin to develop and provide to the committee
and I think internally within the VA? In terms of your own
decision-making and optimizing that decision-making, it sounds
like this kind of data would be very helpful.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Sure. I am not an expert on our financial
and accounting systems, which I think go back to the 1940s, but
we do have a cost accounting system. So I think we can actually
get the cost per colonoscopy in our system. I think certainly
some of our researchers have looked at that level of data in a
much more focused way.
But I think that the answer or asking the question what is
the cost of care is actually the wrong question to be asking.
The question I think is really, what is the return on
investment? What is the value that my dollar is buying for us?
And I think there are many issues around case mix and risk
adjustment, and just comparing cost is flawed thinking.
And in my mind, value is really about quality divided by
cost, right? And when I look at the system that we have in VA,
I can tell you that looking at our data, we track the 44 HEDIS
measures that everybody in private sector tracks, and if you
look at our performance we beat Medicaid, Medicare, and
indemnity insurance on every one of them last year. If you are
a veteran, you are more likely to be screened for cancer if you
are in the VA system. You are more likely to get your diabetes,
hypertension, and lipidemia managed appropriately. You are less
likely to die from coronary bypass surgery. In fact, if you
look at the data, you are 20 percent less likely to die in a VA
hospital or have a major adverse event in a VA hospital than if
you are in a private hospital.
I think asking the question about what is the cost of care
is certainly a legitimate question, as long as we are focused
really I think on the value proposition that is here, because I
think we do serve a different population of people. And I think
efficiency is an extraordinarily reasonable expectation of any
system, any healthcare system, including the VA. And I would
not hold American healthcare up to that standard, because all
of the data shows that American healthcare is probably the most
expensive of any industrialized nation with probably the worst
outcomes.
I think the questions that are being asked and the data
that has been proposed are certainly something that we can go
back if we have clear stipulation of what it is. I am more than
happy to go back and try and figure out how to get that.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
And just then to ask the CBO, based on what was just
stated, based on looking at models in terms of yielding the
very best value and the best care for our veterans,
understanding that we may never get to an apples-to-apples
comparison with the private industry, is there a study that you
could look at to look at that to help inform us how we are
doing. I know it is tough because we are in some sense not
comparing ourselves to anything else. But is there a way for
you to analyze what the VA just said about being cautious about
just strictly looking at cost, not looking at the risk, but
determining what is the real value that we are getting on our
investment in terms of care for our veterans?
Mr. Goldberg. Yes. Let me say two things, if I may. One is,
I am heartened by Dr. Tuchschmidt's commitment to provide the
kind of data that DoD provides to the oversight committees
through the TRICARE report.
In the time we had, and our question from Senator Sanders
was pretty narrowly focused on cost, but I would agree with the
sentiment in the room that the other side of the equation is to
look at the quality of care and satisfaction. That would be a
big study. I am not sure I would just divide cost by
satisfaction, I think the math is a little harder. But I agree
to get a fuller picture you would have to look at all those
various aspects, and perhaps we could be helpful to that in
future studies.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Benishek. Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We need to know what procedures cost, and we don't know
that right now. And we need transparency, and we don't have
that right now in the VA system. And we are talking about a
system that, I mean, when you are talking about the quality of
care, that just excluded veterans by virtue of manipulating
wait lists, appointment wait lists, so that people could get
cash bonuses. That is the system that we have. And, quite
frankly, I don't think that we have the leadership, supposedly
the new leadership in place, new Secretary, is not changing the
culture of the VA as far as I can see.
Let me tell you, I deal with healthcare both on the active
duty side and on the VA side. And as a marine combat veteran,
as a military retiree, I will continue to fight to make sure
that our wounded coming back from the battlefields of
Afghanistan and potentially now Iraq don't go into the VA
system. Right now, our Active Duty, when they are injured in
combat, remain on active duty for the rehabilitation. Used to
be during Vietnam when the wounded came home they would be
stabilized in the military system and then sent on to the VA
for the rehabilitation. Now that is not the case.
Until the VA cleans up, until we are able to make sense out
of this organization, I want to make sure that our wounded,
double amputee above the knees, 2-year rehabilitation, remains
on active duty, as a marine, as an airman, as a sailor, as a
soldier. That is my obligation to them.
But my obligation to the veterans of this country is to
make sure that the VA can function and meet the obligation to
our Nation's veterans, which it is not doing in the healthcare
system. And we can all gloss it over here. I have heard some
great comments about how fine the system is. Let me tell you,
you are not talking to the veterans that I am talking to.
So to the Congressional Budget Office, Mr. Goldberg, we got
all these comments about how different this population is, but
a heart bypass operation, a colonoscopy that was mentioned, I
mean procedure by procedure, were you able to discern the costs
of those relative to the private sector in the VA system?
Mr. Goldberg. Congressman Coffman, we were not able to do
that. We had to go to the report that was published in 2004
where the researchers had access to the individual patient
records and were able to do that kind of comparison, look at
how much it actually cost to provide care in VHA and price it
out at Medicare rates. Because we did not have access to that
individual patient-level data, we really could not reproduce
that study, and so our report basically takes that study from
2004 and asks, is it still relevant today? That is about as far
as we could go lacking the kind of data that the researchers
had access to back then.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
Well, Dr. Tuchschmidt, you say you are going to provide
this information now. I don't know why you haven't provided it
in the past, but you are going to now provide it to Congress.
Let me tell you this, given the record of the Veterans
Administration in providing information to this committee, I
absolutely have no confidence in your remarks.
What I believe has to happen is we have to have a mandate
from the Congress of the United States to the Veterans
Administration on what information that they are going to
provide public, that they are going to have to be transparent,
and that they are going to have to provide the same information
that the Department of Defense provides for the healthcare of
our Nation's Active Duty. In Medicare, that population, that
information is provided.
But I am disheartened by the testimony today, and I think
that certainly it gives a responsibility to this committee to
move forward, I believe, with legislation to accomplish, I
think, what the CBO has said and what the taxpayers need. And I
believe that changes like the Veterans Choice Act actually will
make the VA system better by giving veterans an opportunity, if
they can't get an appointment within a given wait time, that is
excessive, to be able to go outside the system and be
compensated and to have that provider compensated on the
Medicare rate.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Benishek. Dr. Ruiz, 5 minutes.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ms. Ranking Member,
for holding this hearing. I am honored to again represent my
district's veterans on this subcommittee and veterans around
the country as well. And I look forward to working with my
fellow members to ensure our veterans receive the high-quality,
veteran-centered care they have earned.
Last Congress this committee worked hard to create the
Veterans Access, Choice and Accountability Act, which expands
opportunities for veterans to seek private care if the VA
cannot provide the care they need when they need it. I am
working currently with medical professionals in high-demand
specialties in my district to help my constituents utilize the
Choice program, but to maximize the effectiveness of private
care we must be able to adequately measure its value against
the VA services.
However, making an apples-to-apples comparison between the
VA and private sector health system is difficult due to the
limited available data, varying methodologies, and divergent
patient population. I think one of the things you are stuck
with is that in doing a meta-analysis, you don't have the data
to determine what procedures cost, but every hospital knows
what those procedures are, but you are limited by your own
methodology in being able to acquire that information.
It is not if you can compare the VA to private care. It is
what will you compare between the VA and private care that is
the question presented to us. While cost is important, our
number one priority must not be a spreadsheet void of a human
story, but the health and well-being of our veterans. And that
is something that we can measure in terms of morbidity,
mortality, and the performance of different VAs with their
hospital performance that can be compared to other private
hospitals.
And some hospitals are great, but some hospitals are
terrible. And even those that are great have problems with
their wait lists. So if you tell a veteran that your VA
hospital is great or has good scores or that provides cheap,
affordable, good-quality healthcare, but they can't be seen by
a physician, then it doesn't matter. So let's take a step back,
look at the big picture, and make sure that we are measuring
the right things, that we are providing a high-quality,
veteran-centered care. As the CBO remarks, quote, ``Cost
comparisons do not reflect such important considerations as the
quality of the care provided, its effects on patient health,
and patient satisfaction with a given healthcare system.''
So my question to the CBO, which actually goes in line with
your return on investment, is were these costs compared to the
cost savings that the care of the VA provides for those who get
care and therefore you reduce their morbidity and the severity
in future years and compared those cost savings that we have?
Does the study look at that?
Mr. Goldberg. Dr. Ruiz, it is an excellent question. We
were not to do that. But that would be a great follow-on
research if the data were available to follow individual
veterans, and follow their outcomes. I might say not only for
CBO, but for the larger research community it would be a great
question.
As I said earlier, if I could restate, the time we had and
the narrow focus of the question from Senator Sanders and the
data available forced us to look narrowly at cost, recognizing,
according to your question, that quality and satisfaction are
also important dimensions of the problem, we didn't have time
to look at it.
Dr. Ruiz. Well, that is why I want to caution the committee
when we look at any cost-benefit analysis because they are full
of assumptions and they are full of creative ways to determine
what are the costs now and what are the costs in the future
that you are saving. And therefore we need to make sure that we
incorporate those aspects of not only individual costs for the
individual veteran, but for the community, the country, and
overall our economy.
The other question is, if we talk about quality care, how
do you measure veteran-centered care that we can include as
part of this cost-benefit analysis?
Mr. Goldberg. Well, there were a lot of quality measures
that are used for the healthcare system in general, and VHA has
been good about reporting those kinds of measures for their own
population. I think the other ----
Dr. Ruiz. Hold on one second. You know, they are good, but
many of those are institution-centered measurements, in terms
of how many medications you provide or how many, you know.
Veteran-centered care is asking the veteran what was their
experience, what was their quality, did they receive the
medications that they believed was adequately explained and
understood, et cetera. So that is what I am talking about in
terms of veteran-centered measurements.
Mr. Goldberg. I understand. Along those lines what I would
say is we have to survey veterans. I am actually not that
familiar at the moment with the questions in the survey
instruments. But if they don't already, the VA could be asking
this question of the veterans, satisfaction kinds of questions,
exactly the considerations you have. I am not sure the degree
to which that is done. We could check with VA and find out.
Dr. Ruiz. Thank you very much. I am done with my time. I
yield back my time.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Dr. Ruiz.
Mr. Bilirakis, 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. It
really is an honor to serve on this subcommittee. And thank you
very much for holding the hearing. And I thank the panel for
their testimony.
I want to ask a question for Dr. Tuchschmidt.
Doctor, in your testimony you state the VA has surveyed
72,000 veterans each month on their patient experiences since
2002. Does that number reflect how many surveys were sent out
or how many were answered and returned?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. That is the number, I believe, of surveys
that we sent out to veterans. We have in general about, I am
going to say, about a 40 percent response rate, I think, on the
mailed surveys that we have.
We are moving right now actually to beginning to get
satisfaction surveys at the point of care. So we will get much
more real-time feedback. We are putting it on our kiosk. We put
them on TV screens actually in our hospitals. We are working
actually to put them on handheld devices that we can either
provide in our waiting rooms or that they can use on their own
phones.
We do a lot of satisfaction survey, have for a long time,
and publish that data. You know, when you look----
Mr. Bilirakis. Do you make the data public?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. The data is publicly available.
Mr. Bilirakis. How can my constituents access that data?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I am happy to get it for them, absolutely.
Mr. Bilirakis. Can they go to a particular Web site?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So if you go to our Web site you will be
able to look at that data.
Mr. Bilirakis. They can access the data?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I am pretty sure that it is there.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Well, get back to me on that.
Give me an example of maybe a question. Can they write
comments on this survey or is it A, B, C?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I believe they can write comments on the
survey, but it is also a set of questions about your experience
with your clinician. So we can tie that data actually back now
to individual primary care teams.
That data shows actually that veterans say--so they have
two issues really. I will start with the poor end of the
spectrum, which is access. So we know access has been an issue.
And the second one is really I would put in the category of
coordination of care, of kind of knowing what the next steps in
my care process is.
I think that when you look at overall in terms of their
satisfaction with their experience, and of course there is
heterogeneity in the population of responses that we get back,
but generally people are very satisfied with the quality of the
care and the experience of that care once they get in the
system. So clearly getting in, getting access, both in terms of
how quickly I can get an appointment, but then also how timely
does that happen when I get there, how long do I have to wait
in the waiting room, have been challenges for us. But we
collect that data, and I will make sure that your staff have a
link to that----
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, please get that. I would like that
available for the subcommittee. I know my constituents need to
see it.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Absolutely, we will get you that.
Mr. Bilirakis. Give me the Web site as well. You gave me
that 40 percent figure of the 72,000, I want to get that
confirmed as well.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Sure, absolutely.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
The next question is for Mr. Goldberg. Have you done any
analysis on how, if at all, the Affordable Care Act has
impacted the cost of care provided by the VA health system?
Mr. Goldberg. Actually, Mr. Bilirakis, we have not done
that analysis. We understand that VHA counts as minimum medical
coverage and so alleviates the need for veterans to pay a
penalty. But the data are just coming in, it is early, and we
do not have that analysis yet.
Mr. Bilirakis. Do you anticipate having an analysis----
Mr. Goldberg. In the next few years----
Mr. Bilirakis [continuing]. In the near future?
Mr. Goldberg. In the next few years I am hoping to get
that.
Mr. Bilirakis. In the next?
Mr. Goldberg. Do we have a timeline?
I will have to get back to you on what is a reasonable
timeline. We don't have enough data yet to answer that
question.
Mr. Bilirakis. Please.
Mr. Goldberg. But I will get you a timeline.
Mr. Bilirakis. Please do.
Mr. Goldberg. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you.
I will call upon the gentlewoman from New Hampshire, Ms.
Kuster.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. and, again,
it is an honor to serve on this committee, and I appreciate all
the time and effort.
It is interesting listening to my colleagues' comments
because I share the concerns, but I have reached a slightly
different conclusion than Mr. Coffman about what this all
means. This is a field that I am familiar with in the private
sector and this type of analysis is very difficult to come by.
This triangle of cost, quality, and access has been a major
challenge all over the country. And really that is what the
Affordable Care Act is all about, how do we increase access to
high-quality care and make sure we are getting the value
preposition that Dr. Tuchschmidt is discussing.
So I want to focus in on that a little bit, talking about
the design of such a study, how would you tease out. And I want
to pick up on my colleague Dr. Ruiz's comments about the cost
savings. It is a touchy subject up here, but a little bit like
dynamic scoring, where we know now from the private sector, if
you take something like rehospitalization, the cost to the
system for not providing, first of all, access to high-quality
care in a timely way, but second of all, to managing the
recovery process.
So elderly patients that get a hip replacement go home and
don't have sufficient home care services and end up falling
again and they land back in the hospital. And that is the core
of where the Affordable Care Act came from, is that the
hospitals were getting paid for every reentry, right, so money
is coming over the transom, nobody is focused on that.
But what we know as consumers, as taxpayers, if you can
provide the care at home and avoid the rehospitalization, it is
much less costly and, oh, by the way, people feel better. They
get better.
And so I guess I would just open it up, if any of you have
experience in that type of analysis--maybe start with Mr.
Goldberg--and what types of information would be helpful.
Granted, they are elusive in both the private sector and
the public sector, but as the flow of information increases
over the next few years, what can we look at to focus in on
that value proposition so that, as Members of Congress, we can
protect the taxpayers' funds and serve the best interests of
our veteran population?
Mr. Goldberg. That is a great question, and it is one we
have struggled with not only for care for veterans but in the
bigger healthcare system.
The logic might seem compelling that avoiding
rehospitalizations, for example, not only makes the patients
better but would save money. It has been very hard for us to
find evidence, statistical evidence, in studies to quantify
that effect.
So, while most people would think as a matter of public
policy you want to avoid the rehospitalizations and the like,
it has been very hard for us to find that effect in the data we
have looked at--not specifically at VHA, because we have not
had those data yet, but for the bigger healthcare system. It is
an ongoing research subject. It is very hard to tease out that
effect.
Ms. Kuster. Are there other examples, though?
For example, I know in New Hampshire in workers'
compensation we were able to bring down the costs dramatically
by getting people the treatment that they needed in a more
timely way rather than delaying care, which had been, sort of,
the managed-care model of trying to keep people from getting
the surgery, keep going back to PT, keep going to back to PT.
Instead, if you get the care in a timely way, make the
right diagnosis, that you can get people back on the job. And,
as I say, the silver lining is you feel better. You are cured
from--or any of the type of chronic illnesses--diabetes,
obesity, all of the measures--and maybe, Dr. Tuchschmidt, if
you want to comment on----
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Well, I was just going to say, you know, I
mean, I think doing these studies is incredibly difficult. In
getting ready for this, I had an opportunity to talk with some
of our research people. I mean, it is incredibly difficult when
they sit down to try and do this work.
I actually think that Dr. Ruiz made one of the most
important points for me, which is the point I think you are
making, and that is that managing chronic disease today has a
future savings. It avoids----
Ms. Kuster. Yes.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Savings in terms of fewer legs amputated,
fewer patients on dialysis, fewer people who are blind because
of retinopathy. And that is, you know, I think, a very
complicated piece of the puzzle.
And when you look at our patient population, I mean, our
average veteran enrolled in our system has 10 major chronic
conditions.
Ms. Kuster. Yeah.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. That is not private healthcare.
Ms. Kuster. Right.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. When you look at the dually enrolled
veteran who is enrolled in the VA and Medicare, it is up over
13--highest I have seen is 19--chronic conditions in those
patients.
And, interestingly enough, when you look at the studies
that have combined Medicare and VA data to do that and look at
that, the overlap of those diagnostic codes, the HCCs, for
which we are treating the patient and Medicare is treating the
patient are extraordinarily different. And it only overlaps in
about two of conditions at the individual patient level.
So I think that, you know, we have a patient population
that has an enormous amount of chronic disease, particularly as
they age. And thinking about the cost of the intervention today
is fine, but then what is the value, not just in terms of, you
know, I don't have to pay for that amputation or that dialysis,
but in terms of quality of life, improving the lives of
American veterans.
Ms. Kuster. Right. Well, thank you. My time is well up, but
that is a point that I would like to keep focused on going
forward.
Thank you.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you.
Dr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Yes, sir.
This will be for the good doctor and Mr. Goldberg.
I will make a comment first, that we are talking about the
quality of cost of the healthcare, and I think we are getting a
little bit confused.
It is fairly easy, certainly in the private sector--
because, up until 4 weeks ago, I was a practicing physician in
family practice, seeing VA patients in concert with the local
VA clinic.
The chair asked about the cost of a colonoscopy. Well, that
is a pretty objective test. You are talking managing chronic
disease--diabetes, long-term hypertension, long-term congestive
heart failure. So I understand that is hard to measure. But it
is not hard to get figures, I don't think, on the cost of a
procedure--a chest x-ray, a CBC--and compare that to the
private sector.
The question is--I guess for you, Doc--on the VA providers,
the doctors, the nurse practitioners, the PA, are there
computer data that they are given to show that the treatment
that they have given that particular veteran is working and is
the best treatment for the best cost?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So we provide our clinicians a lot of
feedback on all of our performance goals, right? So we measure
all the HEDIS metrics on performance. We measure satisfaction
on our patients. I mean, we have, actually, the last time I
saw, 200-and-something things that we count. And we do provide
feedback to our clinicians, and we have been working, actually,
on more sophisticated ways of displaying and providing that
information back.
You know, I think that a lot of it is about system
performance, though. It is not individual performance, right?
So it is, how do we perform as a system? And, certainly, the
individual clinician contributes to that performance, but it is
really a collective thing. And many of our clinicians, while
they have individual effort contributed to those things, don't
control space and the number of support staff, et cetera, et
cetera. But they do get information back about global system
performance.
Dr. Abraham. It is like what Dr. Ruiz mentioned. Certainly,
there are different hospitals that perform much differently
across this Nation. Some have great ratings, and some have very
poor ratings.
I will refer back to the private sector. Every quarter,
every 3 months, I would get a detailed evaluation of my
performance, comparing me to the peers within the insurance
systems, whether it be Blue Cross, whatever. Every month, I
would get however many insurance companies we had gone along
with.
And I am just thinking, it should not be that difficult in
the VA system to compare doctors among their peers and doctors
among the different hospitals with the VA to see which ones are
rising to the top and then which ones maybe are more mediocre.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. We do that. So I am happy to have our
staff come over and brief you on our SAIL--it is called our
SAIL report. So we have a data tool that displays that
information graphically, and you can drill down into that data.
And I am happy to have somebody come over and show you that
tool.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And going back to the objective colonoscopy, CBC, as
compared to the more subjective chronic management over years
of a chronic disease, where are we going in that direction?
What is happening in the near future to try to resolve those
issues?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So we do have a cost accounting system; it
is called DSS. And both people's time is allocated in that
system as well as dollars. You know, I don't have it with me,
but I am pretty confident that we can come up with a cost for a
colonoscopy. I am sure my CFO is sitting back there about ready
to strangle me when I get back. But I am pretty confident that
our systems would allow us to produce that data.
Dr. Abraham. Okay. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, we talk a lot about the cost. Obviously, that is
one of the things we are here to talk about today. And you can
measure, maybe, cost per RVU, relative value unit, right?
So can you tell me what goes into determining how much you
are spending per RVU produced, either per hospital or across
the VA? What numbers go into that?
Mr. Goldberg. Could I defer to Dr. Tuchschmidt on that? I
think he is probably in a better position to answer that
question.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. Sure.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Sure.
So we do measure RVU data, and I can actually get you some
costs per RVU----
Dr. Wenstrup. That is not what I am asking. I am asking
what goes in to determine how much it costs the VA per RVU. In
other words, is it just what you paid the physician? Is it what
you paid the physician and all the staff per RVU? Is it what
you paid the physician, the staff, the administration per RVU?
Is it what you paid the physician, staff, administration, and
what your bills are for the physical plant that you are working
in?
Because, in private practice, if I have a free place to
have my clinic, I would do a little better than if I am paying
for my own building or paying rent.
So when we are talking about costs, I mean, I am looking at
the big picture here. When you talk about how much it costs per
RVU, I would like to know what are you actually including in
that cost. Because, to me, physical plant and everything else
comes into play.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Yes. So I think, actually, you could
probably calculate it multiple ways. You could do the fully
allocated cost per RVU. You can do salary cost per RVU. And we
benchmark with MGMA and UMHM standards, which is against take-
home salaries of clinicians and----
Dr. Wenstrup. I guess what I would like to see within the
VA hospitals is just start with the standard, put down how many
RVUs were produced in all the VA hospitals and clinics across
the country and what was the bill for everything--everything.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So we have our SPARC tool. I think you
have seen that tool. So we have our SPARC tool, which looks at
the RVU data, and it has cost data in there as well. And it is
also marked against access at the local site for GI or whatever
it might be.
So we do have that information, and we are going out and
getting that data independently validated. So we have a
contract with Grant Thornton to look at the tool and the
methodology and how we are doing the math to tell us whether,
in fact, you know, we have done this in a reasonable way,
against industry standards or whether, you know, we have made
up something that doesn't fly.
Dr. Wenstrup. So someone could tell us--it would be just
one number--how much it costs per RVU across the entire VA,
including all of your expenses.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I will try and get that.
Dr. Wenstrup. I think that would be a good landmark.
Another question I have for you is, are there areas that
you think that the VA--because there are areas I think the VA
could be centers of excellence compared to other sectors,
especially things that are military-specific.
Do you think that we should have a focus toward some of
those, such as TBI, PTSD, the effects of agent orange? And, as
you said, a lot of the comorbidities--so many of the patients,
compared to the regular population, have comorbidities.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. That is right.
Dr. Wenstrup. That can be another center of excellence.
And prosthetics, for example, do you think that we should
have a focus towards that in our VAs?
In other words, are there things that you think the VA can
do better than anyone else?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Well, I think----
Dr. Wenstrup. In the long term.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I think there are things that we do do
better than anybody else. And I think your suggestion,
Congressman, is a great one.
We do have those centers today. So we have centers of
excellence in spinal cord injury and in TBI around the country
that are both engaged in clinical care as well as in research
and training, you know, future healthcare providers. Those are
all part of our mission. So we do have those.
And, you know, I think looking at where are the things that
we do really well and, quite frankly, where are some of the
things maybe as a system we don't do so well but a center of
excellence could help drive that.
We have taken that model through our query process, where
we have funded, for a couple decades, actually, centers for
translational research, to go out and say, okay, what are the
best practices in managing congestive heart failure, and how do
we then, as a system, figure out how to deploy that and get it
from the bench to the bedside. Because if we can't get it to
the point of care, all that knowledge and expertise doesn't
really help us.
So I think the suggestion that you have made is an
excellent one.
Dr. Wenstrup. And I am just thinking of our long-term focus
here and what we want the VA to look like down the road. And
those are areas where, because of the patient population, the
VA can be better than just the everyday setting. But there may
be other things that we say, we can let that go, because that
can be done down the street, Anywhere, USA, so maybe we don't
need to focus that much on that in the VA in particular.
Just a thought. And I am always curious to get the feedback
on that. Thank you.
And I yield back my time.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Dr. Wenstrup. Dr. Huelskamp five
minutes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the hearing on this matter, although I will
note, I think we have had numerous hearings with the same
conclusion, which is: We are not for sure what we know, but we
are trying to find out a little bit more.
And near as I can tell from the four folks on the panel, if
you ask the question, are we getting good-quality care, we are
not for sure. Is it cheaper or more expensive in a private
setting? Well, we are not for sure.
But I want to follow up and dissect a little bit more--
first of all, I want to know from VA, what percent of your care
is spent on the specialized care that Mr. Blake mentioned?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. On the specialized care for?
Dr. Huelskamp. Mr. Blake made reference to the specialties
that are provided by VA that are not accessible elsewhere. What
percent of your total care is for that type of care?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I will have to take that for the record
and get you a number, which I am happy to do. I think it
depends a little bit on what you put in that category of stuff.
Dr. Huelskamp. Yes.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. But we can get you a breakdown
specifically around the----
Dr. Huelskamp. Yeah. And I understand the difficulty. I
mean, that is why we are here today, because that is the kind
of question that I thought we would have a ready, accessible
answer and say, okay, yeah, we know.
Is it in 10 percent? Twenty-five percent? Five percent? Any
guesstimates there at all just for today? I understand we will
get something for the record.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I think it is much higher than that,
actually. It is over 35 percent, I think, of our total costs go
into treating service-connected disabilities.
Dr. Huelskamp. That is only available at the VA. Okay. And
I will look forward to hearing a little more on that.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I want to turn and ask Mr. Goldberg with
CBO, in the CBO score of the Vet Choice bill that we passed,
the provisions dealing with choice, if I remember correctly,
$8.16 billion of the cost of that bill was for the vet choice
over the next 2 years.
Can you dissect that a little bit more for the committee?
Because, as I understood from the CBO report, you don't know if
it is more or less expensive in the private sector. And so how
do you know it is going to cost $8 billion more? What
proportion of that $8 billion is attributable to access,
greater access? Or are you saying it is just more expensive?
Can you shed a little light on that? I mean, that was a
very big number. And, in my district, actually, I believe it is
cheaper and better for vet choice, but you are saying it is a
lot more expensive. Can you describe and dissect that?
Mr. Goldberg. Unfortunately, I am not the best person to
describe that. So if I could take that for the record, and we
could get you a breakdown on that.
Dr. Huelskamp. I would appreciate that.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. And do that in light of your statements
that we are not for sure, we don't know, we don't have good
enough data to compare that. So, I mean, you might come back
and say, it was all about additional access, all about reduced
waiting time.
Because what I hope in the long term is, instead of
worrying about necessarily what the studies say and what
experts in Washington, D.C., say or some big university, some
big hospital, what I am worried about is what my constituents
say. And, frankly--and my district is different than others--
they are tired of driving 200, 300 miles for care that they
could get right down the road at their local hospital.
And the VA has not been very helpful in making that happen.
And we are slowly implementing this, but what I have heard
lately from the VA is soon that 2-year period will be up and
then we go back to the old way of doing things, which is
restricting choice rather than expanding choice.
And so I would like to allow veterans and their families to
make those choices. So if we could find out what proportion of
your estimate--again, $8.16 billion for veterans' choice is a
pretty hard thing to pass around here again. And so I want to
know what that means in the future and how you arrived at that
figure, because I really can't pull that out of the data.
One thing I will note, as well, for the CBO and the VA and
for the chairman, as well--again, glad that you had this
hearing, but we have had a multitude of hearings where I think
we have--the summary of hearing after hearing on data issues is
the data is not valid and not reliable. And then, every time,
somebody comes back and says, well, we think we know this
information.
But the core of this problem was we were being told things,
as Members of Congress, that didn't match up with what was
really happening--you know, that there was no waiting time,
that we have taken care of all these veterans--which led to a
real catastrophe, came to a head about a year ago. So I want to
keep that in mind.
I look forward to the data from both the VA and CBO,
because I want to put those together. We want to know what it
is really going to cost.
But then, you know, I think the crux of the matter is that
we have an entire system, in comparison, called the Medicare
system, where you don't drive to one hospital to get medical
care in the entire congressional district. I mean, people would
be outraged. But we make veterans in my district, every single
one of them, if they want care, they have to drive to a
hospital outside a congressional district. That is two-thirds
of the State of Kansas. And my goal will continue to be to make
certain they can go to 1 of 70 community hospitals and get
their care that they deserve rather than driving hundreds of
miles.
So I appreciate it. And we are going to continue to work on
this, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to the data from our
conferees.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Dr. Huelskamp.
I want to thank all the Members here this morning and to
the witnesses as well.
We are just starting to look into this issue. And I know
that we could go on and on with questions today, but, you know,
I am, frankly, disappointed with the VA. We want to talk about
the cost of healthcare within the VA.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. you mentioned you have a lot of data, but
yet you didn't give us any data in your written testimony. I am
very disappointed.
We are going to really work on trying to, pass some
legislation, and I would appreciate the rest of your help to be
able to, actually mandate the fact that VA presents data
similar to what the DoD is doing with TRICARE, at least to get
a handle on what is happening with our costs.
I know that we are going to continue to work on this issue
in our committee to get input from everyone on the committee
and in the private sector and from the VSOs, as well, as to how
we should proceed with this. But I think the American people
need to know a little bit more about what is happening in the
VA so that we can provide better care for our veterans.
We may be submitting some further questions for the record.
I would appreciate your assistance in getting that stuff done.
Dr. Benishek. If there are no further questions, then you
all are now excused.
I ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and include extraneous
material.
Without objection, so ordered.
Dr. Benishek. I would like to once again thank all the
witnesses and the audience members for joining us here this
morning.
And the hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of the Chairman Dan Benishek M.D.

Good morning and thank you all for joining us for today's oversight
hearing, ``Examining the Quality and Cost of VA Healthcare.''
This Congress, I am honored to return as the Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Health and to be joined once again by my colleague and
friend--Congresswoman Julia Brownley as our Ranking Member.
Ranking Member Brownley and I are joined by several senior and
returning Committee Members and one freshman--Dr. Ralph Abraham.
Five of us are doctors, five of us are veterans, and all of us
share the same primary goal--to create a Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) healthcare system that provides timely, accessible, and high-
quality care that our veterans can be proud to call their own.
Our work will require open and ongoing cooperation and
communication with veterans, stakeholders, and--most importantly--VA
leaders.
Unfortunately, it became painfully apparent to me last year that
the Veterans Health Administration (VHA)--which operates the VA
Healthcare System--was either unable or unwilling to provide basic
information about the services it provides.
Using a simplistic equation--dividing the 9.3 million veterans who
are enrolled in the VA healthcare System by VHA's annual budget of $57
billion--VA spends just over $6,000 per veteran patient.
However, we know from VA's own data that fewer than 30 percent of
veterans rely on VA for all of their healthcare needs, meaning VHA is
only providing for the total healthcare needs of approximately 2.4
million veterans at a per patient cost of more than $23,000.
This is obviously a rough calculation that--as I am sure VA will
argue--fails to take into account certain unique aspects of the veteran
population and VA Healthcare System.
However, that is the kind of granular data that we need in order to
move the VA Healthcare System forward.
Recently, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) released an
analysis comparing the costs of the VA Healthcare System with the costs
of private sector healthcare systems.
In their report, CBO found that, quote `` . . . limited evidence
and substantial uncertainty make it difficult to reach firm conclusions
about [VHA's] relative costs . . . '' end quote.
The ``limited evidence'' and ``substantial uncertainty'' that CBO
references is the direct result of VA's failure to provide the
information that is needed to assist policymakers and the public in
evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of VA's services.
VA's lack of transparency is echoed in the disappointing
testimony--absent substance or detail--that VA provided for this
morning's hearing.
Coming on the heels of last year's astounding access and
accountability failures, VA's testimony provided for this hearing is
unacceptable and I have begun examining measures that would require VA
to be much more open with the American people moving forward.
Today's hearing is just the first in what will be a year-long
effort by this Subcommittee to achieve greater clarity into the cost
considerations that impact VA's healthcare budget and, therefore, the
care our veterans receive. I thank you all for being here today.

Prepared Statement of Julia Brownley, Ranking Member

Good morning. Thank you all for being here today in support of
military veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing. I look forward
to working with you this Congress to better the lives of veterans and
their families.
According to the Veterans Health Administration's report Blueprint
for Excellence, veterans enrolled in the VA Healthcare System have a
significantly greater disease burden than the general population, even
after accounting for the age and gender mix. Forty percent of the
nearly 9 million enrollees have service-connected disabilities, and
their care, in Fiscal Year 2013, accounted for about half of VHA's $54
billion in total obligations.
Clearly there is a high reliance on VA Healthcare for veterans who
are disabled.
Today we will examine the quality and cost of VA healthcare. The
Congressional Budget Office released a report late in 2014 that looked
at comparing the costs of the veterans' healthcare system with private
sector costs.
What CBO found was that it is very difficult to compare costs
because of a variety of factors. Veterans who are enrolled in the VHA
system receive most of their healthcare outside that system--about 70
percent. Veterans have different clinical and demographic
characteristics, and cost-sharing requirements are much lower for VA
care than for care received from private-sector providers.
Another very important point to remember is that VHA's mission is
to address the total health of veteran patients, not just provide care
for illness or disease. This is a much different approach than the
private sector practices.
Additionally, CBO points out in their report that there are
differences in financial incentives for providers. For example, most
private-sector providers, whether in hospitals or physicians practices,
generate revenues for each unit of service that they deliver. Because
of that, they have a financial incentive to deliver more services,
whereas the VA providers do not.
CBO suggests that an annual report, much like that of the
Department of Defense's TRICARE health system, which includes operating
statistics, trends among beneficiaries and their demographics, among
other things, would facilitate comparisons between VHA and the private
sector. However, these comparisons would still be challenging, in part
because private-sector data might also be incomplete, unavailable, or
difficult to make comparisons with VHA data.
Instead of looking at comparing costs to the private sector, I
think we should focus on improving access to veterans healthcare,
ensure that veterans receive the best care possible, and continue to
hold important oversight hearings on the quality and safety of the care
provided to veterans.
We absolutely need complete transparency in terms of costs within
the VA, and there is still much to learn from the private sector and
their practices--particularly when it comes to IT and better access to
healthcare within the VA.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and I yield back my time.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
