- POWER OF LEGISLATIVE INQUIRY_IMPROVING VA BY IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

POWER OF LEGISLATIVE INQUIRY_IMPROVING VA BY IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MONDAY, MARCH 16, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-9

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-572 PDF                          WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American
Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

(II)

C O N T E N T S

----------

Monday, March 16, 2015

Page

Power of Legislative Inquiry--Improving VA by Improving
Transparency...................................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Hon. Jeff Miller, Chairman.......................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    54
Hon. Corrine Brown, Ranking Member...............................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    55

WITNESSES

Hon. Leigh A. Bradley, General Counsel, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     5
Ms. Maureen T. Regan, counselor to the Inspector General, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs.................................     7
Prepared Statement...........................................    56
Mr. Charles Tiefer, Professor of Law University of Baltimore
School of Law..................................................     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    59
Mr. Michael D. Bopp, Partner, Gibson, Dunn ` Crutcher LLP........    11
Prepared Statement...........................................    65

POWER OF LEGISLATIVE INQUIRY--IMPROVING VA BY IMPROVING TRANSPARENCY

----------

Monday, March 16, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 7:30 p.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Walorski, Abraham,
Zeldin, Costello, Radewagen, Bost, Brown, Takano, Brownley,
Titus, Ruiz, Kuster, O'Rourke, Rice, McNerney, and Walz.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JEFF MILLER

The Chairman. This hearing will come to order. I want to
thank everybody for coming to tonight's hearing entitled The
Power of Legislative Inquiry--Improving the VA by Improving
Transparency. This hearing tonight is going to examine some of
the legal objections that have been raised by the Department of
Veterans Affairs, including its Office of Inspector General in
responding to this committee's requests for documents and
information.
Members, I want to emphasize tonight that an essential goal
of this committee is to use its constitutional oversight
authority to discover and to address problems so that VA can
serve veterans more effectively and efficiently. And while I am
willing to work with Secretary McDonald to implement needed
reforms, I am unwilling to allow the Secretary or anyone else
at the Department to dictate how the committee conducts its
oversight or performs its investigations, nor am I willing to
permit the Department to place any limits on the information
that we receive.
Simply put, the committee's constitutional obligation to
conduct oversight requires that it receive complete and
unfettered access to all documents requested. This committee
requires transparency from the VA. Such transparency was absent
last year when this committee helped to uncover the national
wait-time scandal. Scheduling data manipulation was exposed
despite repeated and false denials by VA officials that there
was anything wrong. When VA tried to impede the committee's
investigation, we were forced to issue subpoenas to get
answers. Now, ultimately, leadership at the VA was forced out
through accountability, for the national scandal itself remains
complete. Unfortunately, it is uncertain whether VA truly
understands the lessons in transparency it should have learned.
Currently, an excess of 100 requests for information remain
outstanding, 63 of which are months and months past due. Based
on its general counsel's advice, VA has insisted on chairman's
letters for many requests and has taken to second guessing
whether there exists a legitimate purpose for each of the
requests. Equally problematic, VA and OIG assert that they can
withhold sensitive information based on the unfounded fear that
such information might be publicly released by this committee.
Members of the Supreme Court have consistently found
Congress' oversight powers to be broad in scope due to its
constitutionally enumerated powers. Regardless, VA, and more
troubling, its Office of Inspector General, continue to assert
a number of what I believe are meritless rationales to delay,
to limit, and even deny information to this committee. For
example, VA recently invoked the Trade Secrets Act to avoid
disclosing a risk assessment evaluating the cost of options for
completing the Denver Hospital construction project which is
already hundreds of millions of dollars over budget. Given that
Congress has to appropriate and authorize the funds for the
hospital, the reluctance to share this needed information is
perplexing at best.
In addition VA recently raised undefined privacy concerns
to refuse producing all records of a veteran who tragically
committed murder/suicide. That request was made months ago.
Also due to an unnecessary and unjustified Privacy Act review
by VA general counsel, VA has failed to produce several boxes
of EEO documents from Philadelphia, an area that Mr. Costello
has been very involved in. We requested months ago this
information, and even though a member of my staff was told by a
VA representative that the files would be available in a few
days, they were never produced.
And at a briefing with committee staff last Monday, VA
representatives suggested that VA and the committee work
together to balance equities and minimize disruption to the
Department. They suggested that the committee entertain
briefings in lieu of document requests, and to the extent
documents remained necessary, that the committee accept in-
camera reviews. With full notice of this hearing, they even
tried a late gambit to get ahead of the circumstances by
offering to allow my staff to see long-sought veteran medical
files and the Philadelphia EEO files, meaning VA would actually
retain the physical custody of relevant documents, and the
committee would only get a time-limited, VA-supervised viewing.
My flat answer to this arrangement is no. The committee is
not a junior partner with VA in any respects, and certainly not
when it comes to concerns that our obligation is required in
its conduction of oversight.
We request documents for a number of reasons within our
oversight role, and although we endeavor to share what we can
with VA regarding the purpose of an inquiry, there are
legitimate reasons for stopping short of full disclosure. Among
other things, VA's efforts to co-opt committee investigations
could place in jeopardy our ability to cultivate whistleblowers
within the Department. Further, the independence of an
investigation could be compromised or frustrated by deliberate
delay if the full purpose of an inquiry is revealed to the
entity that is the subject of the investigation.
Let there be no mistake or misunderstanding. When this
committee requests documents, I would expect production to be
timely, complete, and accurate. I don't expect a litany of
questions about the purpose of a request, a negotiation about
how or when it will be answered, or a tutorial from VA
officials about how the committee should conduct its business.
Perhaps most disappointing is that even VA's inspector general
has adopted a similar restrictive posture with this committee.
The Office of Inspector General failed to include the committee
in the distribution of an early report on wait times at
Phoenix, and more recently, a report on serious medication
management issues at Tomah, Wisconsin.
Notwithstanding the Inspector General Act mandate to keep
Congress currently and fully informed, the IG has a stilted
position that other than a semi-annual report specifically
mentioned in the IG Act and others mandated by a separate
statute, that reporting to Congress is fully within its
discretion. This position was articulated most recently in
refusing to provide the committee with all underlying
documentation for an IG report finding serious improprieties of
a former senior procurement official.
Among reasons for the denial were the FOIA, Freedom of
Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the Trade Secrets Act.
This case deserves special attention and is illustrative of the
too-cozy relationship, I believe, between VA inspector
general's office and the VA. Given the gravity of the findings
in that the official had taken a position with the Treasury
Department, we referred the report to the Treasury IG. The VA
OIG refused to cooperate with the Treasury IG's office that was
an investigation citing unfounded Privacy Act concerns. The
Treasury IG conducted its own independent investigation, and
issued a letter to the committee this past Wednesday that calls
into question the integrity of VA OIG's actions in this
particular matter.
At this time, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
include the letter in the hearing record. Without objection, so
ordered.
In addressing continuing scandals at VA, Deputy Secretary
Sloan Gibson recently said, ``I don't expect anybody to give
that trust back. I expect we are going to have to earn it back.
One of the ways we will work to earn that trust back is through
transparency and openness.'' If VA truly wants to be
transparent and open, one of the first things it needs to do is
to stop impeding this committee's oversight investigations. And
with that, I yield to the ranking member for an opening
statement.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Jeff Miller appears in
the Appendix]

OPENING STATEMENT OF CORRINE BROWN

Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will be brief in
my remarks given the time. I know that I speak for many of our
members when I question the urgency and the need to hold this
hearing in the evening and not in the course of regular order
of this committee. I know we have a hearing scheduled on April
the 30th on female veterans issues, but I wonder if a hearing
on homeless veterans or military sexual traumas, which many
members asked for as far back as May 2013, would not be more of
benefit this evening.
I believe that the topic of this hearing on the oversight
powers of this committee and the limitation of that power
including recognition that there are sometimes legal interests
that the executive branch have that we should try to
accommodate; it is an important one. This goes to the very
heart of the Doctrine of Separation of Powers. I believe that
this discussion rooted in Congress' broad but not unlimited
oversight powers is a discussion that from the time many of our
committee should engage in. Our job as a committee is an
important one, and we need to have access to information that
enables us to fulfill our valid legislative purpose. It is well
settled that Congress does not have the general power of
investigation.
I look forward to hearing from the VA how the new process
that they have undertaken will lead to more complete and more
timely response to legal committee requests. For too long,
members on both sides have expressed frustration at not getting
answers to the questions we have. I hope that this new process
will fix this problem and not just be the same old process
dressed up as something new. I have long believed that this
committee works best when we work together, when we work
together to uncover problems and work together to ensure that
we find solutions to this problem. This working together
includes informing all committee members of actions taken in
the name of this committee, including oversight requests from
the VA, the inspector general, and other agencies.
I am troubled that I have not been informed of many of
these requests, and I hope that you will ensure me, Mr.
Chairman, that my staff and I will be informed in the future. I
look forward to the hearing and the oversight discussions. I
believe their contribution will be helpful to all of us in
order to enlighten us on this complex area of law that we look
at ways to improve the manner and process by which we as a
committee conduct our oversight responsibilities in the future.
I thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.

[The prepared Statement of Ranking Member Corrine Brown
appears in the Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much to the ranking member. I
would ask as this committee usually does if members would waive
their opening statements. They can be entered into the record
at the appropriate point. I was looking at the calendar. I
would also note that next Monday night is clear, and if the
ranking member would like to get with me, I would be happy to
discuss another evening meeting reference MST or homelessness.
I would be glad to try to work that into our schedule. I think
those are very important issues.
Ms. Brown. Would you yield, Mr. Chairman?
The Chairman. Yes.
Ms. Brown. You and I have discussed working to make sure
that we coordinate our schedules, and you just had another
trip, and I indicated to you that I would like to make sure
that when we schedule trips, or when we schedule hearings, that
we work together to make sure it accommodates all of the
members. I don't want you to meet without us. We are a team,
and as the Army said, it is one team, one fight, and it is best
if we are all working together.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And reclaiming my time,
members, we were going to have this meeting next Monday night,
but in deference to the ranking member's schedule, I did, in
fact, move it to tonight.
So I would like to welcome the panelists to the table
tonight. We are going to hear from the Honorable Leigh Bradley,
general counsel for the Department of Veterans Affairs; Ms.
Maureen Regan, Counselor for the Inspector General of the
Department of Veterans Affairs; Professor Charles Tiefer,
Professor of Law at the University of Baltimore School of Law;
and Mr. Michael Bopp, Partner at Gibson Dunn & Crutcher, LLP.
Given the quick turnaround time for this hearing, the VA
requested and was allowed not to provide a written statement.
For the other witnesses who did provide a written statement,
your complete written statement will be entered into the
hearing record.
And, Ms. Bradley, if you do have an opening statement, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. LEIGH A. BRADLEY

Ms. Bradley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good evening. Thank
you for the opportunity to speak to the committee directly
following what I believe was a very productive briefing with
members of your staff and the staff of the Senate Veterans'
Affairs Committee just last week about how the Department of
Veterans Affairs can better respond to congressional requests
for information, including those made in the exercise of your
legislative oversight authority.
At the outset, I would like to underscore my personal
understanding of, and commitment to the important work that is
before the Department. Secretary Bob McDonald has pledged to
transform the Department to rebuild trust with veterans and
other stakeholders. My commitment to be part of the Secretary's
team during this seminal transformation is both personal and
rooted in a deep belief that the mission of the Department, to
care for those who have served and for their families and their
survivors, goes to the core of our Nation's character. I am
honored to be part of this mission, and enthusiastically
committed to the work ahead.
An integral part of rebuilding trust is meeting our
obligation to provide information to Congress. Secretary
McDonald recently emphasized this important duty to the
Department's leaders and has stressed to all employees the need
to assist VA's Office of Congressional and Legislative Affairs
in ensuring that oversight requests are responded to both
accurately and in a timely manner.
I would like to reemphasize today what we said to your
staffers during last week's briefing. The Department is
wholeheartedly committed to working with Congress in
collaboration and good faith to ensure that Congress' oversight
goals are met.
Among the top priorities the Secretary laid out for me this
past December, when I became general counsel, was to improve
the Department's capacity to understand and respond to the
committee's oversight needs. This effort is directly linked
with the Secretary's commitment to improve our department's
openness and transparency which will, we believe, help restore
public trust. We have made significant progress toward our
goal. We have aligned resources to enhance the team charged
with responding to congressional oversight requests, and a
little bit over 2 weeks ago, we appointed an experienced leader
to serve as legislative counsel to oversee the team. We are now
developing procedures that will promote a more systematic and
clear approach to responding to oversight requests. And as I
said a few moments ago, we had a very productive discussion
with your staff last week about how we are improving our
response process.
The courts have recognized that the Constitution
contemplates that the legislative and executive branches, as
co-equal branches of the government, will work together to
understand and accommodate one another's interests. One of my
most important responsibilities as VA's general counsel is to
ensure the Department's good faith engagement in the oversight
accommodation process. Among VA's key interests in this process
are the privacy rights and dignity of all veterans and VA
employees.
For example, to carry out the Department's core mission,
our sacred trust, of providing care to veterans and their
beneficiaries, VA collects and maintains a variety of personal,
and often intimate data, on individual veterans and their
family members. Veterans' health records include more than
medical diagnoses and lab test results, but also extremely
sensitive information like sexual history, family finances, and
personal information about the veteran's children, spouse or
other loved ones that veterans may share with VA clinicians.
Similarly VA employee records may include sensitive
information such as bank account and routing numbers, the
Social Security numbers of dependent children who may be
covered by the employee's health insurance plan, and the
designated recipient of death benefits.
Some of this data goes to the core of an individual's
privacy and dignity and may also go to the heart of the
patient-provider relationship. We simply cannot rebuild
veterans' trust in VA if we are not sensitive to that fact. We
understand and respect that the committee may need access to VA
records to properly oversee the Department, and that may
include this type of data. We are committed to accommodating
your requests for records as fully and as quickly as we can.
When we do provide veterans' or employees' records to the
committee, however, we must do so sensitively and carefully
consistent with our core values, legal obligations and our
commitment to veterans.
The Office of General Counsel is guided by Secretary
McDonald's mandate for increased transparency and openness with
Congress and by the Department's core values. I cannot
overstate how deeply we are committed to providing you with
responsive and timely information. We believe we can fulfill
that obligation through open dialogue to facilitate the most
responsive information possible to meet your oversight needs.
Getting this right is deeply personal to me. I am a veteran
myself, as well as a career civil servant. Both my husband and
my father are veterans, as well as both my grandfathers. My
daughter is currently serving on active duty and will one day
become a veteran. I believe that all of us who chose to serve
this Nation, in uniform or otherwise, expect the Department to
work with Congress to ensure that your oversight goals are met.
At the same time, I believe they also expect both VA and
Congress to work together to ensure that their privacy and
dignity are preserved through the protection of their personal
information. From this place of shared interests, we look
forward to working with you to accommodate both of these
critical goals.
For myself and the Office of General Counsel, I give you my
commitment to perform our duties faithfully and respectfully,
to fulfill the Department's sacred trust to veterans, and to
engage in an efficient and transparent accommodation process
with the committee. That is what Secretary McDonald has
directed, and I fully support him in that important commitment.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Bradley appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Regan. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MAUREEN T. REGAN

Ms. Regan. Thank you. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member
Brown, and members of the committee, I would like to take this
opportunity to address the issues that have been raised with
respect to the report we issued on December 8, 2014, regarding
the contracts awarded by VA's Technical Acquisition Center to
Tridec Technologies for the Virtual Office of Acquisition. On
Thursday evening, March 12, we received a media inquiry
regarding a letter sent by Inspector General Eric Thorson at
the Department of the Treasury to the chairman and ranking
member questioning the integrity of our report. It is very
disconcerting to us that this letter was released to the media
without any discussion with us. In fact, as I sit here tonight,
neither the committee nor Mr. Thorson has provided us with a
copy of the letter.
Mr. Thorson's conduct raises serious question about the
legality of his actions as a Presidentially-appointed inspector
general who, at the request of the chairman of this committee,
conducted an investigation of the VA Office of Inspector
General and reported his findings directly to the Chairman of
the Committee.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 11 of the
Inspector General Act, we have referred the matter to the
Integrity Committee of the Council of Inspectors General for
Integrity and Efficiency, otherwise known as CIGIE. We
requested that the Integrity Committee conduct a full
investigation, including the conduct of all individuals
involved. The Integrity Committee is chaired by the Assistant
Director of the Criminal Division Of The Federal Bureau Of
Investigation.
It is also disconcerting to read the Chairman's recent
attacks in the media on the integrity of VA OIG leadership and
cast doubt on the reliability of our work. If the committee has
concerns about this or any of our reports, the committee can
discuss these concerns with us, and we encourage that, or
report their concerns to CIGIE's Integrity Committee.
As the author of the VA IG report on the contracts awarded
to Tridec, I can assure you that the findings and conclusions
are fully supported by the evidence. I personally reviewed the
investigative records and contract documents and cited them in
detail in the report. In response to a January 7, 2015 request
from Chairman Miller, we provided the supporting documents to
the Committee. We understand those documents were given to the
Treasury IG. Because the March 11 letter was released to the
media, I would like to address some of the most egregious
factual errors in the March 11 letter.
The Treasury's IG's conclusions appear to be based in part
on unchallenged statements made by two subjects of the report
and four unidentified persons without any verification of their
statements. The Treasury IG states in his letter that his staff
did not have access to the evidence needed to verify the
statements. Nonetheless, he reached unsupported conclusions.
One specific example is that the Treasury IG relied on Ms.
Cooper's statement that she was unaware she was the subject of
an investigation when she spoke to the VA OIG Special Agents,
even claiming that she was told she was not the subject.
Her statements are not true. OIG investigators are required
to advise employees of the Government who are the subjects of
an investigation of certain rights afforded them under Garrity
v. New Jersey. It is often commonly referred to as the Garrity
warning. Ms. Cooper was not only advised of her rights under
Garrity when she was interviewed by the VA OIG special agents,
she signed a document certifying that she was so advised. We
were not asked for that document. Treasury IG states that when
his staff reviewed the VA OIG report, they found the
conclusions unsupported and sought supporting documentation.
The letter further states that their efforts and those of the
Department of Treasury to obtain evidence from us were denied.
The records at issue are maintained in a Privacy Act system of
records. As such, we did not have authority to release the
records without either Ms. Cooper's authorization, which we
asked them to get, or a valid request under Exemption (b)7 of
the Privacy Act which is for a specific civil or law
enforcement activity. We received neither from anyone in the
Department of the Treasury or the Treasury OIG. As such, we
would be violating the Privacy Act to give those records to the
Department of Treasury, and we are not going to violate the
Privacy Act.
The March 11 letter also alleges that the Tridec
investigation was conducted at the request of a Mr. Jan Frye,
the VA Deputy Assistant Secretary for Acquisition and
Logistics, and asserts that he holds some level of control over
me and the VA OIG because he funds certain positions. This
statement is also not true. As noted in our report, the review
was conducted in response to multiple anonymous allegations
relating to the contract that was awarded. These allegations
were received through the VA OIG hotline.
Also of importance is that the criminal investigation was
conducted because one of our auditors who was conducting an
audit of the TAC, the Technical Acquisition Center, identified
this contract, had concerns about how it was awarded, and
actually referred it to the OIG's Office of Investigations.
The reimbursible agreement has been in place since fiscal
year 1993, and it is between the VA OIG and VA's Office of
Acquisition. The memorandum of understanding has never been
signed by Mr. Frye. The most recent one, it was just recently
amended, was signed by Mr. Glenn Haggstrom. This agreement has
never been a secret, and has been included in our budget
submissions and congressional appropriation bills. The work
conducted by the employees who provide the services under this
agreement has been requested by various VA entities within VA,
and at times, we have the authority to conduct a review on our
own initiative. Mr. Frye has absolutely no influence over our
workload.
According to the most recent semiannual report to Congress,
the Treasury OIG has 17 positions funded on a reimbursible
basis by the Department of Treasury, so this is not unusual.
Any concerns the Committee has with allegations that Mr. Frye
had undue influence with this investigation is inconsistent
with the fact that one day after the nonpublic Tridec report
was provided to the Committee, Mr. Eric Hannel, the Staff
Director for the Subcommittee for Oversight and Investigations,
cut and pasted the summary of a confidential report into an
email and sent it to Mr. Frye. He even noted in there that this
report had not been made public. Mr. Frye had no reason to see
that section of the report.
There are numerous other inaccuracies in the Treasury
letter, including evidentiary, contracting, and other
standards. However, due to time constraints, I cannot address
them all in this statement. We have requested expedited action
by CIGIE's Integrity Committee so the truth can be seen by all,
and the baseless attacks on our reputation and integrity can be
laid to rest. Thank you. I will answer any questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Regan appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. I have several questions to ask, but we will
go ahead and allow the other two members of the panel. Sir,
Professor, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES TIEFER

Mr. Tiefer. Thank you, Chairman Miller and Ranking Minority
Member Brown, and all members. I appreciate the committee's
invitation for this important and controversial subject. I was
in the House General Counsel's Office. I was general counsel of
the House of Representatives. I was in that office for 15
years. I came to many hearings just like this in which there
was a struggle going on between executive departments and
Congress, and I have written about it since becoming a
professor and coming back here to testify at two congressional
hearings dealing with executive privilege claims, one by
President Bush, and one by President Obama. That is how
important this subject is. It is almost historic any time a
committee gets together to listen to it.
The VA IG and the general counsel have raised various
objections to the committee obtaining documents for oversight.
They seem open and generous, at least to some extent, and
willing to work out compromises and solutions, but to the ear
of a House general counsel, to accept the privileges that are
being evoked, the arguments that are being invoked would mean
at least delay, if not barring the door.
Let me take the first of two or three issues. The inspector
general in the written statement has said that their obligation
to the committee is satisfied by public reports. I quote from
the testimony: ``The only specific means identified or mandated
in Section 5''--that is Section 5 of the Charter of the
Inspector General Act in the Inspector General Act of 1978--
``the only specific means for meeting this requirement are the
semiannual reports to Congress and the 7-day letter described
in Section 5(d).'' After that it is all, I guess,
discretionary. But the Inspector General Act says that the
Congress is to be kept, ``fully and currently informed by means
of the reports required by Section 5, the reports, and
otherwise.''
Now, the statute says reports and otherwise. Wouldn't need
that if it just said reports. I have quoted the legislative
history of the statute which bears this out, that Congress knew
what it was doing in 1978 when it passed this provision and so
forth. A second argument is the Privacy Act. We have the
argument that the Privacy Act is a basis for withholding from
Congress.
Now the OIG testimony said, and I quote, ``OMB guidelines
specifically state that this exception''--I will come back to
what the exception is--``does not authorize the disclosure of
information protected under the Privacy Act to an individual
Member of Congress acting on his or her behalf or on behalf of
a constituent.'' Now, this provision says what Congress
provides in Section 552(a)(b)(9) of the Privacy Act, that it
was not authority to withhold from ``either House of Congress
or to the extent of a matter within its jurisdiction, any
committee or subcommittee thereof.''
What am I contrasting here? There is an OMB guideline which
says you don't disclose Privacy Act stuff for constituent
casework by individual Members of Congress, and they don't. But
the statute itself says that is not authority to withhold from
a committee or a subcommittee. Well, that is you. Is there
anybody in this whole building who doesn't know the difference
between a committee or a subcommittee on the one hand, and an
individual caseworker on the other hand? Because if there is no
difference, I think you should leave this great-looking room
here. There are certain little cupboards where caseworkers are,
and you should all cram yourselves in there because that is
your status apparently.
All right. My third and final point is the question of
medical records. And, of course, they are nonpublic, and of
course they are private. You don't want people to walk in off
the street and start riffling through the medical files, but an
investigative body, including the House committee can get them.
The relevant regulations under the closely related HIPAA
statute says a covered entity may discover protected health
information. ``A covered entity may disclose protected health
information to a health oversight agency for oversight,'' and
the VA has posted publicly in its notice of privacy practices--
I have put the Web site link in my testimony--``VHA may
disclose your health information''--they are telling this to
the veterans, to the beneficiaries--``to law enforcement,
health care, oversight, e.g., giving information to the Office
of Inspector General or congressional committees.'' Thank you.
My time is expired.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Tiefer appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Professor. Mr. Bopp.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL D. BOPP

Mr. Bopp. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, and other
members of the House Committee on Veterans' Affairs, thank you
for inviting me to testify before you this evening. My name is
Michael Bopp. I am a partner at the law firm Gibson, Dunn &
Crutcher. I also head our firm's congressional investigation
group. I also hope to distinguish myself this evening as being
the only witness to actually finish my testimony in under 5
minutes.
I spent more than a decade conducting investigations on
Capitol Hill in House and Senate committees and on four special
committees convened to investigate a particular issue or
problem, and I have helped to orchestrate more than 100
hearings. I have taken countless depositions and interviews,
and I have managed massive document discovery efforts both
pursuant to letter and subpoena. I have been at Gibson Dunn for
more than 6 years, and have represented individuals, companies,
and other organizations in dozens of congressional
investigations. I have been on both sides of the dais, both
seeking documents and being asked to provide them. The power of
Congress to investigate, though not explicit in the
Constitution, is woven into its fabric. As George Mason noted,
Members of Congress are not only legislators, but they possess
inquisitorial powers. The U.S. Supreme Court has also concluded
that Congress has the authority and obligation to investigate.
In one seminal case, McGrain v. Daugherty, the Supreme
Court held: We are of opinion that the power of inquiry, with
process to enforce it, is an essential and appropriate
auxiliary to the legislative function. Now why is this the
case? What is the reason for this investigative authority?
Because Congress needs up-to-date, granular information to
legislate effectively. After the terrorist attacks of September
11, 2001, Congress did not rush immediately to pass legislation
reforming the intelligence community based on available
information. Instead, Congress created the 9/11 Commission,
waited for its report, and embarked on its own investigation of
our intelligence community. The legislation that ensued
affected a seismic change in how intelligence is collected,
analyzed, and shared by government agencies. It was the result
of cooperation and information-sharing by the intelligence
community with Congress.
In 2005, when Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast, both
the House and Senate initiated investigations into what went
wrong with Federal, State, and local preparations for and
responses to the hurricane. As part of the Senate
investigation, we interviewed more than 325 mostly government
witnesses, held 22 public hearings, and reviewed more than
800,000 pages of documents. There was a lot to look at. What
followed was legislation that overhauled the way FEMA addresses
natural and other disasters. The legislative action would not
have occurred absent a thorough investigation by both the House
and Senate.
Now it is important to note that Congress need not
investigate with the sole purpose of drafting or amending
legislation. During the Katrina inquiry, were we investigating
specific ways to amend Federal response protocols? No. We were
investigating what happened, what went wrong. So, too, the
Supreme Court in McGrain held that it is entirely appropriate
for Congress to investigate matters on which legislation could
be had. The executive branch, no matter which party is in
control, might not always like Congress' investigative
authority or the way it chooses to exercise that authority, but
it should respect it because congressional investigations help
Congress perform its constitutional functions more effectively.
Congressional oversight of executive agencies helps ensure
that the government is functioning the way it should in the
best interests of the American people. The executive branch
should respect Congress' powers to investigate and legislate
just as Congress must respect the executive branch's
responsibility to ensure that the laws are implemented and
enforced, even when they are enforced against Members of
Congress.
Vigorous oversight and investigative activities will always
cause some degree of friction between Congress and the
executive branch. In fact, that is how the system was designed,
but they should not cause agencies to look for questionable
ways to withhold information from congressional committees. In
the private sector context, the types of obfuscation alleged
here would not be tolerated. In the case of investigations of
the executive branch, such activities are not unique to a
particular agency or Office of Inspector General, and they are
also not unique to a particular political party, but they are
all too common.
I applaud the committee for standing up for the
prerogatives of Congress through this hearing, and I welcome
any questions you may have.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Bopp appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Regan, I too have
sent a letter to CIGIE to try to get to the bottom of the
conflict that exists between the two offices of inspector
general. In your very eloquent opening statement, you talked
about many things, but one thing you did not discuss, or if you
did, I apologize, I didn't hear it, how many times did the
inspector general's office from the Department of Treasury
contact VA OIG to discuss or gather information regarding
Tridec and the Iris Cooper report that you signed off on?
Ms. Regan. Signed off on what?
The Chairman. The report, whether you signed off on it or
not.
Ms. Regan. They didn't contact us at all before the report
was issued. The report was issued----
The Chairman. Okay. I am talking about after the report was
issued.
Ms. Regan. After the report was issued, we learned around
the 17th or 18th of December, Mr. Richard Delmar left a voice
mail demanding the file. We didn't know why. In a conversation
with Mr. Delmar, he told me he had been asked by the Committee
to conduct an investigation, and he needed the entire file. I
told him, there is several email exchanges, one in which Mr.
Thorson actually, when I explained the Privacy Act----
The Chairman. Actually all I am asking for is a number,
numerous.
Ms. Regan. Actually, I don't know the number. I think it is
laid out in the 5-page response that we gave to the Department
of Treasury that I provided to Mr. Towers and Mr. Tucker.
The Chairman. I believe it is at least eight.
Ms. Regan. I don't remember the number of pages, but we
laid all of that out in there, and every single time----
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I appreciate that and
CIGIE will get to the bottom of it, I am sure.
Ms. Bradley, December of 2014, we were told that the VA
would be providing a copy of a risk assessment regarding the
Denver Construction Project. Later in January the VA responded
that it would not provide the committee with the promised copy
of their assessment, but instead, would allow committee staff
to review the document in the presence of VA staff. VA has made
the same decision regarding MSPB and Equal Employment
Opportunity files from the Philadelphia RO. However, in both
cases there was no justification for the unilateral decision
that was made by VA.
I would like you to explain to me and the committee what
grounds do you think VA has for demanding an in-camera review
of the assessment.
Ms. Bradley. I really appreciate the question, Mr.
Chairman. I think both of those examples you point to
underscore the need for greater communication between VA and
the committee, a greater development of trust so that when you
ask for documents or information that we retain, that we can be
responsive to your needs, but we can also be mindful of
executive branch prerogatives, meaning executive branch
interests which we must protect. With respect to the risk
assessment----
The Chairman. If I can reclaim my time, who appropriates
and who authorizes the expenditure of funds for things like the
Denver Hospital?
Ms. Bradley. Congress.
The Chairman. Correct. How can we do the oversight
necessary if you do not provide us the entire document that
exists out there and the assessment that you are doing, VA is
doing, in order to try to bring this behemoth disaster under
control. I mean, we are talking about a project that has gone
from $600 million that will probably more than double before it
is over.
Ms. Bradley. The way that you phrase this is misleading to
the American people. You suggest that we haven't provided this
information to the committee. We did in December----
The Chairman. Excuse me.
Ms. Bradley. Could I finish? Could I answer?
The Chairman. No. No, you can't because I have 1 minute
left on the clock, and I am not going to let you filibuster for
me to get the answers that I need. Why did VA not provide the
risk assessment, not in-camera, the risk assessment.
Ms. Bradley. The risk assessment contains sensitive pricing
information. As you note, we had to compete for the follow-on
contract. We wanted you to have that information immediately
and offered it to you immediately. The reason we that didn't
want to provide you a document is the risk of redisclosure,
whether it is inadvertent or intentional. It was too important
to making sure that we could have fair playing field----
The Chairman. Excuse me. Mr. Bopp, is that an adequate
explanation? Is Congress bound by the same privacy requirements
that the general public is?
Mr. Bopp. No, it is not, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. And so what Ms. Bradley is trying to explain,
and I can understand the need to try to protect sensitive
information, but if Congress asks for that information, is
there any explanation as to why it should not be given?
Mr. Bopp. In my view, it is Congress' prerogative to ask
for and receive the information in the form it needs. That is,
if in-camera inspection is not adequate to the committee's
needs, the committee should have access to the information.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I first
would like to say I have not seen a copy of the letter that you
sent CIGIE. Can you provide us a copy of it?
The Chairman. I will be happy to.
Ms. Brown. Mrs. Bradley, I would like for you to finish.
Because I understand when we request sensitive information or
information that the committee needs, what I want to know is
when we get that information, let's say a lot of this is
legal--in other words, we may be suing somebody or someone
might be suing us--what happens if the committee releases that.
I think that is what you were discussing?
Ms. Bradley. Well, precisely. I also want to make the point
that we didn't say that the committee couldn't have the risk
assessment. In fact, if the committee finds that an in-camera
inspection of the risk assessment is insufficient to meet your
needs, if we have a more open dialogue, you would simply tell
us that, and we would reassess and provide it to you. We are
trying to minimize the redisclosure of highly sensitive
information.
In this case, it is procurement sensitive information that
could give an offerer on a follow-on contract an advantage over
other contractors, and so for the reason of trying to protect
the taxpayers so that we get the best value on the follow-on
contract, we thought that the best approach was to provide it
in-camera. But again, accommodation is about talking about your
interests. Over the months, and I have only been the general
counsel for just shy of 3 months, and Secretary McDonald talked
to me about this, we have been engaging in conversations
through letters. We really haven't been talking. You haven't
been sharing with us your needs. So if we come up with a
proposal for providing you information, a healthy dialogue----
Ms. Brown. Ms. Bradley, I don't have much time either.
Don't we have a new process in place?
Ms. Bradley. We do.
Ms. Brown. Tell us quickly, what is that?
Ms. Bradley. We have a streamlined process. We have an
exceptional person who is leading that process. So now we have
someone who is going to be a focal point with you and to our
agency to very quickly assess what information you need and the
format that you need that information. So instead of asking for
boxes and boxes of personnel records that you may or may not
need, we will talk to you to make sure that we are providing
what you do, in fact, need to perform your oversight function.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. Ms. Regan, did you want to respond to
the request that was asked you earlier more complete?
Ms. Regan. Yes, I would. Thank you. I received a phone call
around December 17 from the Treasury IG demanding a copy of all
the investigative files. When I questioned their need for it,
they told me they were asked to investigate by the Chairman of
this Committee, and actually they told us that, I think on a
letter from Mr. Thorson at one time said on December 12, that
Mr. Rees had sent over a copy of that report. At that time, it
was not a public report. We had many, many discussions with
them about what they needed, why they needed, that it was a
Privacy Act document, and that we had to meet certain
requirements of the Privacy Act so as not to violate it.
Ms. Brown. My question is, is this the usual process that
one inspector general's office investigates another?
Ms. Regan. It is unheard of. And I would like to say that
as we went through this discussion on January 5, I had a call
again with Mr. Delmar, and when I told him I didn't have
authority to give him the records in the manner he was asking,
he said to me, and I quote, ``Well, I am going to have to
report you to House Veterans Affairs Committee for not being
cooperative with us.'' Two days later we get a letter from the
Chairman asking for the records, and we did provide the records
requested for the stated oversight purpose for that. We had
them come over. We talked about what they needed. We told them
they could get an authorization from Ms. Cooper. We told them
about a (b)7 letter. Turns out they didn't even know what one
was. They didn't have a civil or criminal law enforcement
purpose. We can't violate the Privacy Act.
We went for about a month and a half trying to work with
them to find a valid legitimate reason under the Privacy Act to
give them the records, and there wasn't one.
Ms. Brown. Thank you very much. Is there in-camera review,
Mr. Bopp, in-camera review, is there appropriate accommodations
at times?
Mr. Bopp. At times, sure, I think if that meets the needs
of the committee, absolutely. But I think the point is the
committee has the authority to decide whether it needs more
than just in-camera review.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Bradley, real quick, did I hear you
correctly say that VA would determine what the committee may or
may not need?
Ms. Bradley. Absolutely not. If I said that, I did not mean
to say that.
The Chairman. Would you like to retract that?
Ms. Bradley. It is clearly----
The Chairman. Could you turn the microphone on, please?
Ms. Bradley. I didn't say that, or if I said it, I
certainly didn't mean to say that. We must talk to you so that
you can tell us what you need. What I said before is that we
have been sharing information through letters where the needs
are not as clear to us as we would like them to be in order for
us to be responsive and expeditious.
The Chairman. If I would tell that you we were offered the
risk assessment document the day after our telephone conference
call with VA in December, it took several weeks of dialogue for
VA to finally acquiesce to allow an in-camera review. Let me
just make it very clear. In-camera review of any document is
not acceptable. So you don't even have to go through that.
Okay? We want the documents. Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your leadership
in having this meeting. Ms. Bradley, you inferred that you need
to protect the privacy of veterans and their dependents, for
instance, not giving out their Social Security numbers. Has
this committee ever asked for Social Security numbers?
Ms. Bradley. No, and I am not suggesting that you do. But
when you ask, especially if you have broad requests for
information, a lot of times the information that you request
has all of that sensitive information in it. So what we may
want to do is have a conversation with you to tell you that we
would like to redact the Social Security numbers, but we want
to be open and transparent about it so----
Mr. Lamborn. If this congressional committee has to give
you a specific reason behind any particular request for
information, doesn't that allow you to judge whether or not you
agree with that intention? If so, that makes you a more than
equal partner in what should be a co-equal relationship.
Ms. Bradley. No. We are not in a position to judge. We
don't have authority to judge. We just need to know what you
need. In other words, if we are trying to divine from the
heavens above what you need out of 200 personnel files, and
then later after you look at the personnel files and you say to
us, you know what, what we were looking for----
Mr. Lamborn. Let me go on. I have a limited time here. Ms.
Regan, in your testimony you site in 1989 DoJ Office of Legal
Counsel opinion stating that, ``The process of accommodation
requires that each branch explain to the other why it believes
its needs are legitimate.'' What you do not say in this
testimony is that this opinion relates to the accommodation
process involved when a constitutional privilege has been
asserted. Tell me, please, what constitutionally-based
executive privilege the OIG has asserted to the committee?
Ms. Regan. We have not had a request where we have asserted
that privilege at all. I am just talking in general about
providing documents. And up until recently we have never been
asked for anything that was deliberative process.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. So you are not asserting, and no one is
asserting any kind of constitutionally-protected executive
branch privilege.
Ms. Regan. I don't have a request at this time in which we
would assert that privilege. The only request that seems to be
an issue is the request for the entire investigative file on
Tridec.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. So on the record, there are no
privileges being asserted?
Ms. Regan. We already provided those documents that were
requested, and the documents that related or supported the
report as the letter said, and we did not assert that
privilege.
Mr. Lamborn. And, Ms. Bradley, back to you, it should be
sufficient for you to realize that if we are serious enough
about a request to put it into writing, and to formally present
it to you, we want a truthful and transparent response, and
this should control, no matter what you think our intentions
are or are not. Would you agree with that statement?
Ms. Bradley. I certainly do. And, again, I don't want to
convey an impression that we at VA are trying to judge your
intentions. We are simply trying to respond, to be responsive
to your oversight needs.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Well, that is not how it is coming
across, and I don't think we would be here otherwise, so I
really think that we need more transparency on the part of the
VA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield the balance of my
time to you if you want to use it.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Bradley, I would ask
you, the MSPB and EEO files, why it has taken 3 months for the
VA to tell the committee that you will not comply with the
request when the EEO program manager actually told us that we
could get the information. In fact, I think I was told that I
would have to have a chairman's letter. I provided that
chairman's letter. We are not writing letters because we like
to. Most of the chairman's letters are written because that is
what has been demanded of this committee from the agency, so my
question is, why is it taking so long to get the information
that should have been available, was told to us it could have
been available, in 1 to 2 business days?
Ms. Bradley. Mr. Chairman, I am really glad that you asked
about this one as well. I have only been on the job for
whatever, 2 months and 3 weeks.
The Chairman. Can we stipulate that you have just started?
Ms. Bradley. That would be great. I have looked into this
matter, and we haven't said no; and, in fact, we are working on
that particular request, and we said to your committee on this
past Thursday, that we wanted to come up and have a
conversation because we got boxes and boxes. We wanted to make
sure that this is what you want and need before we convey all
this information to you.
The Chairman. Thank you. And I very much----
Ms. Bradley. You refused that request.
The Chairman. I apologize. I am not trying to shut you
down, and I appreciate that commitment, and I look forward to
working with you in that. But could you share with us when the
Philadelphia RO provided the EEO files to the Office of General
Counsel.
Ms. Bradley. I don't know but I certainly can and I will.
The Chairman. Will you find out for me?
Ms. Bradley. I can and I will.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Takano, you are
recognized.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is just an awful
lot of documents in question that we haven't been made privy to
on the minority side. And so I am just trying to figure out
what the dispute is about, and from I what I can tell, there
have been questions that have been put to you, the VA, by the
inspector general of the Treasury, and there have been
questions put to you by the majority of this committee. Is that
correct? I mean, is that what the dispute is about here?
Ms. Regan. Are you talking about the dispute with the
Tridec report?
Mr. Takano. Yes.
Ms. Regan. I am not sure what the dispute is. We did
provide the Committee with documents. The question I got asked
is why we didn't provide the documents to the Treasury IG, and
as I said, those records are protected under the Privacy Act,
and we did not have authority to give them to the Treasury IG,
so we did not.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Bopp or Mr. Tiefer, you have commented on
what the VA is required to do with respect to congressional
committees.
But do you have any comment as to the VA OIG
responsibilities to respond to another IG office?
Mr. Tiefer. No.
Mr. Takano. You have no comment?
Mr. Tiefer. I have no idea.
Mr. Takano. So do you have nothing to say about whether or
not they are required to respond to queries of another IG
office and they can determine whether or not they should
disclose certain information or not?
Mr. Bopp. I would make one observation, and it is this. My
reading of the Privacy Act is that--for the exceptions within
the Privacy Act, which include exceptions for providing
information to Congress or congressional committees and also
includes an exception to providing information to another
agency or an instrumentality. I don't read the Privacy Act as
requiring an affirmative request for the IG to be able to share
that information.
Mr. Takano. Well, let me ask you this: Does the fact that
an inspector general, in this case, of the Treasury, who has
been asked, presumably, by the chairman of the committee--does
that give any more authority to the IG's office under the
inspector general--of the Treasury--of a different department?
Mr. Bopp. It is a very good question. I think I would
answer it this way. I think the chairman of the committee,
having asked for the information--well, the information
obviously can be. And I understand what is shared with the
committee. As far as whether the chairman can somehow vest more
authority into the IG--into----
Mr. Takano. It isn't more straightforward just for the
chairman to go through regular order and get authorization from
the committee because we do have a process here by which
subpoenas are issued for information? Or in the absence of
cooperation, wouldn't that be a much more straightforward
process than going through the IG of another department whose
ability to be able to ask that question is somewhat in
question?
Mr. Bopp. My understanding is that the information was
provided to the committee, but I defer to Ms. Regan and the
committee staff.
Mr. Takano. Ms. Regan.
Ms. Regan. The information requested that is--the documents
that supported the findings and conclusions in the report were
provided to the Committee.
And my understanding is that they were then given to the
Department of Treasury, who has absolutely no authority to
conduct an investigation into another IG's office.
Mr. Takano. Do you have any--I mean, you say it is unheard
of that one IG's office would investigate another IG's office.
I mean, do you have--I mean, I am trying to understand why
this happened.
Ms. Regan. First of all, this committee has no oversight
authority over the Treasury IG. So even for the Treasury IG to
conduct an investigation of the individuals, it would be a
Privacy Act record. And the only time you can provide those
documents to the Committee is for your oversight committees or
subcommittees.
So that Treasury IG has no authority to come in and
investigate our work. There is no authority whatsoever. The IG
Act says that your scope of your authority is over the programs
and operations of the agency for which you are the IG.
So ours is the VA. Treasury is Treasury. There is no
authority under the IG Act. Their appropriated funds are to
conduct the oversight of the Treasury Department.
Mr. Takano. Since you have not asserted any form of
executive privilege--I mean, that is what I have heard you say,
no executive privilege--there is no reason for extraordinary
measures trying to be had here by going to a different IG.
Ms. Regan. There is a significant difference in dealing
with information to go to another agency. There is actual case
law holding that you can't even use a routine use to give
Privacy Act information to another agency.
The only exception under the Privacy Act is with the
authorization of the individual, a waiver. So, for example, if
there is an OPM background investigation, there is a waiver
that says agencies can give them the information.
The other exception is (b)(7), which is for law enforcement
purposes, and that requires a specific articulated law
enforcement activity and a specific portion of the record that
is being sought.
We could not get either from the Treasury IG. They had no
civil or criminal law enforcement activity. The Privacy Act
prevents us from giving those records without violating the
Privacy Act.
Mr. Takano. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Mr. Takano, if I can express to you just a
little bit and the other Committee members so you understand.
This didn't just bubble out of nowhere. When the VA OIG did
the report, it was a damning report on a former VA employee who
had left VA and gone to work doing almost the exact same job at
the Department of Treasury.
So this whole conversation started because it appeared that
this person had left VA and, because there is no communication
between the agencies, that Treasury had no idea that Iris
Cooper and the Tridec report had occurred.
Ms. Regan, I mean, is that kind of in a nutshell?
And then----
Ms. Regan. There was nothing public at the time she moved
over to the Department----
The Chairman. Correct.
Ms. Regan [continuing]. Of Treasury.
The Chairman. Correct.
So when we found where she had gone to, we called to make
sure that they were aware of what was going on. They thought
that they had hired an employee that could have an issue from
being hired. That is how the two IGs--normally, we would never
communicate with another IG.
Again, when--and you know from being on this committee time
and time again employees are allowed to resign, they are
allowed to transfer, to leave, and it never goes in their file.
And so they are shuffled on to another agency. And so that is
how this all started.
And so Treasury IG then began their own questioning, trying
to find out what was going on. They were being blocked from
getting any information at that point. And so that is where--I
mean, yes, this is about the two Offices of Inspector General.
And, by the way, the report is public. The exact report that
was given to the Treasury OIG is the same report that is online
now.
Ms. Regan. It was not public at the time it was given to
them.
The Chairman. It is now.
Ms. Regan. We had FOIA request, and we published it within
7 days.
The Chairman. Correct.
So it is a public report. There was nothing changed in that
report. There was no privacy information that was given that
shouldn't have been given.
But that is how this whole document situation began.
Otherwise, we would be dealing specifically with Ms. Regan and
not--not the other OIG.
Mr. Bilirakis.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate it.
All right. Questions for Ms. Bradley.
Previous Supreme Court findings and Federal court cases
that were mentioned in the testimony of Professor Tiefer and
Mr. Bopp provide case studies that support the powers vested to
Congress on inquiries without justification needed nor a
product or legislation produced.
My question is: Why should congressional committees with an
oversight role related to agencies have to disclose the purpose
of their inquiry?
Ms. Bradley. Let me quote from a seminal case on this
issue. This gives you the legal framework for our thinking.
``The framers expected that, where conflicts and scope of
authority arose between the coordinate branches, a spirit of
dynamic compromise would promote resolution of the dispute in a
manner most likely to result in efficient and effective
functioning of our governmental system.
``The coordinate branches do not exist in an exclusively
adversarial relationship to one another when a conflict arises.
Rather, each branch should take cognizance of an implicit
constitutional mandate to seek optimal accommodation through a
realistic evaluation of the needs of the others.''
So while we will see your needs for information for
oversight purposes, we want to talk more frequently and openly
with you all so that you understand our needs to protect
certain information.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Tiefer or Mr. Bopp, would you like to
respond to that?
Mr. Tiefer. That kind of language is used when there is a
much stronger executive branch claim than the ones here, the
kind of claims that were made by President Bush or President
Obama when they gave executive privilege claims from the
presidency itself.
Just because one can say, ``Oh, I think the Privacy Act
should be put in the way of the committee,'' even though it
says in the statute it can't be, that is not enough to start
this dynamic approach of the planets and the Congresses and the
separation of powers and all that sort of stuff. You save that
for a place where you have got a real argument to defend the
material from oversight.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Bopp, do you have anything to add?
Mr. Bopp. I would say that what Ms. Bradley quoted from is
aspirational when it--as it refers to this committee and--but
the reality is that the Constitution vests authority such that
it is up to this committee to decide what it needs and when it
needs it and it is not up to the agency to be able to
determine--or to determine that, ``Well, there is not enough
dialogue going on with the committee; therefore, we are not
going to produce these documents.''
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
The next question is for Ms. Regan.
One of the main functions of the Inspector General's Office
authorizing the IG Act of 1978 was to provide a means for
keeping the head of the establishment and the Congress fully
and currently informed about problems and deficiencies related
to the administration.
In your testimony, ma'am, you suggested that the IG's
interpretation of this law only requires the IG to submit semi-
annual reports to Congress. Can you confirm that this is the
position of the IG specifically in relation to the IG Act and
what is required by law to Congress? Yes or no. Can you confirm
that?
Ms. Regan. The IG Act only requires--the only specific
requirement is a semi-annual report.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Ms. Regan. But that is not what do.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Ms. Regan. As noted in my testimony.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Mr. Bopp, in regards to the interpretation of the IG Act,
do you agree that the intent of this act and requirement of the
OIG is limited to semi-annual reports when keeping Congress
fully and currently informed?
Mr. Bopp. I do not. I don't believe that semi-annual
reports alone in most circumstances constitute keeping Congress
currently and fully informed.
Mr. Bilirakis. Mr. Tiefer?
Mr. Tiefer. Same.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
The IG Act has been enacted for the last 37 years. The
question is for Ms. Regan and Ms. Bradley.
The IG Act has been enacted for the last 37 years. Why is
it now that the VA and the OIG are contesting the investigative
powers and authority of Congress in this act?
During a time when the VA must continue to rebuild the
trust of the veterans they serve and, of course, Congress and
the American public, how would providing less information to
Congress and the public help in this endeavor?
So we will start first with Ms. Regan, please.
Ms. Regan. All of our reports--as I said in my written
testimony, all of our reports are reviewed prior to being
issued, and those reports, if they can be a public report
without redactions under the Privacy Act, are actually put up
in unredacted form on our Web site within 3 days after being
issued.
Those reports that have to be redacted, we have to wait for
a FOIA request, a Freedom of Information Act request, but they
are all ready to go. So once we get a FOIS request they are put
up on the Web site.
So we do keep the public informed because all of those
reports are put up on our Web site without delay. That is one
thing we have conscientiously done.
So we know what reports are going to go up. We even try to
write our reports in such a way to take out names, identifiers,
medical records, and everything else so that we can put it up
on the Web site unredacted.
We do that a lot with the healthcare inspections.
Otherwise, they would almost all be confidential and we
wouldn't be able to release them. So we make a concerted
effort, and that is one of the ways we keep Congress informed.
In fact, before a report goes up on the Web site that we
expect will have some public interest or Congress is interested
in, even an individual Member, we make the effort to come up
and brief them. I think we have had 400 briefings up here, and
those are just the formal ones.
There are the informal ones where a staff member or
somebody--a Member of the Congress calls us and just wants us
to answer some questions about something, and we do that, too.
We have never withheld information on the----
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
Ms. Regan [continuing]. Reports that we have done.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
I would like to give Ms. Bradley an opportunity to respond
about these things.
Ms. Bradley. Thank you.
Transparency is so important to establishing or reaffirming
a trust with the American people and with our veterans. And, to
that end, Secretary McDonald has made a lot more information
available to the public, including information that is posted
on the Web site about access.
I understand that we have to do a better job responding to
the oversight requests that you send us. I will note that the
committee started a list, I believe, in January of 2013 that
you monitor so that there is more transparency about how we are
responding to your requests.
Of the list of items that you have requested from VA, my
understanding is that currently we have provided you with 94
percent of all of your requests. That doesn't mean there isn't
a lot of work to do, but that is why I am here tonight, to talk
about the new team and the new process.
We can do better, and that is our goal, openness and
transparency with this committee and with the American people.
Mr. Bilirakis. All right. Thank you.
My time is expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And the chair disputes the 94 percent of all requests.
Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Excuse me. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to ask Mr. Bopp or Mr. Tiefer--either one of you
could respond.
I think at least, Mr. Bopp, you have made it, I think,
pretty clear to the committee that the Constitution indeed
invests the authority in committees to ask for information that
they need to legislate. So I wanted to just drill down a little
bit further.
So what does it mean when the committee asks for
information? Is that a collective committee decision? Is that
the chairman of the committee making a decision? What
constitutes a request from the committee?
Mr. Tiefer. It depends on the rules of the House and the
committee rules. Under some legal situations, the entire
committee is supposed to authorize, but that is----
Ms. Brownley. So that can be determined by the rules of the
committee.
Mr. Tiefer. Under other circumstances, the chairman by
himself.
Ms. Brownley. Okay. So the committee requests information.
Under optimal circumstances, we receive the information.
Once we receive that information, does that information
become public information? Is there a responsibility of
committee members once they have in their possession this
information?
Mr. Bopp. It does not become public information when it is
received by the committee. There are House rules about what
happens to that information. And the information that is shared
with the committee then becomes the information of the
committee. And so, as Professor Tiefer noted, it is then up to
committee rules to determine what can be done with that
information.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
And just, again, to continue to sort of drill down and
explore with regards to any possible limitations to Congress in
terms of its broader oversight authority, can either one of you
provide any examples of what you would consider to be a request
made by a committee within its jurisdiction that could be
properly ignored by an agency?
Mr. Tiefer. Well, there certainly are several statutes
which I named in my written testimony. One of them concerns
taxpayer information where the statute itself says, in general,
committees can't get it.
And if one of the few committees that can get it, which is
the Ways and Means Committee, wants it, they have to walk
through the following path of explicit authorizations and so
forth.
And there is--the intelligence committee is similarly
surrounded by procedures and restrictions and limitations. That
is not true, in general, where the information is sought. It is
true of some.
Ms. Brownley. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bopp. You phrased your question very adeptly. You said
within the committee's jurisdiction. And if the request is
within the committee's jurisdiction, then I believe that that
request is valid----
Mrs. Brownley. Right.
Mr. Bopp [continuing]. And should be complied with.
Ms. Brownley. Are there any--I am not a lawyer. It is
probably pretty obvious. But are there any time restrictions
also with regards to request of information and the timeliness
of receiving that information?
Mr. Bopp. Not built into the rules. I mean, that is the
key. Right? In my view, in today's--today's discovery
involves--often involves, you know, requests for electronic
discovery, electronic emails, sometimes text messages. Those
documents can take time to produce. And there is no timeframe
listed in the committee's rules.
But what ought to happen in a situation like that is there
ought to be a dialogue between the committee and the agency
being asked for the information. The agency being asked for the
information should explain how long it will take, what the
process is for getting those documents, so there is no--there
is an understanding.
Sometimes it does take weeks to collect documents and to
produce them. But if the documents are actually collected and
they are being held and not produced to the committee because--
for whatever reason that is not valid within the law, then
there is a problem.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Dr. Roe.
Dr. Roe. Thank you.
The Chairman. Dr. Roe, also, I apologize. Welcome back. We
have missed you. And our thoughts and prayers have been with
you the last several weeks. I just want you to know that your
seat was vacant, but we all knew why you weren't here.
Dr. Roe. Thank you. I want to thank the committee for their
support and all the Members that have reached out in a personal
way during my family tragedy that was very heart-rending for
me.
I just want to say a couple of things. I have been here 6
years and change. And the way we--and we are a pain, I realize,
sometimes. We can be a real pain, and you know where. And that
is our job, though.
We can't do our job without adequate information. And when
it is not--when the VA is not transparent--and that is why I
think we are having this hearing tonight, is that we don't feel
like--and I certainly don't--feel like that information has
been generously handed to us.
And I will give you an example, Ms. Bradley. When you said
that, basically--and the impression that the chairman gave was
exactly, ``We will decide what you think is important''--``We
will decide what is pertinent information.'' That is what I
heard you say.
And I think, if the VA had been forthcoming, we wouldn't be
$500 or almost $600 million over budget at a VA hospital in
Aurora, Colorado. And when I think about that, I think about,
as a physician, how much health care we could provide veterans
for $5 or $600 million. It is a lot, let me tell you. That is a
lot of money. And it isn't done yet.
So I think us knowing what those contracts are, we could
help you do your job better. And in the time that I have served
on this committee, I haven't seen any private information
released yet. And you are making an assertion that what
happened here that I have never seen happen.
And as Mr. Lamborn said, we have never asked for somebody's
Social Security. Redact that. If it is personal information, we
can have records release signed. Every doctor up here on both
sides of the aisle know that, to release personal information,
you have got to have a records release. We can get that if we
need it.
We need you to be forthcoming because what we think--we
have built a wall between the VA and this committee, and it is
a steep wall. And every time we find out you are not giving us
information, we then think, ``Well, what are they holding back
from us that we can do our job?''
So I think you begin to see why it is so important for you
not to decide. But if we pore over more records than need be,
let us pore over them. That is our problem, not your problem.
And I haven't seen that fear you have of information being
given out, personal information.
I would like to have you list one case that that has
happened. I don't know of one. Do you?
Ms. Bradley. I am aware of several cases. Yes.
Dr. Roe. What are they?
Ms. Bradley. Secretary McDonald shared a case with me.
Dr. Roe. What are they?
Ms. Bradley. But let me say something first.
Dr. Roe. No. I asked you a question.
What I----
Ms. Bradley. I think----
Dr. Roe. I have never heard----
Ms. Bradley. I don't want to share it in this hearing. But
suffice it to say----
Dr. Roe. Well, give me a broad--use a Jane Doe.
Ms. Bradley. It was shared with the Secretary in the
chairman's presence.
Dr. Roe. Don't give anybody's name or anything.
Ms. Bradley. That is exactly right.
Dr. Roe. Use somebody else's name.
Ms. Bradley. But that is the point. There is such a lack of
trust between----
Dr. Roe. I want you to tell me----
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. This committee----
Dr. Roe. I want to know what those cases are where private
information from this committee were divulged. That is what you
have just said.
Ms. Bradley. I will be happy to share that with you, but I
don't intend to share it in this public forum.
Dr. Roe. Okay. That will be fine.
Ms. Bradley. I am not going to redisclose the information.
But I am aware of two cases.
But that isn't the point. The point is we must trust each
other and we must work closer together. That is precisely why
you are developing----
Dr. Roe. Let me interrupt you.
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. The process----
Dr. Roe. That is the point. Because what you just said was,
``We can't supply that information because we are afraid you
will say something you shouldn't.''
Ms. Bradley. I never said that.
Dr. Roe. Well, that is what you just said.
Ms. Bradley. I didn't say it, and I don't mean to imply it.
Dr. Roe. Okay. Good. I appreciate that you don't.
And the IG--we have to have an independent IG to be able to
do our job. There is no question about it. Without your input,
Ms. Regan, we can't do what we need to do because we can't get
the information that we need to make these decisions.
And so we have to have a straight shot from you, and we
have to be able to believe what you are saying. And I have.
Look, I think you all have done a good job through the time I
have been on here. And so I think we have to have that
transparency. I think it is gone, and I think that is why we
are holding this hearing tonight.
Ms. Regan. But I will echo the words of Ms. Bradley's that
there is--it is a two-way street and there has to be trust.
And, to be honest, the trust isn't there right now.
And I can give examples where information we gave to this
Committee that we thought was for Committee purposes--there was
never a discussion with us about the information, but the next
day it ends up in the press.
Dr. Roe. Let me interrupt you.
I don't think you--I don't think you need to decide if it
is--what we do with that information. That is our job to do.
Not your job to decide what we are going to do with the
information----
Ms. Regan.
Dr. Roe. I think----
Ms. Regan. When the information is never used for a
Committee purpose, just to give to the press, based on our
conversations with the Department of Justice, we do have the
right to ask questions and to engage in this justification
process.
And conspicuously missing from here is the Department of
Justice, who provides the legal advice and guidance to the
executive branch.
Dr. Roe. I think right now you have just defined the
problem that I have seen develop over the last 6 years here, is
that how--it is not how we can help you do your job. It is sort
of how we don't trust the Congress to do its job. We are
elected to do that. We have a constitutional requirement to do
what we are doing here tonight.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
I would, Ms. Regan, want you to explain to me why a member
of my staff would receive this email from somebody who was
asking for information regarding the Tridec/Cooper information.
And it said, ``Here is the reason for the redactions:
(b)(5), predecisional; (b)(6), privacy concerns outweigh the
public's right to know; (b)(7)(C), privacy concerns outweigh
the public's right to know with respect to law enforcement
records.''
Is that a proper reason for withholding information from
Congress?
Ms. Regan. First of all, we had a letter. Under (b)(9) of
the Privacy Act, it states that there must be a letter in
writing, and it says may give the records to the Congress. It
doesn't say must give the records to the Congress.
And, frankly, there wasn't trust because 2 days before that
letter----
The Chairman. This has nothing to do with----
Ms. Regan [continuing]. That we gave--what we gave----
The Chairman. Ma'am. Ma'am. I apologize.
But this has nothing to do--I don't care if you trust me or
not. It is not important. What is important is the
Constitution, the separation of powers, the executive branch
and the legislative branch.
And for the witnesses to sit there today representing one
agency and to imply that you get to make the decision as to
what information we get to see reminds me an awful lot about
something we have been watching in the press recently.
It is not your choice. If we ask for it, we shouldn't have
this long, flowery conversation about should we get it or not.
We should get it and not under a camera review. And I
apologize.
But your response is that, then, this was an appropriate
response to a request.
Ms. Regan. Yes, it was.
The Chairman. Then, why did they change it and go to a
deliberative process and trade secret argument?
Ms. Regan. I didn't make those arguments with respect to
those records.
The Chairman. That is what happened with this dialogue. The
person----
Ms. Regan. We came up to a have meeting. I think it was on
January 29. And we went through a list of issues and concerns
that we had about information. We did not talk specifically
about that request.
The Chairman. This came from your Office of Legislative
Affairs. In case you didn't know, You know, that is who we get
our information from.
Ms. Regan. IG information comes directly from the Inspector
General's Office. We do not go through the Department because
we are independent.
The Chairman. No. You--I apologize. This individual, I
think, is in your Office of Legislative Affairs, but maybe not.
Do you have an Office of Legislative Affairs?
Ms. Regan. We have a legislative liaison. Yes.
The Chairman. Yeah. Okay. Well, this came from that person.
Ms. Regan. Right.
The Chairman. Okay. And you assert that that is correct?
Ms. Regan. Yes, we do.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Bopp.
Mr. Bopp. Not knowing what was actually redacted--look, the
problem is this. When an agency takes it upon itself to redact
information and to assert privileges that do not apply to
Congress, then you have a problem because you are not getting
the information you need.
Now, if there was a relationship between the committee and
the agency of the IG's office where the IG's office was being
prompt in delivering information--I don't know if it was or
wasn't in this case--promptly delivering information and
raising concerns and asking you, ``Look, we would like to
redact this information because it is particularly sensitive.
Are you okay with doing that?'', you could discuss
accommodations.
If it just appears in front of you after weeks or months of
asking for it--and I don't know whether that happened in this
case--and it is redacted, I can completely understand the
frustration because that is--these are not privileges that
apply to Congress.
The Chairman. And that is what has happened time and time
again with the agency, whether or not it was this particular
instance or not, and that is--that is why we are here.
Ms. Titus, you are recognized.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I feel like I have fallen down a rabbit hole. There are two
things that seem to be going on here. One was the stated
purpose of this hearing, which was to look at how to have
better communications, more transparency, better cooperation
between this committee and the VA and IG's office so we can
better serve our veterans and keep them informed of what is
going on. That is the primary goal.
Now, after the scandal in Phoenix, a lot of people thought
they weren't informed. Fortunately, I was able to talk to our
local hospital folks and tell our veterans what was going on
there, but maybe other people didn't have that opportunity.
I think that is a very worthwhile cause. That is something
this committee should do, and we have been doing it for the
past 2 years, how can we work together better. Okay. Fine.
I think we all might be well served to read this book that
is on our desk about congressional hearings, when Congress
comes calling, a primer on the principles, practices, and
pragmatics of legislative inquiry, and answers a lot of the
questions about when things are justified, what is First
Amendment, what is executive privilege, what is right of
privacy. That is right here.
Now, the second thing that I am hearing is this attack on
the IG for something about the Tridec case. Now, we have had no
hearing on the Tridec case. There was a report issued in
December. I doubt if many people here know what brought about
the Tridec case. We have nobody from Treasury to answer any
questions, nobody from the judicial--judiciary to answer any
questions, or the Justice Department.
Ms. Cooper has been much maligned here. Where is she? What
is her position in all of this? What is the point of all of
this? Did you all go after her because you didn't like her?
Should Treasury have not hired her because she had a bad
reputation? You know, that is all a whole personnel matter that
is secondary to what we should be addressing.
And then we have got the law professor--I am not sure what
you were talking about--and the legal expert who has got
opinions. That is all it is, opinions. So, you know, somebody
help me out here. Let's start with the VA.
Ms. Bradley. We need your oversight. We thank you for your
oversight. We are dealing in very challenging times. We want to
be more open and transparent and responsive.
If I have said anything this evening to suggest that I in
any way intend to or my team intends to second-guess your
needs, your requests, I apologize. That is the antithesis of my
message tonight.
Secretary McDonald recruited me to take this job. He said
one of our top priorities must be to restore public trust. And
so what we are doing, we have built a team that is committed to
working closely with you, getting you what you need as soon as
possible, better understanding what you need.
We are not here to second-guess your motivations or to
question what you do with the information once you get it. We
are committed to this. It is essential to our ability to
restore trust with our veterans.
I am here to do that and to convey that message. And so, if
I have misspoken at all in any previous statements, I really
want to make sure that is the one takeaway point tonight from
the VA general counsel.
Ms. Titus. And then can I ask you from the IG's office,
what if next time one of your former employees gets hired by
the Department of Agriculture? Are we going to have their IG
come over and investigate what you all are doing?
Ms. Regan. I certainly hope not. I am not sure they have
the authority.
Ms. Titus. I don't think they do.
Ms. Regan. I don't think they have the authority to
investigate us. This is first time this has ever happened, and
people in the IG community, as far as I have heard, were
astounded that the Treasury IG issued that report criticizing
our report.
Ms. Titus. All right. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Did you yield back?
Ms. Titus. I will yield my time to the ranking member.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. And I am going to be real brief.
But I think it is very important that we have communication
with the committee. When something happens to Members'
families, we need to know, or when we send letters to different
agencies, so we won't have this confusion.
And I think where we need to have the confidence that we
get the information, they also need to know if we are trying to
get it for purposes that we want to have a--better working
together with the agencies in oversight or whether or not we
are just going to release it to the media to sensationalize.
And I want to tell you I was very encouraged, Mr. Chairman,
when you have said from the beginning that we are moving
forward--we are moving forward working for the veterans and
that we are not--you know, I know you made some statement that
you didn't really mean about somebody in the press that is
ignoring some kind of information. I missed that. I know we are
not putting----
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. Politics in this committee.
The Chairman. Time has expired.
I do want to ask Ms. Regan one thing.
You said that you publish all your reports in your--or at
least the title of the reports in your semi-annual report to
Congress?
Ms. Regan. All reports that are issued are put up on our
Web site, as required under the IG Act.
The Chairman. Okay. So help the committee. And I apologize
because I know it is Dr. Benishek's time.
But in looking at the semi-annual reports, I don't see the
March 2014 Tomah report listed and I don't see the 2008 Phoenix
report described in the semi-annual report.
So can you explain why they weren't in there.
Ms. Regan. I was not involved in either one of those. But
my understanding is they are not issued reports.
The Chairman. Oh.
Ms. Regan. They were administrative closures.
The Chairman. What is an administrative closure
investigation?
Ms. Regan. Administrative closure--you would have to ask
the people responsible. Each our Directorates has the authority
to do an administrative closure----
The Chairman. So this----
Ms. Regan. Let me finish my answer.
The Chairman. No.
Ms. Regan [continuing]. And each directorate----
The Chairman. No.
Ms. Regan [continuing]. Decides what----
The Chairman. Ma'am, I am sorry.
But I want to know what the Phoenix report that was--and
that was about the wait times--and the Tomah report that we
will be going and having a field hearing on the 30th of March--
how would anybody know those reports existed or that there was
such a problem at Tomah or at Phoenix if those reports were
never made available to Congress? How would we know to even ask
for those reports?
Ms. Regan. I am not sure I agree about all the problems.
Especially in the Tomah report, we had no findings and there
was only one complaint----
The Chairman. You don't think there is any problems at
Tomah?
Ms. Regan. There was one complaint about Tomah in 2011. And
at the time they did the administrative closure, which was,
what, 3 years later, there were no other complaints about
Tomah.
The Chairman. So it is your----
Ms. Regan.
The Chairman. It is your----
Ms. Regan. But I did not administratively close that
review.
The Chairman. It is your testimony, then, that there are no
problems at Tomah because the report clears them?
Ms. Regan. I said we did not have any findings at Tomah.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you very much.
Dr. Benishek.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Bradley, on February 10, 2015, we held a hearing in
this committee on the issues at the Greater Los Angeles VA
Medical Center.
During that hearing, I asked Dr. Skye McDougall, the acting
director of the Pacific Healthcare Network, what the average
wait time was for new patients at the LA facility, and she told
me it was about 4 days.
Two days ago CNN released a report saying that that claim
was simply not true. This is according to internal VA documents
stating that the actual wait time was 48 days.
I also asked about wait times for mental health patients at
the facility and was told that it was also roughly 4 days. And
according to the same CNN report, that number is more like 36
days. I think this illustrates the problem that we are having
and why this hearing is important.
Was Dr. McDougall misinformed or was she deliberately
trying to misrepresent the new patient wait time at the
facility?
Ms. Bradley. I have been thinking about that issue. I saw
the CNN clip myself. And I wonder, if you all want accurate
information that is granular----
Mr. Benishek. We would like accurate information. I will
tell you that right now.
Ms. Bradley. Then, you would get that in a briefing. If you
ask a witness a question----
Mr. Benishek. But you understand, if you don't know the
answer, you can always say ``I don't know.''
Ms. Bradley. No. What I am saying is that----
Mr. Benishek. No.
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. She provided granular
information.
Mr. Benishek. The answer that she gave was 4 days, and that
was inaccurate.
So was she misinformed or was----
Ms. Bradley. See what I mean?
Mr. Benishek [continuing]. She just making up an answer? Is
that allowed? Is that what you think? If you don't know the
answer, you should just make one up?
Ms. Bradley. See, this----
Mr. Benishek. You just said that.
Ms. Bradley. This is exactly why----
Mr. Benishek. When you are in a hearing and you don't know
the answer, you give an answer. Is that--that is your
testimony.
Ms. Bradley. My testimony is that----
Mr. Benishek. No. You just told me.
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. It is not appropriate for you to
badger me into answering a yes or no question. I am saying that
what you need from her and from all of us at the VA----
Mr. Benishek. No. That is enough of that.
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. Is accurate granular information.
Mr. Benishek. No. I am talking now.
Ms. Bradley. She is probably accurate on one----
Mr. Benishek. Can you clarify in writing for the record
what the actual new patient wait times are----
Ms. Bradley. Yes.
Mr. Benishek [continuing]. At the LA facility?
Ms. Bradley. Yes, I could. And I----
Mr. Benishek. In that clarification----
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. Think that would be helpful----
Mr. Benishek [continuing]. Could you please provide
evidence of what precisely explains how wait times for new
patients at the time of Dr. McDougall's testimony were about 4
days. Could you please explain how that answer about 4 days
came to be.
Ms. Bradley. Absolutely.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you.
Ms. Bradley. I think that would be helpful to the
committee.
Mr. Benishek. Ms. Regan, on February 23, I, along with Ms.
Brownley, sent a letter to Inspector General Griffin in
addition to Secretary McDonald.
We wrote with specific questions on the alleged
overprescription of opiate pain medications at the VA Medical
Center in Tomah. We haven't received a response from our
letter. So I would like to ask you some questions about that
tonight.
So, as you know, the IG investigation on Tomah was
administratively closed. Do you know when the report was
completed?
Ms. Regan. If I am not mistaken, I was not--I was not
knowledgeable about that at the time.
Mr. Benishek. So you don't know when it was completed.
Ms. Regan. I think it was February 2014.
Mr. Benishek. Who has it been released to and when? Do you
know that?
Ms. Regan. It was released--I believe it was in July of
2014, based on a FOIA request from Senator Baldwin.
Mr. Benishek. Has the entire unedited report been released?
Ms. Regan. The report has minimal redactions, but it has
been up on our Web site for some time now.
Mr. Benishek. How many reports are administratively closed
every year?
Ms. Regan. I have no idea.
Mr. Benishek. Who makes the decision whether or not to
administratively close a report?
Ms. Regan. Until very recently, it was the Assistant
Inspector General for the directorate that was doing the
review.
Mr. Benishek. How many administratively closed reports
within the past 3 years have contained specific recommendations
for VA action?
Ms. Regan. I don't know.
Mr. Benishek. As I understand it, your testimony to the
Chairman suggests that there was no suggestion for VA action
within the Tomah report.
Ms. Regan. I don't recall if there were or not. I didn't
ask specific----
Mr. Benishek. Apparently, there are suggested actions to
the VA within the Tomah report and, yet, it was still
administratively closed. Is that standard procedure?
Ms. Regan. I don't know what the standard procedure is
for----
Mr. Benishek. Thank you.
Ms. Regan [continuing]. Each office.
Mr. Benishek. I think I will yield back the remainder of my
time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Dr. Ruiz.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member, for
the opportunity to speak today.
I am going to just focus on the transparency and making
sure we get the information that we need because that is of
vital importance for us. I am an emergency medicine doctor, and
oftentimes we practice medicine with imperfect information.
And we understand--I understand the importance of being
able to have the most accurate information in a timely manner
in order to make the proper diagnosis in order to provide that
treatment.
That same example applies to policymakers in this
committee, is to have the most accurate information in a timely
manner so that we can provide the best solutions to the
problems that exist and then have it implemented by the
administration.
Now, my question--we have talked about how we have had a
new team and new process. So in the spirit of problem-solving,
in the spirit of cooperation, in the spirit of making sure that
we focus on these solutions, Honorable Bradley, can you tell me
a little more about the process and how you will, one,
prioritize the requests.
Because I understand, too, sometimes when you are flooded
with requests, it doesn't help the system produce the
responses. But how will you prioritize with the direction of
the chairman and the committee?
And, two, have you come up with any metrics of success in
the responsiveness that you want to demonstrate so that we can
see how things are changing?
Ms. Bradley. Well, thank you for the question.
And I would like to tell you that I think what is really
important is we said before we have responded to the vast
majority of requests from the committee, but the ones that are
left are pretty complicated.
Many times there are broad requests that require us to go
into, let's say, independent databases or ask for data across
all of our medical centers or all of our regional offices. So
what we haven't been doing a good job of and what my commitment
is to the committee tonight is that we ask you to help us
prioritize the work.
It is not up to me. I don't want to make that call. I want
you all to tell me what you need first and what you want my
team to focus on first. That is number one.
Number two, we have a senior--a senior, highly skilled,
mature person who is going to be in charge of this effort, who
is going to be kind of the bellybutton so that you can call her
and she can call you and we can adjust as needs change.
She is also going to be the focal point in VA. So people
will get to know her. And when she says ``I need particular
information and I need it right away'' and ``Oh, by the way, I
gave you a deadline and I am going to hold you to it,'' it is a
way for us to inject some accountability, is what I am trying
to say. Because before it was a kind of, ``Um, I don't know.''
It was a decentralized process and nobody was really in charge
and nobody was really being held accountable.
I think we can improve dramatically with our new team and,
also, a more systematic approach and lots more communication
with this committee.
Mr. Ruiz. So I understand what you are saying is that you
have restructured your office in order to provide a mechanism
for more dialogue with the committee in setting those
priorities under our discretion----
Ms. Bradley. Right.
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. So that you can start to tackle one
at a time.
Now, how about the metrics? Like what are you going to be
able to hold up in agreement with the committee to show that
things are improving or not improving and then we--if they are
not improving, then we have the responsibility to hold all of
you accountable? So what are those metrics that you are going
to be employing?
Ms. Bradley. Well, I think the committee's satisfaction is
important to us, and I think that will be measured by our
timeliness and whether the information that we provide you is
responsive to your needs.
Mr. Ruiz. As you have repeatedly seen in our committee,
committee satisfaction is very subjective. So I would highly
recommend that you have something a little more objective that
we can count so that we--it can be clear as to whether you are
doing your job or not doing your job in being responsive to
this committee.
Ms. Bradley. I agree.
Mr. Ruiz. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And as we ask questions--and I know some of them sound
argumentative, but, you know, Members have extremely small
amounts of times with which to ask those questions.
And, you know, the impression that is being left to the
committee and anybody that is here watching is that 90 percent
of the requests have been complied with. That is just not the
case.
90 percent of the requests may have been responded to, but
that doesn't mean that they have been complied with. We still
have over 63 that are more than 60 days that are out there.
And I would suggest to the VA that one way to move the
process forward is to go ahead and give the committee the
Bradley Stone file and the EEO records that we have asked for.
There is no need for delay. We have been very clear in exactly
what we have asked for.
And you were correct. I mean, Ms. Bradley is new, and she
is trying to set up--but we are--we have got to plow old
ground, too, because there is a lot of stuff that is out there
that this committee has been looking at for a long period of
time.
So, with that, I just want to also extend our deepest
sympathies and condolences to our colleague, Mr. Huelskamp,
upon the loss of his father last week. We are glad that you are
back here with us, even if you are a little under the weather.
But, Dr. Huelskamp, you are recognized.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate those
comments. I certainly appreciate the opportunity to ask a few
questions this evening as well.
I would like to follow up on Dr. Benishek's line of
questioning. He outlined a statement that was made in this
committee by the VA, that a CNN report says it is simply not
true. Let me outline a few other statements that are not just
to the committee, but to the American public, rolling back in
the last year.
On April 30, 2014, former VA Under Secretary for health
Robert Petzel said there was ``no evidence of a secret list in
Phoenix.'' That, of course, turned out to be very false.
In a May 23, 2014, report, former Phoenix VA Director
Sharon Helman and current Phoenix VA Chief of Staff denied
there was a secret list in Phoenix. Those statements turned out
to be false.
In a December 15, 2014, report, the inspector general
documented how VA officials have misled Congress and the press
regarding deaths related to delays in VA medical care.
And then most recently, on February 15, 2015, on a national
appearance on Meet the Press, VA Secretary Bob McDonald said
the VA had fired 60 people due to wait-time issues. That
statement was also false.
Ms. Bradley, how do you explain how so many VA officials
have been caught misleading Congress, the press, and the
American people?
Ms. Bradley. Certainly does draw our attention to our need
to be much more clear and accurate in what we provide to the
public and to you and to our veterans.
So I don't have any other comment other than there is no
way for us to restore trust unless we are more careful about
specific facts, numbers, and information that we provide.
Dr. Huelskamp. 60 people fired. That is a very specific
fact. The Secretary himself stated that. You were obviously
working for him then.
Did you approve that statement? Did he just make that up?
Did he get confused between 4 and 60? Explain that a little bit
more, if you would, please.
Ms. Bradley. I really can't say what he was thinking about.
He may have been using numbers of people who had been removed
for other reasons and merged the two. I don't know that.
Dr. Huelskamp. Was there a statement following that by the
VA that said ``No. We made a mistake'' or ``We misled''? I have
not seen the follow-up statement from the Secretary.
Ms. Bradley. Yes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Because that statement is put--is that
statement true?
Ms. Bradley. I believe there was a statement that was made
from the VA for a followup.
Dr. Huelskamp. The statement that he fired 60 people, is
that true, that he made on Meet the Press?
Ms. Bradley. As far as I know, it is not true.
Dr. Huelskamp. So why would he make such a statement?
Ms. Bradley. I don't know. I don't think it is fair to
say----
Dr. Huelskamp. You said he issued a statement about his
statement?
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. He made the statement up. I
really think you should ask him about it.
Dr. Huelskamp. He is not here. You are the general counsel
for the VA. You are asking us to trust you. To me, this is the
most misleading statement I have heard made, probably, in my 4
years on this committee. Meet the Press. 60 people fired. That
is not true at all. You agree it is not true.
Can you tell me what the Secretary's statement was.
Ms. Bradley. I didn't say that 60 people weren't fired. I
said that he misspoke when he said that 60 people were fired
because of access issues.
So it may be, in fact, that there were 60 people fired.
They just weren't fired for access issues. I don't know that
for----
Dr. Huelskamp. So there were 60 people fired? You don't
know that?
Ms. Bradley. I don't know that----
Mr. Hueskamp. And you are asking me to trust.
You were working for the VA at this time, on February 15?
Ms. Bradley. I was.
Dr. Huelskamp. And you want us to trust you, but you can't
answer or explain away this statement about 60 people that was
patently false.
Ms. Bradley. Again, you should ask Secretary McDonald about
that statement.
Dr. Huelskamp. He is not here. Ma'am, if you want trust to
be restored----
Ms. Bradley. I can't speak for him, though.
Dr. Huelskamp. I have been----
Ms. Bradley. That is the point.
Dr. Huelskamp. Where were you before you came to the VA?
Ms. Bradley. I was at the Department of Defense.
Dr. Huelskamp. Department of Defense.
Ms. Bradley. Yes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Did it astound you? Did you get worried and
upset when you heard about waiting lists in Phoenix and
veterans possibly dying because of waiting lists? Did that
upset you?
Ms. Bradley. I was obviously so committed to come back to
the VA. I served as the general counsel in 1998. I served for 3
years.
Dr. Huelskamp. Did that upset you?
Ms. Bradley. It did.
Dr. Huelskamp. I will tell you what the committee's
perspective was. We had VA officials sitting right in those
chairs. They said there was no waiting list. And people were
dying because of that. And I believe they lied to the
committee.
And this will be my request, Mr. Chairman, from the
committee, an official request, for each of these five
statements, including the one from my colleague.
I would like a written statement, an explanation of whether
or not this was a false statement or not and how your
Department, if it was a false statement, repaired that breach
of trust.
Would you be willing to provide that to the committee?
Ms. Bradley. I will ask the Department to provide it. Sure.
Absolutely.
Dr. Huelskamp. You will ask--you are the Department
representative here, ma'am.
Ms. Bradley. I won't----
Dr. Huelskamp. Yes or no. You will provide it or not?
Ms. Bradley. I can't answer on behalf of the Secretary.
But, yes, I will make sure that you get that answer.
Dr. Huelskamp. So the answer is, yes, you will provide
that?
Ms. Bradley. Yes.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, as we have discussed here, the key word is
``trust.'' And until these misleading statements and, I think,
are patently false--and we have heard so many of these for 4
years, and these have to be cleared up.
And, again, I appreciate you calling the hearing tonight,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Huelskamp.
I will say that I did speak directly with the Secretary
regarding those comments. He did tell me that he had misspoken,
that the statement was not accurate in the way he had phrased
it. But I will leave it to Ms. Bradley to see if she can get
any more on that.
Also, for the record, this committee has been clear. It was
40 veterans died while waiting on the list, not because they
were on the list.
Ms. Kuster.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you for the opportunity to address our witnesses today.
I just want to join the comments of my colleague,
Representative Titus, that I do feel that we have sort of
dropped into a black hole with regard to the notice of this
hearing and some of the topics that are being covered because
we haven't had a hearing notice on the specifics of this other
matter that has come up today.
So I want to direct my remarks to what was noticed in this
hearing, and this is generally on the issue of transparency.
And I want to start with our--I presume expert witnesses were
called by the chair because there has been a lot of discussion
about accommodation.
And I want to ask Attorney Bopp, in the circumstance of
committee staff releasing documents directly to the media
without those documents coming to members of the committee--
these are documents that I have not had the opportunity to see.
I don't believe my colleagues in the minority--letters that
have been sent where the minority has not been even copied, the
ranking member even copied on the request for documents that
were asked for--we didn't hear about it till many, many weeks
later. Frankly, I have just heard about it today. And I am
hearing reports at this hearing that staff members are
releasing these documents directly to the media.
In that circumstance, under your legal advice to a Member
of Congress, how would you recommend this accommodation?
Our chair has said--and I want to quote this accurately
because this is a blanket statement--there will be no in-camera
review. So he has taken that off the table as any type of
accommodation of people that are trying to reach--trying to
develop the trust.
Here we have a new effort, a new Secretary seeking and
recruiting a new legal counsel so that we can have a new
process to reestablish trust, and, yet, we have taken this in-
camera review off the table because they want, quote-unquote,
to hold the documents.
Well, it seems to me they want to hold the documents
because the staff is going to give them to the press. What
would you recommend to me as----
The Chairman. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Kuster. No. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman. I won't yield. I
would like to hear the advice that I would get from counsel as
to how I would possibly handle this.
And, by the way, I come from The Granite State, where
privacy is of primary concern. I represent veterans who care
about not just their Social Security number. They care about
their personal private information.
The topic that we talk about more often than not in this
committee, PTSD--they can't even come forward to get the
medical care that they need, and now we are going to start
spreading this information around publicly? So just what advice
would you give me?
Mr. Bopp. I would say, first of all--look, it is a good
question. I don't know the facts as you lay them out. But let's
assume the facts, as you lay them out----
Ms. Kuster. You know as much as I know. We both have been
in this room.
Mr. Bopp. Sure.
Ms. Kuster. This is as much as we know.
Mr. Bopp. Okay. The House rules and committee rules don't
contemplate committee staff--don't contemplate committee staff
providing information--committee information directly to the
press.
Ms. Kuster. And that is the problem. I mean, that is the
situation we have. So if an accommodation would be an in-camera
review because you want to limit the release of private
personal information to the press, but that has been taken off
the table because the chair refuses in-camera review, then
where are we?
Mr. Bopp. I would say this. There really ought to be more
of a discussion at the front end of a request for information
from the committee with an agency and that that front-end
discussion ought to include what information is available, how
long it will take to provide that information, and then how
sensitive that information is. And, at that point, that is the
time to discuss accommodations.
And I don't know--again, I don't know what is happening
here exactly, but it is not the time to start discussing
accommodations 3 months in or 60 days after a request is
already received.
But you are right. I mean, there ought to be a discussion
of the sensitivity of the information, how long it will take to
provide the information, and what is available on--at the front
end.
Ms. Kuster. And just--if I can ask one quick question----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired. Thank you
very much.
I would also----
Ms. Kuster. I will ask you the question another time.
The Chairman. I will also tell you that the information
that----
Ms. Kuster. I am sorry. This is----
The Chairman. Well, let me finish.
Ms. Kuster. You are now taking my time.
The Chairman. No. Your time is expired.
What was released to the press was a letter that was
written to me as the chairman. I have the authority to release
letters that are written to me. You are making--no, ma'am.
Ms. Kuster. I am simply saying is there a reason----
The Chairman. No, ma'am.
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. that we wouldn't accommodate this
issue? And, obviously, that is what has created the lack of
trust.
The Chairman. No. Unfortunately, the lack of trust has been
long developing in this process. I can assure----
Ms. Kuster. Well----
The Chairman. Ma'am----
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. Then, it doesn't seem to----
The Chairman [continuing]. I can assure you that the
problem that exists here today is a lack of trust. We are
attempting to correct that. The Secretary is doing everything
that he can in hiring a new general counsel, making changes.
But we also--you know, what is interesting is everybody
wants to focus on improving the VA by improving transparency,
but we are leaving off the first part of this, and it is called
the power of legislative inquiry. And that is what we are doing
here today.
Mr. Coffman, you are recognized.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I can, let me refer something to our two legal experts
here today, Mr. Tiefer and Mr. Bopp.
The construction of a VA hospital is in my district. It is
hundreds of millions of dollars over budget, years behind
schedule, and this committee has done some inquiries to find
out how things got so messed up, I guess, to put it mildly.
And so we requested a report--a risk assessment that the VA
did, and they did not provide it because they were concerned
about a more--quote-unquote, more public review. I think they
were willing to do it in camera.
Could you both comment on that in terms of our oversight
responsibilities and the VA's response.
Mr. Tiefer. As I said in my written testimony, not only is
the Trade Secrets Act, which is the only legal provision that
is being invoked here, not some basis to withhold from
Congress, because it says you can withhold, you can keep
materials unless you are being asked by someone, quote,
``authorized by law,'' and you are authorized by law. So it is
not a statute that was meant to keep things from Congress, and
it doesn't.
More broadly, and more common sense, procurement is like
one of the main things that all the committees of the House get
into because everybody's got some department, and their
department does procurement, and their procurement is screwed
up, and so the idea that there is a barrier to doing oversight
over procurement, it is a novel discovery in a situation where
there have been hundreds of previous times it wasn't there.
I am going to say this, which is, if there is this terrible
concern that a certain piece of paper's numbers--certain
numbers on this, should be very closely held, you provide a
document that is redacted other than those very numbers, you
bring the numbers up, and you present the case, do you want
these numbers in writing, or can we just show you the piece of
paper and where the numbers fit? And at that point--but not--
you discuss them at great length of time and distance in-camera
as a general theory. You bring the paper up to the committee.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Bopp.
Mr. Bopp. I agree with Professor Tiefer.
Mr. Coffman. Ms. Hadley--Ms. Bradley, I am sorry, the
Congress of the United States, is going to have to vote on
lifting the cap on this hospital soon. By sometime next month,
we will be beyond the authorized cap, and we are going to have
to do some sort of supplemental appropriation for a hospital
that is hundreds of millions of dollars over budget and years
behind schedule. If you are not willing--if the VA is not
willing to provide the information to Congress on how we got to
where we are, how is Congress supposed to make that decision?
Ms. Bradley. We didn't know when we offered in-camera
inspection that that didn't meet your needs.
Mr. Coffman. But that wasn't the request. The request was
for the document, and it is the power of Congress, the ability
to ask for that document. And so your position is, well, we
will decide what information we want to give Congress, and what
information we don't. And you are here trying to create a new
environment of trust. How can we trust you?
Ms. Bradley. Well, just by telling me that you would like
to see the risk assessment and that an in-camera inspection----
Mr. Coffman. It was in writing. The request was in writing.
Ms. Bradley [continuing]. And then we will do it. And we
will talk about it, and if you tell me that is your need, we
will do it.
Mr. Coffman. The request was in writing.
Ms. Bradley. I am just answering your question. Tonight is
the first night----
Mr. Coffman. You are saying that a request in writing isn't
good enough?
Ms. Bradley. We offered it. We came back through the
accommodation process and said we understand what your request
is. Because of the sensitive pricing information, that could
really go to making a deal in which the taxpayers suffer, we
said would you be willing to accept an in-camera inspection?
And as far as I know, we never heard that you weren't willing
to accept that. Now we have heard that. This is what
accommodation is about. You tell us no, an in-camera inspection
of the risk assessment is insufficient. We would like the
document. And then we go from there.
Mr. Coffman. When can I get the document?
Ms. Bradley. Got it.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To Ms. Regan, I just
want to make sure I have the dates on some of these correct.
The VA OIG publishes the Tridec report on what day?
Ms. Regan. I believe it was December 8, of 2014.
Mr. O'Rourke. December 8?
Ms. Regan. Yes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Of 2014. And then the VA committee requests
the Tridec report on what date? Or what day did you receive
that request?
Ms. Regan. The letter was dated January 7.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. And then what day did the VA Committee
receive the Tridec report?
Ms. Regan. The Tridec report--the report itself was given
to the committee the day it was issued.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay.
Ms. Regan. We sent copies up here the same day to the four
corners.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. On the chairman's concern about the
fact that Ms. Cooper was alleged to have committed serious
misconduct, was less than candid, who had potentially steered
multi-million-dollar contracts to people that she knew that
were not noncompetitive. What is the proper way for her next
employer in the Federal Government, the Treasury Department, to
learn of these accusations?
Ms. Regan. I would hope that the agency hiring the
individual would have vetted her through her former employer,
or current employer. We don't know what happened with regard to
that. Sometimes reports just kind of overlap, and it is a
surprise somebody's leaving. So if they, and I remember with
the report involving FedBid and Ms. Taylor, I think the agency
gave the report to the future employer, and then the hiring was
cancelled. But we didn't know Ms. Cooper was leaving, and the
report hadn't been finished yet at that time.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. So the onus would be on the future
employer to look over her work history, call her former
employer.
Let me switch to Ms. Bradley. On this question of the
outstanding requests from your office, and the chairman
disputes your 94 percent completed, and I think that should
certainly be worked out. I would love to understand the
resolution of that. You said that we should assist in
prioritizing those requests. Why not just prioritize them based
on when they came in and the longest outstanding? The chairman
says the committee has 63 requests at 60 days or over. Those
seem like the ones to attack and resolve.
Ms. Bradley. It does seem logical, but for example, we
might get a request for all of the arrests that VA made in
2014, and then all of the subsequent disciplinary actions that
were taken as a result of those arrests. So that might take us
a long time to get. And there might be two or three other
requests that the committee needs immediately for its oversight
and legislative purposes. I don't know about these priorities.
I need you to tell me what those priorities are so that we can
be more responsive to you.
I can just tell you that some requests are extremely
onerous. They take a long time and a lot of different people,
and looking at a lot of different databases in our very
decentralized organization. So, you know, it may not be to the
committee's advantage for us to tackle that one if that one is
at the top of the list. Just in terms of, you know, first in,
first out.
Mr. O'Rourke. Let me ask this question. Have you and the
Secretary met with the chairman and the ranking member on this
issue of access to information that I think is owed to the
committee?
Ms. Bradley. Secretary McDonald has met with the chairman
twice, and he was accompanied with someone who is part of the
oversight team, that I have stood up. I have not met with the
chairman yet. Tonight was my first night to meet him, but I
know that there were two prior meetings I think relatively
recently to discuss these issues, yes.
Mr. O'Rourke. I would, you know, just respectfully
recommend that a meeting of those four, with the ranking member
representing the minority committee members on the committee,
meet to see if we can't resolve this because I think this is a
legitimate, genuine issue. I think you are hearing the urgency
from my colleagues about care delayed or denied, hospital
projects that have gone twice over budget, taking money
presumably from other districts who have pressing needs as
well, a history of frustration on our part in getting
information that we need.
Now I will say that, but I will also say that under the
leadership of this Secretary, I have seen a turnaround in
responsiveness, in transparency, and the development or the
beginning of a development of a culture of accountability. And
I see that directly from the Secretary who is personally
responsive and accountable to requests that I make, so I do
think that the leadership is there and that the will and the
intent is there. And Republican or Democrat, we are both
interested in getting to the same end of serving those who have
served this country.
So, this committee is known for its bipartisanship. I just
hope that we don't lose that. I hope that those four can meet,
work through these issues. I certainly would support that. And
so, I appreciate your willingness to join that meeting, and I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. O'Rourke. And the
ranking member and I have just been talking, and if the
Secretary is available, Ms. Bradley, we are more than happy to
meet at any time this week that we can mutually agree upon
because there are scheduling conflicts, I understand. And if
not this week, you know, maybe we can get together quickly. And
I think it would be a good thing for us.
And we did. We sat right here at this table, the Secretary
and I did, and several of the things we did get accomplished,
but three weeks ago we were talking about the EEO files, and we
still don't have the EEO files. So Dr. Wenstrup. Ms. Walorski,
you are recognized.
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Regan, in your
testimony you state that the IG is only required to provide the
committee semiannual reports, and everything else is subject to
the IG's discretion. So, is it your position that the committee
should resort to legislation or a subpoena to get documents
that we request?
Ms. Regan. Absolutely not. We have responded with just
about everything that this Committee has asked for. We are very
open. We do briefings. We give information to the Committee. We
keep them updated. We give them copies of the reports before
they are made public. There are some reports that are even
going to be listed on the Web site as restricted. There is a
briefing ahead of time. That is information that is the other,
in the IG act. But we do keep this committee currently
informed.
We have not taken the position that we don't have to saying
anything or we don't have to give anything else, but when you
go to the specific language in the IG Act, as you go through
what is required versus discretionary, that is all it says; and
we do keep this committee fully informed.
Mrs. Walorski. Yeah, I have only been on the committee 3
years. I am one of the younger members of the committee. And it
has amazed me when we put requests in for information as
individual members or through the committee and then sometimes,
you know, just continually asking and asking and asking, I
asked a question 7 months ago that I was just actually made
aware of, we finally got the answer tonight before this
hearing, 7 months.
And, I guess I would direct this to you, Ms. Bradley. You
know, I had a horrible situation develop in my district last
week. It was in Indianapolis VA Hospital. And there was the
medical center director, who basically is in charge of
administering the mental health programs, the lifelines to
veterans who desperately need help and are often suicidal. She
sent an email out mocking the veterans that she was charged to
serve, and the photos that she sent in this email depicted a
toy Christmas elf as a veteran pleading for anti-anxiety
medication, and then hanging himself with a strand of Christmas
lights. The employee in question has been placed on paid on
administrative leave and will eventually be coming back to
work. The medical center director is telling me that they have
responded, but he can't comment on any disciplinary actions,
and I am operating on his word. Because I only have his word, I
need documentation they are responding appropriately; and for
sure this committee needs documentation that they are
responding.
So, based on what I am hearing tonight, you are telling me,
or are you telling me, that if this committee wanted to see
documentation in regards to the disciplinary handling of this
employee in question, what we would need to do is go to your
headquarters, review documents on-camera in the presence of a
VA staff. Is that what you are saying if we wanted additional
information on how this was handled?
Ms. Bradley. No. Absolutely not. That is not what I have
said for the entire----
Ms. Walorski. So what would be my step if--and I guess--and
let me just say this. Here is the caveat to this whole thing
is--I have only been here 3 years, and it has been a disaster
after disaster after disaster. And the reason I think folks
like me are so passionate and can get emotional about this, is
because we are fighting in many cases, and I have had to do
this myself with the new Secretary, and he absolutely responded
as Representative O'Rourke mentioned. But we are fighting for
the lives of people. I mean, I have been in life and death
situations with veterans in my district, and all this is
surrounded by the fact that you and I both work by the
taxpayers' money that they are investing and asking us to be
good stewards of. We are elected to be able to be involved in
an oversight question and answer to be good stewards of the
money given us by the taxpayers of this country, who at many
times in my district are hard, hard workers, double income, and
we have 54,000 veterans plus their families in my district.
So, you know, I get very passionate about this because if
we are not sitting here in the 3 years I have been here
fighting, having to sit and listen sometimes to ridiculous
answers, and then waiting 7 months to get an answer and then
something happens in my State, State of Indiana, and it is
horrific. I think this employee should be fired. I am
questioning whether the executive director should still be the
executive director, having that email in his hand for 3 months.
These are the kind of things.
This is reality in my world as one member of this
committee. This is reality, when people ask me what I do, I
tell them I fight for veterans every day. And I will say
Secretary McDonald has gone out of his way and he saved the
life of one of my veterans. But, that is why it is so
frustrating, and to say to you how do I get information on this
case? How do I know this woman was put on administrative leave?
How do I know she was disciplined? How do I--what do I do? How
do I get the information? Where is my first step if it is not
that camera request.
Ms. Bradley. Forget the in-camera request. Have you asked
for a briefing? It seems to me we should provide you a
briefing, like tomorrow, if that is what you want.
Mrs. Walorski. Okay. Now here is what makes me leery of
that. I asked a question, and I just got an answer 7 months
later, 7 months. The history of what the VA has been able to
deliver to this committee is months if not ad infinitum. That
is why it is so hard for me to sit here and say to you, yeah, I
want a briefing tomorrow. I will take it. Can you deliver me a
briefing tomorrow in the Indianapolis case?
Ms. Bradley. I think I can.
Mrs. Walorski. All right. I--Okay.
Ms. Bradley. I am passionate and am thrilled that you are
passionate and you have a right to get a briefing about this
like in realtime.
Mrs. Walorski. What time tomorrow, and how soon can you
tell me what time? This is real news. This is real in our
district, and in our State. Not my district, but certainly my
State. My veterans go to that hospital. Can we get a briefing
tomorrow?
Ms. Bradley. You can get a briefing tomorrow, yes. I think
we can arrange that.
Mrs. Walorski. And so I am giving you the request right now
right? I appreciate it. Thank you. I yield back my time, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. One of the things that bothers me, Ms. Regan,
is you are leaving the impression that the IG has responded to
all of our requests, given the impression to the Members that
when we ask for something, we get everything we ask for. Again,
and I know, Ms. Kuster and others have said they don't know
about the Tridec-Cooper report. What I got, was 27 pages with
at least a paragraph or more redacted, 15 where the entire
page, if not most of it, was redacted and whole pages missing.
So, again, that is where the transparency problem exists is we
are leaving the impression that we are getting what we are
asking for, and we are getting half of what we are asking for.
And I am willing to accept what has been said tonight, and I
think the committee wants to accept it so we can move forward.
And as I said earlier, you know, the impression again that,
you know, with the Tridec-Cooper issue, we did not release
anything to the media, except my letter that I got from the
OIG, which of course any of us are within our own rights to be
able to release that, but I am just letting you know, just
because they send us a package like this, doesn't mean we are
getting what we are asking for. Ms. Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, I know Ms. Walorski
said she has only been here for about 3 years. I have been here
for about 5 seconds compared to you. So, and given my
background as a prosecutor, I guess my question could probably
be an obvious one, but I am going to direct it to Ms. Bradley
and Ms. Regan. The responsiveness to the chairman's request or
alleged lack thereof, is that an attempt at a coverup on either
one of your parts regarding potentially negligent, criminal
behavior, et cetera, on anyone's part at the VA. Ms. Bradley,
yes or no?
Ms. Bradley. Absolutely not.
Miss Rice. and Ms. Regan.
Ms. Regan. Absolutely not.
Miss Rice. Okay, so then from that point I guess what we
can do is I take you at your word, and I am sure everyone on
this committee does. I think that was a direct question that
has to be asked, and I appreciate your answer. And I think then
that what we have to deal with is obviously the bureaucratic
steps that need to be taken in order to answer the chairman's
request for information or any member of this committee's
request for information, and there is one simple reason,
because that is what the men and women who are brave enough to
put on a uniform and go fight for all the freedoms that we
enjoy every day, that is what they deserve.
I appreciate both of your presence here today, and I am
sure that you are going to, my hope is that you are going to
continue to ensure that whatever is going wrong at the VA is
made public so that we can go forward and serve the men and
women that so dearly deserve the help that they need.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Dr. Abraham.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Bradley, thank
you and you your family for your service.
I want to echo, some of what Dr. Ruiz and Dr. Roe said. It
is not you all's job to tell us what we need when we ask for
it. We are fairly intelligent enough to know that if it is
private information, then it is to stay private. I am assuming
that you or someone on your counsel, your team, decides what is
private information and what isn't.
You inferred that mental health, and certainly we
understand that, but day end, you are making that decision.
Well, I think we are quite capable of making that decision
ourselves. So, I want to echo what Dr. Roe was saying that,
that what we ask for when we ask for records, we expect to get
the records, and we can make that decision.
I am looking forward to the two cases that you have cited
where information was possibly leaked from members of this
committee, and I would like to see the circumstances regarding
that, but then that also goes back to a trust issue for us. You
have to trust us to a point, and this is a new committee this
year. And I don't think there has been any information leaked
from this committee on the 114th Congress.
In reference to Mr. Ruiz' comments, I totally agree that,
you know, you also said that we need timely, systemic,
objective data. But, again, who decides what timely is? Who
decides the system? So, we do need a template of sorts to check
the box as to what time is, what we can get from you guys, when
we can get it, because again, we are talking subjective. We
need to get objective because, like Ms. Walorski said, we are
talking about lives here, and sometimes time does matter.
So, I guess the question, and with the nod of your head, I
think you have probably answered it, that your team so to
speak, heretofore has made the decision what to redact on these
reports that we asked?
Ms. Bradley. That is correct.
Mr. Abraham. Okay. And there are no physicians per se on
your team, that wouldn't understand the health issues that some
of it could be private information and some that may not be?
Ms. Bradley. Yeah. Let me give you one example. You said
that, you know, we can share that private information with you.
Our question that we must ask as the executive branch is, do
you need that information?
Mr. Abraham. But again that is not your----
Ms. Bradley. Can I give you an example?
Mr. Abraham. But I don't think that is your call.
Ms. Bradley. I don't mean it in a way----
Mr. Abraham. I think that would be our call.
Ms. Bradley. Right. So here is an example. So in a
veteran's file who commits suicide, there is extensive personal
information, about the veteran's child, about the veteran's
child's incarceration, drug addiction, attempted suicide. It
may in fact be, that this committee does not have use for that
information.
Mr. Abraham. But how do you know that?
Ms. Bradley. I don't.
Mr. Abraham. Okay so I----
Ms. Bradley. Exactly----
Mr. Abraham. And I think that is where the debate begins.
Ms. Bradley. That is why I would ask you do you need that
information----
Mr. Abraham. We might.
Ms. Bradley. About the child, and then you would say----
Mr. Abraham. We might.
Ms. Bradley. Yes, we do----
Mr. Abraham. Yes.
Ms. Bradley. And we would provide it. But you might say,
you know what, it is not pertinent to our oversight request and
we will have been doing our part to protect that private
information if in fact, you don't need it.
Mr. Abraham. But that is a judgment call on your part.
Ms. Bradley. But you--no, for you to make. To help----
Mr. Abraham. But, we also must have say in what is
pertinent information and what is important here.
Ms. Bradley. So we will share it with you.
Mr. Abraham. So what you are telling me is that you are
thinking that maybe your team's judgment overrides ours, or is
more important. And I understand that. We want to make sure
that we are on the same page here. And I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Ms. Bradley. Okay.
Mr. Abraham. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. In any of these requests that the
committee has made, I am not aware of one single time that the
department has asked us about a child or arrest record or
anything like that. I think common sense would dictate, you
know, but, we are the ones sometimes--we will have to take all
of the information because if we let somebody know exactly what
we are looking for, they may be tipped off within the
department, or somebody could be identifiable.
So, I agree, a communication and dialogue that has not
existed. Again, we are still waiting on the Bradley Stone file.
We are still waiting on the EEO file. You know, we don't have
those. I look forward to getting them but----
Mr. McNerney, you are recognized.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is clear to me
that every single person on this committee is determined to get
our hands on the information we need to perform our oversight
responsibilities, and Dr. Roe was right on when he said that if
there was excess expenditures on construction that could have
been used to help our veterans, then that is what we would be
paying our taxpayers back and paying our veterans back. So, you
can find that we are going to be interested in finding a way to
get that information.
Now, we have heard about two types of sensitive information
so far that the VA can be cautious about releasing. One is
personal information, and the other is sensitive bidding
information. Is there any other type of information or reason
for not being forthcoming, or for being reluctant to be
forthcoming?
Ms. Bradley. I am glad that I can answer this question. I
hate for it to be cast in the light of that we are not
forthcoming. For example, we have an office called the Office
of Accountability Review, and its primary purpose is to conduct
administrative investigation boards. And so if you were to ask
us for a draft report that had been prepared by the
Administrative Investigation Board, we would push back and say
let's talk about it because it is not a final report, and it is
going to lead to discipline that the Secretary or other
officials may want to take. So we have to do everything in our
power to make sure that we have righteous investigations, that
we have righteous administrative actions, and that when we take
those actions, they will stick either in court or at an
administrative body like the EEOC, or the MSPB, so that would
be internal deliberative decisionmaking kinds of documents that
we wouldn't want to provide to you while they are ongoing. That
would be another good example.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Bopp, do you believe that it is credible
that there is communication problems, that have gotten us here
that could have been avoided with proper communications? Do you
believe that is a credible claim?
Mr. Bopp. It does not appear to me that is certainly the
only cause of the problems. I mean, there may be communications
barriers or problems between the committee and the agency, but,
what I am gathering is that there are--it appears that there
are attempts to find sort of ways to getting to know. And
bringing up potential ways or reasons not to provide
information to the committee, that are very clearly reasons
that are not legally defensible, I see as the core of the
problem.
Mr. McNerney. Do you have any recommendations, or will you
be able to produce recommendations that will help solve this
problem?
Mr. Bopp. I am not sure I can, you know, solve the problem,
but yes, absolutely. I think one of the key recommendations is
at the very front end if discussions need to be had and there
is not enough discussion going on between the agency and the
committee as far as, you know, what information is being
sought, where that information is, how long it is going to take
to produce, those communications, those discussions should take
place right away, not after 60 days, not after 90 days. If
those communications occur at the front end, and it appears
from today's discussion that there is a desire to have those
communications, if they happen early on, I think a lot of the--
presumably a lot of the problems that have been occurring can
be alleviated.
Mr. McNerney. Well, Mr. Chairman, we could include that in
a protocol then when we request information.
I have a weird question. Ms. Regan, have you been charged
with investigating the department on lack of responsiveness to
this Committee? And if you hadn't, how would you investigate,
how would you go about answering that question?
Ms. Regan. We have not as far as I know. And there would be
a request, would come in to the Deputy Inspector General, and
we would look at that and probably conduct an audit or other
review. Usually, we get a lot of requests from the Hill, and we
usually conduct some kind of a review or investigation based on
those requests.
Mr. McNerney. Would your department be capable of
conducting that kind of an investigation?
Ms. Regan. I would think so.
Mr. McNerney. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Yeah, I have a question for Ms. Bradley. Ms.
Bradley, we have not met. And nice meeting you. I am sorry this
is the first time we have got a chance to meet. But we have had
several meetings with the Secretary, and I want to point out
your newness and your freshness is very nice, but I think you
may be overcommitting the VA and overpromising, like tomorrow I
am going to have a meeting and we are going to discuss this. So
I think you need to, what is it, back down.
The Chairman. Stall.
Ms. Brown. No. I am trying to find a nice word to say
that--don't overcommit, because when you commit something and
you can't produce it like tomorrow, then it will be headlines,
stories tomorrow at 5:00. So I am asking you to kind of back,
back, slow down, catch your breath. You are refreshing. We are
looking forward to working with you, the chairman and I. We
have had several meetings with the Secretary. In fact, the big
four have met several times, and I am looking forward to us
meeting this week if it can be scheduled.
But, some of the other things that you have committed to
and committed to do in the next day or tomorrow, I don't know
that you can do it, so you need to say I am going to try, but
don't say I am going to do it. It is the worst thing to say you
are going to do something and cannot produce. So you going try,
and you going get it done, but you may not be able to get it
done tomorrow. I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Costello.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And for the record,
the Stone matter is in my congressional district, and I want to
thank the chairman for his vigilance in seeing through the
records requests, and I may actually have a question for you
relative to that.
But first, a more fundamental and constitutional question,
Ms. Bradley. Yes or no, are you asserting that the Privacy Act
prohibits you from providing certain records to this
congressional committee?
Ms. Bradley. No.
Mr. Costello. So, the Privacy Act does not bar you from
providing information to this committee?
Ms. Bradley. That is correct.
Mr. Costello. Okay. And Ms. Regan, is that the same for
you?
Ms. Regan. Under the Privacy Act, that is the same answer.
It does not prohibit us.
Mr. Costello. Okay. So, by what measure are you asserting
that you are not going to forward information to this committee
pursuant to that Act?
Ms. Bradley. First of all, we don't assert that we won't
provide information to the committee based on the Privacy Act.
What we want the committee to understand is that in the
executive branch, it is a fundamental interest that we
establish trust with veterans, with our patients and with our
employees. So, to the extent we can protect personal
information and still meet your oversight needs, that is what
we want to achieve. We want to accommodate with you so that we
can meet your needs, but you need to be mindful that we want to
protect privacy interests.
But we don't have any bar from providing you the
information, but if you don't need it, it would be an
unnecessary disclosure. It would be re-disclosing private
information that we try to avoid. It is a high-risk area, and
we try to avoid it.
Mr. Costello. Okay. I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
being here at this later hour.
First of all, I think the premise we all start from is, is
that it is never in question that everyone in this room cares
deeply about the care of our veterans and tries to deliver the
best quality care we can.
And I also think, and I think the ranking member did a nice
job, Ms. Bradley, of summing up here. I think it is refreshing
to hear you talk about this, in here, and I think Mr. Bopp call
it aspirational, which I think is a very positive character
trait. I am a high school teacher and lunchroom supervisor.
Aspirational is a good place to be in. But it also understands
that results do matter, and I hope you understand, and we do
know you are new at this, but all of us up here, the one
thing--we are a pretty surly bunch on this issue of data--and
the issue of being concerned about the privacy of the data as
one of those veterans who is in the 26 million who the data
went out from your office, not us, this is a touchy spot.
And this idea about the determinations, and I am very
cognizant of your protecting data and all that, but this is, it
is the reality of where we are at. An example is of after
Phoenix, great investigations went across the country in depth,
and then a list was published of areas, and facilities, and
CBOCs that had problems, and those made it on the front page of
many of our congressional districts that there is a problem at
X CBOC. And then when we ask what the problem was, silence. And
then people would come in here, and I would say will you take
back to your boss that I need to know what is happening.
Picture what happened back in our districts.
There was Phoenix. There were problems. We were on the
list. We are a member of the committee, a Member of Congress,
and we have to respond, I don't know, they won't tell me. They
won't tell me. Request, request, request. That is what you are
up against. And the situation is we are on the same team. We
are trying to get there, but it created this friction. So even
if it is one case from one Member who didn't get an answer,
that is the most important request that you have ever gotten
because it is a veteran in that district. So that is what you
are up against.
Now with that being said, Ms. Regan, how many times have
you testified here?
Ms. Regan. I lost count, maybe seven, eight.
Mr. Walz. Sure. When I got here in 2007, we had a lot of
them, and that is when we first met. And I think at that time I
would make the assumption--you don't have to--that I felt the
IG was underfunded, and I felt the criticalness of IGs across
the government are absolutely critical. What is Ms. Bradley's
oversight over you? What leverage does she have over you?
Ms. Regan. None.
Mr. Walz. So, you are two separate issues here. My point on
this hearing is what I would say is this issue of transparency,
or and I will say at times the lack thereof of on the numerous
issues that Mr. Bopp and the Professor brought up, about how we
get this, I fall in their camp on this, because the one thing
you will get us to agree on--this is a pretty bipartisan
committee--but the issue of congressional, prerogative and
privilege, we are together on this. We want it. We need it. We
are Article 1 for a reason. Deliver it. I think this is an
important one. We need to get answers, and we need to figure
that out.
What I am concerned about is the sensitive nature of the IG
because two things are at work here. The integrity of the IG is
being questioned, or the integrity of the IG has been
compromised, or both or neither, I guess in terms of if it
hasn't been. That has been brought into this. And this is
something new, and this is something that I think is critical.
It needs to be looked at. I just think by--and I know it
crosses into this issue of getting information on this, but I
am, at least at this point, uncomfortable in this because of
that absolute sacredness of the IG being independent from you
and being able to do what Mr. McNerney just asked, I want that
report to be done. I want you, Ms. Regan, to ask--this is why
we are so mad because we asked for a request, and Ms. Walorski
waited 7 months.
So I guess and, again, as a statement as we all make them,
and it may have been said before, there is some great questions
brought up. You hear a common thread going through here. We
want the information to serve our veterans, as you want. I
believe you are trying to protect them. Our situation is, is
that is good, but let us decide. Send it to us.
And this issue of the IG of what has happened here with
Treasury and an employee or whatever, this is very sensitive
ground that I am not comfortable at 10:00 at night in another
hearing of this being there, so I will just respectably ask the
chairman and the ranking member--I think they have already done
this--is maybe taking this to a different level, the
communications with the Secretary and the two principals that
are here, taking that and then figuring out where we go next.
But, I am grateful for the opportunity. This is a critical
issue, and I want to say while, and being a teacher myself, I
am sorry I didn't ask you a question. I know we like to talk,
so I would have let you, Professor. But, I think you two bring
up a good point. While this may be theoretical, it is an
important theoretical discussion we are having here on this
Freedom of Information Act and what we have, and I will tell
you this issue has frustrated me from the beginning. And you
have inherited, Ms. Bradley, but what I am hearing tonight is I
think you have the potential to fix it. I think you have the
right attitude to do so, and I would encourage you to work with
us to get that done. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Walz. Dr. Wenstrup, you are
recognized.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well thank you, Mr. Chairman. I found a lot
of this conversation very interesting and disturbing at the
same time tonight, and in many ways since I have been in
Congress, and I am in my second term. I am a doctor, and my
specialty is foot and ankle. Sometimes I would be called to the
hospital to see patients that are in the mental health ward.
Now, they don't redact everything that is in that chart about
the patient. There is an understanding that when I see that
patient, that I understand that is private. And that is what is
missing here. There is no understanding.
I don't see where you are any more professional than I am
when it comes to what information should be shared and what
isn't. I have to make that decision and be professional, and
know what is private, but I need to get the information. And we
have the authority to get that information. It is not up to
you. You don't have any higher certification than I do when it
comes to making decisions about privacy. And that is an
attitude we have here.
We go to classified briefings as Members of Congress. You
know, I served in Iraq as a soldier. I would get special
briefings on battles that were coming up. I was trusted there.
I am trusted as a doctor. But here we see things like the
Bergdahl exchange where the law says that you are supposed to
inform Congress of this, and both sides of the aisle were upset
about that because they just did it. And this is the attitude
that tends to pervade down to us here in Congress.
And as Mr. Walz said, you are asked a question. I don't
know. You are a Member of Congress. You can't find that out?
That is the problem. And really the--I trust every single
person that sits around this table, both sides of the aisle, to
be professional and do the right job and try and take care of
veterans. It is an attitude that has to change. If you can tell
me why you are more professional than I am to read personal
information and to make a judgment on things that we need to
do, I would like to know what that is.
And you said a couple of times about the executive branch.
Does the VA only work for the executive branch? No, they work
for the legislative branch as well, and we the people. And that
is an attitude that has got to change. Do you think you only
work for the executive branch? I ask that question, and I would
like to know the answer.
Ms. Bradley. Well, we are a part of the executive branch,
but I will tell you who we think we work for, it is our
Nation's veterans.
Mr. Wenstrup. So do we.
Ms. Bradley. It is a privilege to work for them.
Mr. Wenstrup. But please--please work with us. I am
encouraged by what you are saying tonight. This is water under
the bridge, a lot of the things that we are talking about, but
it is not just in this committee, and it is throughout, where
agencies feel they don't have to work with us. And I hope that
that changes as we move forward, and with that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Wenstrup. Ms. Brown, do you
have any closing comments?
Ms. Brown. Ms. Bradley, it has been nice meeting you. I am
looking forward to working with you, and make sure you stand
down, I think that is the word. Let everybody know where you
stand, because you made a lot of commitments around the room,
and I want you to be able to produce, you know, your promises.
And I just know in the timeframe, some of the promises, like
tomorrow, you may not be able to do it, but maybe you will be
able to do it Wednesday. Thank you, and I yield back the
balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And I would say that the
new Secretary has been a breath of fresh air for all of us. He
is doing the very best that he can, given the hand that he has
been dealt. He has brought some able folks in, and is moving
some unable folks out, in regards to their ability to do their
jobs. I have said to him time and time again, we want to be a
partner.
Ms. Bradley, you and this committee will work very well
together. I know we will. Ms. Regan, we will always have
friction between the IG's office and us as it relates, but I
can tell you, as Dr. Wenstrup has already said, we know how to
protect private information. We are not going to release
private information. I would take exception. I would like to
speak with you briefly before we all depart in private so we
know exactly what the two areas that you have alluded to. I
know of one I think, but I dispute that and tell you that that
was all redacted. Just because you write or somebody writes on
it that it is for official use only, doesn't necessarily mean
that that is the case. We have redacted numerous documents that
we have provided to the media and in order to further this
committee's investigations and causes.
But I would like to know the second. If I have hit on one,
but I would like to know the second. And this committee, again,
commits itself to working with the Secretary, to working with
the, is it the deputy IG? I guess he is the deputy now. Used to
be the acting, but he has been in office for so long he is now
the deputy IG. And I have encouraged the President to fill that
slot permanently, because I think it is important that it be
done.
But we do all have the exact same end goal, and that is to
serve the veterans of this country and get them the benefits
that they have earned in a timely fashion.
And with that I ask that all members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks or add any extraneous
material.
The Chairman. Seeing no objections, this hearing is
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:12 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Chairman Jeff Miller

I want to welcome everyone to tonight's hearing titled, ``The Power
of Legislative Inquiry Improving the VA by improving transparency.''
This hearing will examine some of the legal objections raised by
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), including its Office of
Inspector General (OIG), in responding to Committee requests for
documents and information.
I want to emphasize that an essential goal of this Committee is to
use its constitutional oversight authority to discover and address
problems so that VA can serve veterans more effectively.
While I am willing to work with Secretary McDonald to implement
needed reforms, I am unwilling to let the secretary or anyone at the
department dictate how the Committee conducts oversight or performs
investigations.
Nor am I willing to permit the department to place any limits on
the information we receive. Simply put, the Committee's constitutional
obligation to conduct oversight requires that it receive complete and
unfettered access to all documents requested.
This Committee requests transparency from VA.
Such transparency was absent, last year, when the Committee
uncovered the national wait time scandal.
Scheduling data manipulation was exposed despite repeated and false
denials by VA officials that there was anything wrong.
When VA tried to impede the Committee's investigation, we were
forced to issue subpoenas to get answers. Ultimately, leadership at VA
was forced out, though accountability for the national scandal remains
incomplete. Unfortunately, it's uncertain whether VA understands the
lessons in transparency it should have learned.
Currently, in excess of one hundred (100) requests for information
remain outstanding, sixty-three (63) of which are months past due.
Based on its general counsel's advice, VA has insisted on
chairman's letters for many requests and has taken to second-guessing
whether there exists a legitimate purpose for each request.
Equally problematic, VA and OIG assert they can withhold sensitive
information based on the unfounded fear that such information might be
publicly released by the Committee.
The Supreme Court has consistently found Congress' oversight powers
to be broad in scope due to its constitutionally enumerated powers.
Regardless, VA and, more troubling, its OIG, continue to assert a
number of meritless rationales to delay, limit, and even deny
information to the Committee.
For example, VA recently invoked the Trade Secrets Act to avoid
disclosing a risk assessment evaluating the costs of options for
completing the Denver hospital construction project which is already
hundreds of millions of dollars over budget. Given that Congress must
authorize and appropriate funds for the hospital, the reluctance to
share this needed information is perplexing.
In addition, VA recently raised undefined ``privacy interests'' to
refuse producing all records of a veteran who tragically committed
murder/suicide, a request that was made months ago.
Also, due to an unnecessary and unjustified privacy act review by
VA general counsel, VA has failed to produce several boxes of EEO
documents from Philadelphia that I requested months ago, even though a
member of my staff was told by VA representatives that the files could
be available in a ``few days.''
In a briefing with Committee staff last Monday, VA representatives
suggested that VA and the Committee work together to balance equities
and minimize disruption to the department. They suggested that the
Committee entertain briefings in lieu of document requests and, to the
extent documents remained necessary, the Committee accept ``in camera''
reviews.
With full notice of this hearing, they even tried a late gambit to
get ahead of criticism by offering ``to allow'' my staff to see the
long-sought veteran medical files and Philadelphia EEO files, meaning
VA would retain physical custody of relevant documents and the
Committee would only get a time-limited, VA supervised viewing.
My flat out answer to this arrangement is no.
The Committee is not a junior partner with VA in any respect and
certainly not when it concerns our obligation to conduct oversight.
We request documents for a number of reasons within our oversight
role.
Although we endeavor to share what we can with VA regarding the
purpose of an inquiry, there are legitimate reasons for stopping short
of full disclosure.
Among other things, VA's efforts to co-opt Committee investigations
could place in jeopardy our ability to cultivate whistleblowers within
the department.
Further, the independence of an investigation could be compromised
or frustrated by deliberate delay if the full purpose of an inquiry is
revealed to the entity that is the subject of an investigation.
Let there be no mistake or misunderstanding, when this Committee
requests documents, I expect production to be timely, complete, and
accurate.
I do not expect a litany of questions about the purpose of a
request, a negotiation about how or when it will be answered, or a
tutorial from VA officials about how the Committee should do its
business.
Perhaps most disappointing is that even VA's inspector general has
adopted a similar restrictive posture with the Committee.
The OIG failed to include the Committee in the distribution of an
early report on wait times at Phoenix and more recently, a report on
serious medication management issues at Tomah.
Notwithstanding the inspector general act mandate to keep Congress
currently and fully informed, the IG has taken the stilted position
that other than a semi-annual report specifically mentioned in the IG
act and others mandated by separate statute, reporting to Congress is
fully within its discretion.
This position was articulated most recently in refusing to provide
the Committee with all underlying documentation for an IG report
finding serious improprieties of a former senior procurement official.
Among reasons for the denial were the Foia, The Privacy Act, and
The Trade Secrets Act.
This case deserves special attention and is illustrative of the
too-cozy relationship between the VA OIG and VA.
Given the gravity of the findings and that the official had taken a
position with the treasury department, we referred the report to the
treasury IG.
The VA OIG refused to cooperate with the treasury IG's
investigation citing unfounded privacy act concerns.
The treasury IG conducted its own independent investigation and
issued a letter to the Committee this past Wednesday that ``calls into
question the integrity of VA OIG's actions in this particular matter.''
I ask unanimous consent to include this letter into the hearing
record. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
In addressing continuing scandals at VA, deputy secretary Sloan
Gibson recently said, ``I don't expect anybody to give that trust
back.''
``I expect that we're going to have to earn it back.''
``One of the ways we will work to earn that trust back is through
transparency and openness.''
If VA truly wants to be transparent and open, one of the first
things it needs to do is stop impeding the Committee's oversight
investigations.

Prepared Statement of Ranking Minority Member Corrine Brown

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be brief in my remarks given the time. I know that I speak
for many of our Members when I question the urgency and the need to
hold this hearing in the evening, and not in the course of the regular
order of this Committee.
I believe that the topic of this hearing, on the oversight power of
this Committee, and the limitations to that power, including a
recognition that there are sometimes legitimate interests that the
Executive Branch has that we should try to accommodate, is an important
one. This goes to the very heart of the doctrine of Separation of
Powers.
I believe this discussion, rooted in Congress's broad, but not
unlimited oversight power, is a discussion that, from time, many of our
committees should engage in.
Our job as a committee is an important one, and we need to have
access to information that enables us to fulfill our valid legislative
purposes. It is well settled that Congress does not have a general
power of investigation, and does not have the power to ``expose for the
sake of exposure.''
I look forward to hearing from the VA how the new process they have
undertaken will lead to more complete and more timely responses to
legitimate Committee requests.
For too long Members on both sides have expressed frustration at
not getting answers to the questions we have. I hope that this new
process will fix this problem, and not just be the same old process
dressed up as something new.
I have long believed that this Committee works best when we work
together, when we work together to uncover problems, and work together
to ensure that we find solutions to these problems.
This working together includes informing all Committee members of
actions taken in the name of the Committee, including oversight
requests made of the VA, the Inspector General, and other agencies and
individuals that fall within the jurisdiction of our Committee.
I am troubled that I have not been informed of many of these
requests, and I hope that you will assure me, Mr. Chairman, that my
staff, and I, will be informed in the future.
I look forward to this hearing on the important issue of oversight.
I look forward to hearing from the new VA General Counsel, regarding
the VA's efforts to better respond to Congressional requests. I look
forward to hearing from the VA Inspector General how we can work
together to uncover waste, fraud, and abuse and the important work that
the IG does to assist this Committee. I also look forward to the
opinions and insight of our two experts, Professor Tiefer (Tea-fer) and
Mr. Bopp.
I believe their contributions will be helpful to all of us in order
to enlighten us on this complex area of law and as we look at ways to
improve the manner and process by which we as a Committee conduct our
oversight responsibility in the future.
Thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.

Prepared Statement of Maureen T. Regan

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to provide information on the laws and requirements that
the Office of Inspector General (OIG) must follow when releasing
information to Congress and the public.
The primary responsibility of the OIG for the Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) under the Inspector General Act of 1978, (IG Act)
as amended, is to conduct oversight of VA's programs and operations. In
addition to planned audits, inspections, and evaluations, we conduct
investigations, reviews, audits, and inspections in response to
complaints received through the OIG Hotline as well as from Members of
Congress. In the last 6 years we opened 690 cases based on requests
from Members of Congress.
Our purpose today is to discuss the OIG's responses to
congressional requests and discuss our commitment to transparency. As
discussed in detail below, the OIG is transparent in reporting the
findings and conclusions of our work as permitted under existing laws
and regulations. Furthermore, the OIG has complied with applicable
legal requirements for reporting to Congress and responding to
congressional requests.

Transparency

With respect to the issue of transparency, in the past 6 years, the
OIG has issued more than 1,700 reports; made 3,000 arrests; provided
testimony at 67 congressional hearings; conducted 400 briefings to
Members of Congress and staff for various congressional committees; and
responded to written requests for information from various Members and
committees. In addition to the 400 briefings, on a daily basis we
respond to telephone calls and emails from committee and Members'
personal staffs and the media seeking additional information regarding
our reports. During this 6-year time period, we also processed 1,860
requests for information under the Freedom of Information Act.
As required under the IG Act, all report titles are posted on our
website within 3 days of being issued to VA. If the information in the
report is not protected under the Privacy Act or another
confidentiality statute, the website includes a link to the report. If
the report contains protected information, the title and a brief
summary are posted. However, once we release a report in either
redacted or unredacted form under the Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA), the report itself can be accessed on the website. Our official
distribution list include our congressional oversight committees. We
also include other Members of Congress when the report is about a
facility in their district or state or if that Member of Congress
requested the review. All receive email notification when reports are
posted on the OIG's website.
In an effort to release our findings and conclusions publicly, all
reports are reviewed by our Information Release Office, which is a
component of the Office of the Counselor to the Inspector General, for
a determination whether the report can be published on our website in
its entirety or in redacted format when issued. The Office of the
Counselor works closely with the various OIG Directorates to write
reports that the findings and conclusions are clear and supported and
in such a way that the reports can be made public without redactions.
As one example, on December 8, 2014, we issued a report, Review of
Allegations Regarding the Technical Acquisition Center's Award of Sole-
Source Contracts to Tridec for the Virtual Office of Acquisition,
Report No. 12-02387-59. The report was referenced on our website the
same day it was issued but was not accessible because it was protected
from disclosure under the Privacy Act. We subsequently received FOIA
requests for the report and it became accessible in its entirety on the
website on December 15, 2014, within days of receiving the FOIA
requests.
The OIG has procedures in place to authorize us to review certain
allegations and provide information to individual Members of Congress
who have requested that we review or investigate a complaint from a
constituent. For example, as discussed below, the IG Act prohibits us
from disclosing the identity of complainants. Due to the nature of many
complaints, it is often not possible to review allegations without
disclosing directly or indirectly the identity of the complainant. To
this end, we developed a waiver of confidentiality form for the
complainant's signature that we provide the Member. When we complete
our work we provide follow-up information to the Member for the
constituent. Similarly, when we close a Hotline case, those
complainants whose identity is known are notified of the closure and
advised of their right to make a request under FOIA.

Responding to Requests From Congress

In responding to congressional oversight committees, the OIG has
fully complied with applicable laws. We have reviewed applicable
Federal statutory and case law and consulted with the Department of
Justice. We have made every effort to be responsive and provide
requested information without violating the law or waiving any
applicable privilege based upon requests in any form from a committee
Member or staff. Our responses have ranged from providing briefings,
answering questions, and providing records.
However, we have a responsibility to comply with laws and
regulations regarding the release of information and a right to request
justification when responding to requests for non-public information
maintained by the Executive Branch. Some of the laws that impact
decisions to release non-public information to congressional oversight
committees include:

The Inspector General Act

Section 2 of the IG Act states that the intent of the Act was ``to
create independent and objective units'' to ``conduct and supervise
audits and investigations relating to the programs and operations'' of
the agency and to ``provide a means for keeping the head of the
establishment and the Congress fully and currently informed about
problems and deficiencies relating to the administration of such
programs and operations and the necessity for and progress of
corrective action.''
Section 4 (a)(5) of the IG Act provides: ``[T]o keep the head of
such establishment and the Congress fully and currently informed, by
means of the reports required by section 5 and otherwise, concerning
fraud and other serious problems, abuses, and deficiencies relating to
the administration of programs and operations administered or financed
by such establishment, to recommend corrective action concerning such
problems, abuses, and deficiencies, and to report on the progress made
in implementing such corrective action.''
The only specific means identified or mandated in Section 5, or for
that matter anywhere else in the IG Act, for meeting this requirement
are the Semiannual Reports to Congress and the ``seven day'' letter
described in Section 5(d). This section requires the IG to report
immediately to the head of the establishment involved whenever the IG
becomes aware of ``particularly serious or flagrant problems, abuses,
or deficiencies relating to the administration of programs and
operations of such establishment.'' The head of the establishment, not
the IG, is required to transmit any such report to the appropriate
committees or subcommittees of Congress within seven calendar days,
together with a report by the head of the establishment containing any
comments such head deems appropriate.
In addition to our semiannual reports, to ensure that Congress is
currently informed, the OIG routinely provides copies of reports,
sometimes in redacted form, to our oversight Committees usually before
the report is posted on our website. When requested or when we believe
there are significant findings we offer to brief the Committees on the
findings and conclusions and answer questions. As noted above, our
oversight Committees receive an email notification when reports are
posted on our website.
The IG Act does not mandate that reports or other information
protected from disclosure under a provision of law be provided to
oversight committees or otherwise made public. Section 5(e) of the IG
Act states that ``nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize the public disclosure of information which is ``(A)
specifically prohibited from disclosure by any other provision of law''
. . . and ``(C) a part of an ongoing criminal investigation.'' In other
words, there is no requirement under the IG Act to provide any
congressional committee or subcommittee with an unredacted copy of a
report containing information that is protected under the Privacy Act
or other confidentiality statute.
Section 7(b) of the IG Act prohibits the OIG from disclosing the
identity of employees who submit complaints or provide information to
the OIG. Similarly, Section 8(m) of the OIG Act protects the identity
of all other complainants. The failure by the OIG to maintain
confidentiality by releasing the identity of complainants without their
authorization would have a chilling effect on individuals or entities
who want to report fraud or other criminal behavior, violations of
laws, rules, or regulations, public health or safety issues, gross
mismanagement, etc.

The Privacy Act

Information contained in reports issued by the OIG and the
information contained in the supporting documents are maintained in a
Privacy Act system of records. The Privacy Act prohibits the disclosure
of information that is maintained, or should be maintained, in a
Privacy Act system of records without the consent of the individual to
whom the record pertains. The term ``disclosure'' includes any means of
communication including oral disclosures. The Privacy Act provides for
civil and criminal penalties for the unauthorized disclosure of records
or information contained in those records.
There are 12 exceptions to the ``no disclosure without consent
rule.'' These exceptions include responding to requests for information
received under FOIA, Section 552a (b)(3). When information protected by
the Privacy Act is requested under FOIA, and is not prohibited from
disclosure under any other FOIA exemption, the agency is required to
conduct a balancing test in which the individual's right to privacy is
weighed against the public's right to know [FOIA Exemptions (b)(6) and
(b)(7)(C)]. When the public's interest outweighs the individual's
privacy interests, the information can be released without the consent
of the individual. The decision to release information in OIG systems
of records resides with the Inspector General or designee.
Section 552a(b)(9) authorizes (but does not mandate) a disclosure
``to either House of Congress, or, to the extent of a matter within its
jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof, any joint
committee of Congress or subcommittee of any such joint committee.''
OMB Guidelines specifically state that this exception does not
authorize the disclosure of information protected under the Privacy Act
to an individual Member of Congress acting on his or her behalf or on
behalf of a constituent. OMB Guidelines, 40 Fed.Reg. 28,948-28,955
(July 9, 1975). The decision by the agency to disclose Privacy Act
protected information to an oversight body is at the discretion of the
agency and requires a written request. Neither the Privacy Act nor any
other statute mandates that an agency release Privacy Act protected
information to either House of Congress when requested.
In our discussions with staff from the House Veterans' Affairs
Committee and another committee, they have told us that the Privacy Act
does not apply to Congress. As we pointed out in both discussions,
while the Privacy Act does not apply to records in the possession of
congressional committees, it does apply to the agency that maintains
the record when making a decision whether the record can be released.

Title 38 U.S.C. Confidentiality Statutes

In addition to the Privacy Act, certain VA records are also
protected from disclosure under various VA confidentiality statutes,
Title 38 U.S.C. Sections 5701, 5705, and 7332. The plain language of
these sections shows that the decision whether to release the
information resides with the Secretary. Each statute identifies the
circumstances under which the Secretary is required to disclose or the
discretion to disclose the protected information without the consent of
the individual. None of the statutes authorize the OIG to disclose
protected information. As with the Privacy Act, each of these the
statutes include civil and/or criminal penalties for unauthorized
disclosures.

38 U.S.C. Section 5701--Prohibits the disclosure of VA
claims records, including the names and addresses of veterans and other
beneficiaries. With the exception of deceased veterans, these records
are also protected under the Privacy Act. Unlike the Privacy Act,
Section 5701 is still applicable after the death of the individual.

38 U.S.C. Section 5705--Prohibits the disclosure of
medical quality assurance records. Regulatory requirements implementing
this statute are set forth in 38 C.F.R. 17.500 et. seq.

38 U.S.C. Section 7332--Prohibits the disclosure of
records of the identity, diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment of any
patient or subject that are maintained in connection with the
performance of any program or activity relating to drug abuse,
alcoholism or alcohol abuse, infection with HIV, or sickle cell anemia.

In responding to requests for information, including requests from
our oversight committees we take seriously our responsibilities to
protect the identity of individuals, especially employees and veterans,
who could be harmed if the information became public. Statute dictates
that veterans have both a right and expectation that their private
medical and other claims information not be disclosed without their
consent unless otherwise authorized by statute. As such, we have both a
right and an obligation to ask questions and obtain clarification from
an oversight committee or subcommittee seeking information protected
from disclosure.

The Accommodation Process

A memorandum issued on June 19, 1989, by the Department of Justice,
Office of Legal Counsel (OLC), summarized the principles and practices
governing congressional requests for confidential executive branch
information. 13 Op. OLC 153 (1989). The memorandum addressed ``the duty
of Congress to justify its requests.'' Id., 159. As noted in the OLC
memorandum, ``the process of accommodation requires that each branch
explain to the other why it believes its needs are legitimate.'' Id.
Justifications for not providing the information requested may include
whether the entity responding has the legal authority to release the
information and whether the records are privileged.
The OIG is and has always been prepared to accommodate legitimate
oversight requests but we need to do so in a manner consistent with
veterans' expectations to privacy, statutes, and appropriate guidance
of the Executive Branch.

Conclusion

The OIG is committed to carrying out vigorous oversight of VA
programs and operations and keeping the VA Secretary, Congress, and the
American public informed of our oversight results. Our prolific public
reporting on the OIG Web site (http://www.va.gov/oig/) and information
sharing with Congress thru briefings, hearing testimony, and regular
staff contacts are among the highest in the Inspector General
community. In doing so, we will continue to carefully balance the
public's right to know against the privacy of individual veterans, and
to work with Congress in accommodating legitimate oversight requests to
further our mutual goal of helping VA improve delivery of services to
America's veterans.

Prepared Statement of Charles Tiefer

Mr. Chairman and Members:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify.
This testimony concerns the Committee's right to obtain oversight
materials about VA and VA OIG (both referred to here sometimes as
``VA'') programs, beyond what the agencies choose to make public.
Advice from the VA General Counsel raises various objections to the
Committee obtaining documents for oversight, amounting to a
comprehensive program of denying meaningful access.
For 15 years, I was counsel to Congress (1979-84, assistant Senate
legal counsel; 1984-1995, General Counsel, and, Deputy General Counsel,
of the House of Representatives). During that time, I testified and
submitted briefs to court a very large number of times on questions
like the one before us. Since then, I have been a professor at the
University of Baltimore Law School. I have continued to study these
subjects, testifying from time to time, and, publishing at length, on
these subjects. Charles Tiefer, ``The Specially Investigated
President,'' 5 Univ. of Chicago Roundtable 143-204 (1998).
I was Chairman Issa's (R-Cal.) lead witness at his hearing on the
demand for Justice Department materials about the ``Fast and Furious''
scandal that became the House's contempt case against Attorney General
Holder when the President invoked executive privilege.\1\ I gave full-
length written (and oral) testimony in 2002 about a similar issue
during the Bush Administration involving an FBI informant
program.\2\ Ultimately a claim of executive privilege by the President
himself was overcome by that investigation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Congressional Committee Conducting Oversight of ATF Program
to Sell Weapons to Smugglers, Notwithstanding Pending Cases,'' in
Hearing on Justice Department Response to Congressional Subpoenas:
Hearing Before the House Committee on Government Oversight. June 13,
2011.

\2\ ``Overcoming Executive Privilege at the Justice Department,''
in The History of Congressional Access to Deliberative Justice
Department Documents: Hearings Before the House Committee on Government
Reform, 107th Cong., 2d Sess. (Feb. 6, 2002).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This Committee has ``Penetrating and Far-Reaching'' Power to Obtain
Oversight Materials From Agencies, Including Inspectors General

The Supreme Court described the Congressional oversight power as
``penetrating and far-reaching'' in Barenblatt v. United States, 360
U.S. 109, 111 (1959):
The power of inquiry has been employed by Congress throughout our
history, over the whole range of the national interests concerning
which Congress might legislate or decide upon due investigation not to
legislate; it has similarly been utilized in determining what to
appropriate from the national purse, or whether to appropriate. The
scope of the power of inquiry, in short, is as penetrating and far-
reaching as the potential power to enact and appropriate under the
Constitution.
Congress enacted the Inspector General Act of 1978 to create
investigative machinery for more than one purpose. Of course, one
purpose was for law enforcement. But, another purpose was to keep
Congressional oversight about agency problems, which involves
cooperating with Congressional committees' own efforts to oversee the
same. The House General Counsel's office, when I served there, wrote
what became the authoritative opinion in the House about that
inspectors general must provide committees with oversight material.
(The opinion has been separately furnished to this committee. It was
about a Justice Department memo known as the ``Kmiec Memo''.)
Let us lay out the argument made unsuccessfully then, and made
again now by the VA OIG. Specifically, section 4(a)(5) of the Inspector
General Act plainly and explicitly requires each OIG ``to keep . . .
The Congress fully and currently informed, by means of the reports
required by section 5 and otherwise, concerning fraud and other serious
problems, abuses, and deficiencies relating to the administration of
programs, abuses, to the operations . . .''
The response now by the OIG is that ``The only specific means
identified or mandated in Section 5 . . . for meeting this requirement
are the Semiannual Reports to Congress and the `seven day' letter
described in Section 5(d).'' In other words, the OIG would shrink down
the duty and obligation of the OIG to keep Congress ``fully and
currently informed'' to the published reports. It is as if the statute
said ``the OIG shall withhold from Congress anything to keep it `fully
and currently informed' except what the whole world is told too.'' The
Inspector General statute would become the opposite of what Congress
intended. It would create an entire layer of shielding and withholding
to surround what Congress pointed to as the ``fraud and other serious
problems, abuses, and deficiencies'' of agencies like the VA. From
living contemporary experience at the time, and from the legal
materials sources, we know the Inspector General Act of 1978 was part
of a wave of post-Watergate legislation intending to restore
Congressional oversight. But, the OIG argument would make it the
opposite, a statute meant to shut the windows and bar the doors for
Congress peeking in at the failings of agencies like the VA.
But, taking the OIG's argument and looking at the Inspector General
Act's words, if the OIG was to withhold and deny needed documents for
Congressional oversight, and just to make the reports, then there would
be no purpose to the statute's key words saying the OIG was to keep
Congress ``fully and currently informed, by . . . reports . . . and
otherwise.'' The statute would have stopped with ``by . . . reports''
if all that the OIG was obliged to provide were reports. Rather, the
OIG claim that the Inspector General need not go beyond giving Congress
access to public record material like his reports, is refuted by the
highly significant ``and otherwise'' language.
Moreover, as the House Counsel memo responded back at that time to
the unsuccessful Kmiec Memo, the legislative history of the act shows
the contrary to the OIG's position. Chairman Jack Brooks (R-Tex) was
House floor manager of the Inspector General Act of 1978. A bipartisan
chair who worked closely with his ranking minority member Frank Horton
(R-NY), he was a strong exponent of Congressional oversight. Not
surprisingly, his legislative history spells out the exact opposite of
the OIG position. In a discussion on the House floor Representative
Bauman (R-Md) agreed with Chairman Brooks--that ``It would just seem to
me to be pointless to pass this legislation unless, as part of each
committee's oversight function, the committee had complete access to
all records of the investigations of these Inspectors General.
Otherwise, the bill is unnecessary.'' (Underlining added) Chairman
Brooks agreed and explained: ``If the gentleman will yield further, Mr.
Speaker, we will have complete access to the records if we request
them. It just will not be part of the routine [of OIG reports]. I would
say to my distinguished friend, the gentleman from Maryland (Mr.
Bauman), that there is no prohibition with respect to filing all the
information which Congress wants. We will be able to get it. There is
no problem about it. It is just that it will not be routinely printed
in the semiannual reports.'' 124 Cong. Rec. 32032 (1978).

Committees Have Vast Oversight Powers That Go Far Beyond What the 435
Individual Members Doing Casework Can Obtain

Another OIG argument reduces the authority of the VA Committee to
that of one of the 435 individual Members who do casework. The OIG
justifies not providing records to the VA Committee because they are
covered by the Privacy Act. If the Privacy Act barred providing
information to oversight committees, it is hard to see how they could
function, as a substantial fraction of the waste, fraud, and abuses of
agencies affect individuals. Now, even the OIG does not dispute that
Congress carefully provided in section 552a(b)(9) for disclosure ``to
either House of Congress, or, to the extent of a matter within its
jurisdiction, any committee or subcommittee thereof . . . .''
The provision furthering oversight is not surprising, for the
Privacy Act, like the Inspector General Act, was a product of the post-
Watergate era when Congress restored the oversight power of its
committees. See, e.g., Murphy v. Department of the Army, 612 F.2d 1151
(DC Cir. 1979) (noting in that case ``the obvious purpose of the
Congress to carve out for itself a special right of access to
privileged information not shared by others'').
But, even more, there is a further nuance of that statutory
language. Congress did not provide equivalent treatment for committees
like the VA Committee, and for the 435 individual Members doing
casework. It referred to ``any committee or subcommittee,'' while it
did not refer to individual Members.
Yet the OIG asserts the power to reduce this committee to the level
of a caseworker. The OIG argument now continues:
OMB Guidelines specifically state that this exception does not
authorize the disclosure of information protected under the Privacy Act
to an individual Member of Congress acting on his or her behalf or on
behalf of a constituent. OMB Guidelines, 40 Fed. Reg. 28,948-28,955.
(July 9, 1975).
Having conflated committee oversight requests, with individual
casework, OIG then says:
The decision by the agency to disclose Privacy Act protected
information to an oversight body is at the discretion of the agency and
requires a written request. Neither the Privacy Act nor any other
statute mandates that an agency release Privacy Act protected
information to either House of Congress when requested.
This same argument runs through the rest of the OIG and VA
positions--that the VA Committee has no more authority than an
individual Member doing casework, to overcome VA and OIG withholding.
No one with any understanding of the Congressional investigatory
power would ever mistake the vast authority of committees (including,
when pertinent, subcommittees) to conduct oversight, with the work of
the 435 individual Members on casework. Congress delegates vast
oversight authority to committees for agencies and matters within their
committee jurisdiction. It is constitutional authority, upheld in
literally dozens of decisions in the Supreme Court and the other
federal courts. In citing Barenblatt v. United States above, what was
cited for ``penetrating and far-reaching'' authority was a House
Committee's oversight power, fully respected, honored, and accepted by
the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court was not talking about casework.
Normally, this point is so well-understood, so fundamental, so
undisputed, that no further discussion would be necessary. But, the
testimony of the agency witness, again and again, conflates the ability
of an agency to be unhelpful, if it chooses, with individual Members
doing casework, with the contrasting full authority of House
Committees, like the Veteran's Affairs Committee (and its oversight
subcommittee) to perform committee oversight on agencies, like the VA,
within the committee's jurisdiction.
What is the difference?
For House Committees:

Rules of the House of Representatives confer jurisdiction,
including oversight jurisdiction, and authority, on House committees.
Moreover, they create a structure with committee rules, including
witness rights, all to further evolve the committee oversight
authority.
Rules of the House, and firmly established precedent, confer
authority for hearings and subpoenas, the main formal tools of inquiry,
on House committees.
Criminal statutes, and firmly established precedent, confer the
classic investigative sanctions on those who impede committees by
committing contempt, perjury, and obstruction. This contrasts with the
435 individual House Members doing casework, at the level down to which
the VA puts this Committee.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ For individual Member casework:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
House Rules do not establish such jurisdiction and authority for
casework, and do not create a structure with specific rules including
witness rights;
House Rules do not confer authority for hearings and subpoenas.
Criminal statutes do not establish contempt, perjury and
obstruction for creating obstacles to casework by the 435 individual
Members.
This is just the superstructure. Under this rubric, House
Committees--not the 435 individual Members--conduct a vast quantity of
oversight on the agencies within their jurisdiction and authority, like
the VA for the VA Committee. Committees publish many hundreds of
hearings and reports every Congress. Committees are the eyes and ears
of the Congress and the nation for oversight like this committee's of
the VA.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ That has been true since the administration of George
Washington, when a House Committee inquired into an Indian war. Indeed
this was true in state and colonial legislatures and the British
Parliament, as the precedents for the Framers writing Article I of the
Constitution. Nothing could be firmer as a matter of constitutional
principle.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To put it bluntly: the VA has lost touch with legal reality, and is
having a flight of fantasy, to withhold documents from the VA Committee
by equating the Committee with doing casework.\5\ Section 552(b)(9) has
not been in the past, is not now, and never will be, authority to
withhold material from Congressional oversight committees.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ A different question is posed when an individual Member seeks,
not the sword of formal authority to inquire, but the shield of Speech
or Debate Clause privilege for informal self-informing. Different
considerations apply. That question is not posed here.

For the VA to Block Committee Inquiries Into Health Care Matters Lacks
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Support in Congressional Investigatory Law

The VA invokes statutory provisions that keep medical records of
individual beneficiaries nonpublic. It conjures this issue in the
abstract, as though the committee were about to throw open the doors to
VA medical facilities and flinging all the records outside to be
public, and for no reason at that. The OIG argument strikes at the
heart of Congressional oversight by rejecting Congressional committees'
right to anything but public records.
For several reasons, the OIG argument lacks support. First, the VA
argument treats oversight as invalid because it must not be allowed to
view nonpublic records. That is contrary to how oversight is
conducted--namely, with the understanding and full acceptance that
House Committees must obtain some nonpublic records. The House has a
rule about closed or executive sessions, and nonpublic records may be
deemed to be received that way. The examples of this are legion.
Virtually every Senate committee receives confidential FBI inquiries on
nominees, which starts nonpublic and is kept nonpublic.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The House and Senate Intelligence Committees receive
information at the highest levels of classification, which starts
nonpublic and is kept nonpublic. The Joint Committee on Taxation
receives taxpayer information of an extremely private rigidly
undisclosed nature, which starts nonpublic and is kept nonpublic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Armed Services Committees receive defense information from a
wide variety of nonpublic arrangements, treated likewise. As House
Counsel, I dealt with any number of oversight committees, from the
House Banking Committee to the House Government Reform and Oversight
Committee, with material from inquiries that was nonpublic. To put it
differently, it would hobble the House oversight power to restrict it
only to public information.\7\ Taken as a whole, if House committees
could obtain nothing more than is publicly posted, their hearing rooms
would be stale, boring, and completely empty, and their reports would
go completely unread.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ If the Armed Services Committee could only see the documents
about our defenses what we post on open Web sites for viewing by
everyone, it would know little about our military and its judgments for
the defense authorization bill would be unsupported. If Chairman Issa's
inquiry about ``Fast and Furious'' only knew about what the posts on
Web site for viewing by everyone, it would have learned little and its
judgments would be unsupported.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, when Congress passes statutes that would preclude,
selectively or wholesale, the constitutional processes of Congressional
oversight, it says so expressly.\8\ There is no possible equating of
the statutes cited by OIG, which do not mention precluding oversight,
and these other statutes, which do. There is no comparison between the
statutes that expressly constrain being obtained by Congress, and those
that simply say, like these VA-related statutes do, that the
information is nonpublic. Such statutes do not bar oversight, they put
Congress on notice that the agency has held these in a nonpublic
status, and the committees understand this and proceed consciously and
appropriately.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ For example, tax legislation meant to keep individual tax
return information inviolate expressly precludes committees (other than
the tax committees) from obtaining the information. 26 U.S.C. 6103(f).
House Rules expressly precludes classified information in the hands of
the Intelligence Committee from being released (except either by
negotiated declassification or similar special processes). The wiretap
statute expressly constrains the occasions when Congressional
committees obtain wiretap records. I worked with these types of
provisions when I was detailed from House Counsel to being Special
Deputy Chief Counsel for the Iran-Contra Committee.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Third, as to statutory provisions about individual medical record
privacy in particular, as committee counsel has pointed out, a HIPAA
section related to the one cited by the VA says ``A covered entity may
disclose protected health information to a health oversight agency for
oversight activities[.]'' 45 CFR Sec. 164.512(d). And, official VA
practices (``Notice of Privacy Practices'', Sept. 23, 2013) state that
``VHA May Disclose Your Health Information'' to ``Law Enforcement
Health Care Oversight (e.g., giving information to the Office of
Inspector General or Congressional Committees.'' \9\ The pertinent
statutes and regulations should be interpreted together to authorize
committee oversight.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ http://www.va.gov/vhapublications/ViewPublication.asp?pub--
ID=3048.K
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fourth, the above points make clear how a legitimate House Veterans
Affairs Committee investigations into, say, certain specific causes of
death for specific beneficiaries who did not get appointments, differs
from throwing open the doors at VA facilities and tossing out to the
public all the records. The Committee may have a specific oversight
inquiry, such as the extent to which delays in making appointments were
a cause of certain specific deaths. It may have a different focus or
standard than, say, the Inspector General. \10\ The Committee has a
different responsibility. It must do its oversight work, even though
this means reviewing nonpublic documents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ For a hypothetical, the Inspector General for his office's
specific purposes may decide only to pursue the matter when there is
strong evidence that the delays were the main or probable cause. The
Committee for their broader legislative purposes might still be
interested if there was suggestive evidence the delays were a
contributing or possible cause. I am speaking for myself. I have not
discussed with the Committee whether this illustration fits or does not
fit any of their inquiries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fifth, it is said to be a concern of the VA that it might be liable
for providing the records to Congress in the face of these statutes.
This is no reason to block oversight. I have heard this kind of
argument since I started as a Congressional counsel in 1979. I do not
know of one single occasion during that time when agencies have
provided something for Congressional oversight and suffered damages
from a lawsuit. It is a red herring. It is what general counsels raise
up as a reason not to act, rather than a live probable problem to
mitigate on the way to actually assisting the oversight.
In light of the statutes and regulations just recited, an agency
would say it was legally justified in providing the records. But,
perhaps the VA actually needs reassurance--say, it has some example of
something that actually happened that gives it legal worries. Then it
should approach the Committee very differently. Rather than using its
concerns as an excuse to preclude oversight, it should use its concerns
as a reason to provide the records under some kind of an arrangement
that provides such safety. It should have said to the Committee ``we
are ready to provide the records, but we wish to show we are acting
under legal obligation. Can you provide us with a legal memorandum that
we are under such an obligation?''
I researched and issued such memos as House Counsel. It was one of
various ways to mitigate the agency's concerns and to confirm to the
agency that providing information was the right thing. \11\ The agency
was expressing its concerns, and yet, its positive attitude, and its
embracing a solution under which it provides the material, makes all
the difference.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Purely as an example, there were some times when an agency
asked for a committee subpoena--not as part of a desire to actually
oppose the investigation, but rather to address their unusual need to
show compulsion. For example, a state agency with records implicating
privacy might say it needed a subpoena because that ``translated'' into
an expression of compulsion that was clear between federal and state
levels. I do not see in this case a need for a subpoena.

Arguments From 18 U.S.C. 1905 and From Pre-Decisional Privilege Are
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without Merit

VA and OIG have made a number of arguments to the Committee which
are not at the heart of their testimony today. These warrant only brief
comment.
They have mentioned the statute at 18 U.S.C. 1905, the Trade
Secrets Act, which provides for criminal sanctions for an agency
official who discloses trade secrets ``unless authorized by law.'' As
discussed above, the Congressional investigatory power is well
recognized as authority to obtain agency documents, and satisfies the
statute. Opinion of the Attorney General 221 (1955). The invocation of
this statute purports to justify withholding, as proprietary, of
records of procurement. This claim could not have merit without putting
out of the oversight business a large part of the activity of House
committee inquiries doing exactly what the House as a whole, and the
public, want them to do.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Virtually every committee of the House looks into procurement
as to the agency under its jurisdiction. And, from experience with
procurement protests at the GAO, it is clear that in an instance of
procurement dispute over contract award, a claim of proprietary will
sweep up a great deal. Conversely, few subjects deserve oversight as
much as procurement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There has also been impugning by the VA of the inquiring
communications of Congressional committee counsel, also known as the VA
seeking to impose the requirement of a specific letter from the
Chairman himself even for limited requests. This is not persuasive.
Committees must delegate. The VA is enormous.\13\ The VA is not going
to have the Secretary do everything himself.\14\ It should reserve its
arguments in this regard for when it has a focused, supportable issue
that it wants to raise up to the level of the Chairman, not for all
requests.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ It outclasses in size almost any agencies other than Defense
and HHS. The VA has hundreds of thousands of employees, and has large
numbers of facilities scattered around the country. Does the VA Counsel
claim the power to dictate that the Chair himself must visit them all
in person, eschewing staff (and still handle his gigantic flow of work
in Washington)? The VA has hundreds of matters warranting oversight,
involving all together, directly and indirectly, perhaps millions of
documents and perhaps gigabytes of data. The VA can hardly insist that
the Chair read and analyze them all in person, and still handle also
the duties of legislating, communicating, voting, and so on.
\14\ For that matter, oversight inquiries from various sources flow
into the VA. Is the VA Counsel going to make the Secretary of the VA
himself show up in person, meet in person, join visitations in person,
take calls in person, fill out questionnaires in person, answer
inquiries in person, and scrutinize himself millions of documents and
gigabytes of data in person, and, in short, do everything for the whole
vast department as to inquiries in person--and not delegate to his
staff?
\15\ There always has to be delegation from Chairs--and
Secretaries--for others to handle the large extent of matters under
their jurisdiction. And, each side must tolerate a degree of delegation
on the other side. A wholesale refusal by the VA to respond to
delegated inquiries makes as much sense as a wholesale insistence by
the VA Committee that the Secretary in the VA respond in person. The VA
should not use this point as a basis for blanket refusal to answer
inquiries. Rather than that, the VA should step back from a refusal,
recognize the need for delegation on both sides, stop treating
committee counsel as nullities, figure out some far more
finely-tuned approach that would meet its real needs and proceed from
there.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The VA has also tried to make a claim of deliberative process
privilege. However, it has done little of what it must do to make such
a claim. It has not focused the claim on some specific narrow agency
decision or category of documents. Nor has it provided an index for the
documents. And, this is a claim that ultimately evaporates unless
backed up by an invocation of executive privilege by the President
himself. (Currently, the ``Fast and Furious'' litigation is about this
issue, and the President himself invoked executive privilege.)
Even with all those steps taken, the claim would be weak, because
none of the deliberative process involves communications with the
President. In regards to Sealed Case (Espy), 121 F.3d 729 (DC Cir.).
There is no particular sign that the President would support a
privilege claim in this matter.\16\ Without some documentation from the
VA that the White House stands ready to invoke executive privilege, it
should be regarded as not specifically invoked in this matter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ The VA had a large scandal in recent years, and Congress
conducted oversight, without contest from the White House. Congress
passed a remedial statute, and the Secretary of VA left office and was
replaced, without argument from the White House.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prepared Statement of Michael D. Bopp, Partner and Head of
Congressional Investigations Group

Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, other members of the House
Committee on Veterans' Affairs thank you for inviting me to testify
before you this evening. My name is Michael Bopp and I am a partner at
the law firm, Gibson Dunn & Crutcher. I also head our firm's
Congressional Investigations Group.
I spent more than a decade conducting investigations on Capitol
Hill, in House and Senate committees, and on special committees
convened to investigate a particular issue or problem. I have helped
orchestrate more than one hundred hearings, I have taken countless
depositions and interviews and I have managed massive document
discovery efforts both pursuant to letter and subpoena. I have been at
Gibson Dunn for more than six years and have represented individuals,
companies and other organizations in dozens of congressional
investigations. In other words, I have been on both sides of the dais;
seeking documents and information, and being asked to provide them.
The power of Congress to investigate, though not explicit in the
Constitution, is woven into its fabric. As George Mason noted, Members
of Congress ``are not only Legislators but they possess inquisitorial
powers.''
The U.S. Supreme Court has also concluded that Congress has the
authority and obligation to investigate. In one seminal case, McGrain
v. Daugherty, the Supreme Court held: ``We are of opinion that the
power of inquiry--with process to enforce it--is an essential and
appropriate auxiliary to the legislative function.''
Why is that the case? What is the reason for this investigative
authority? Because Congress needs up-to-date, granular information to
legislate effectively. After the terrorist attacks of September 11,
2001, Congress did not rush immediately to pass legislation reforming
the intelligence community based on available information. Instead,
Congress created the 9/11 Commission, waited for its report, then
embarked on its own investigation of our intelligence community. The
legislation that ensued effected a seismic change in how intelligence
is collected, analyzed and shared by government agency. And it was the
result of cooperation and information-sharing by the intelligence
community with Congress.
In 2005, when Hurricane Katrina hit the Gulf Coast, both the House
and Senate initiated investigations into what went wrong with federal,
state and local preparations for--and responses to--the hurricane. As
part of the Senate investigation, we interviewed more than 325 (mostly
government) witnesses, held 22 public hearings and reviewed more than
800,000 pages of documents. There was a lot to look at. What followed
was legislation that overhauled the way FEMA addresses natural and
other disasters. This legislative action would not have occurred absent
the thorough investigative actions taken by the House and Senate.
It is important to note that Congress need not investigate with the
sole purpose of drafting or amending legislation. During the Katrina
inquiry, were we investigating specific ways to amend federal response
protocols? No. We were investigating what happened; what went wrong.
So, too, the Supreme Court in McGrain held that it is entirely
appropriate for Congress to investigate matters ``on which legislation
could be had.''
The Executive Branch--no matter which party is in control--might
not always like Congress' investigative authority, or the way that it
chooses to exercise that authority. But it should respect it, because
congressional investigations help Congress perform its constitutional
functions more effectively. Congressional oversight of executive
agencies helps ensure that the government is functioning the way it
should: In how are systemn the best interests of the American people.
The Executive Branch should respect Congress's power to investigate and
legislate just as Congress must respect the Executive Branch's
responsibility to ensure that laws are implemented and enforced--even
when they are enforced against Members of Congress.
Vigorous oversight and investigative activities will always cause
some degree of friction between Congress and the Executive Branch. In
fact, that is how our system was designed. But they should not cause
agencies to look for questionable ways to withhold information from
congressional committees, to hide the ball. In the private sector
context, the types of obfuscation alleged here would not be tolerated.
In the case of investigations of the Executive Branch, such activities
are not unique to a particular agency or office of inspector general,
and they are also not unique to a particular political party. But they
are all too common.
I applaud the Committee for standing up for the prerogatives of
Congress through this hearing.
And I welcome any questions you may have.
