- A REVIEW OF LICENSING AND CREDENTIALING STANDARDS FOR SERVICEMEMBERS AND VETERANS: DO BARRIERS STILL REMAIN?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF LICENSING AND CREDENTIALING STANDARDS FOR SERVICEMEMBERS
AND VETERANS: DO BARRIERS STILL REMAIN?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

98-691                 WASHINGTON : 2016
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois

Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

BRAD WENSTRUP, Ohio, Chairman

LEE ZELDIN, New York                 MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa          Member
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania          DINA TITUS, Nevada
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  KATHLEEN RICE, New York
JERRY McNERNEY, California

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, September 10, 2015

Page

A Review of Licensing and Credentialing Standards for
Servicemembers and Veterans: Do Barriers Still Remain?.........     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Brad Wenstrup, Chairman..........................................     1
Mark Takano, Ranking Member......................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Steve Gonzalez, Assistant Director, National Veterans
Employment & Education Division, The American Legion...........     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    32
Dr. Roy Swift, Executive Director, Workcred, and Affiliate of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)...................     4
Prepared Statement...........................................    38
Mr. Jamie P. Merisotis, President, Lumina Foundation.............     6
Prepared Statement...........................................    41
Ms. Denise Roosendaal, Executive Director, Institute for
Credentialing Excellence (ICE).................................     8
Prepared Statement...........................................    46
Ms. Teresa W. Gerton, Acting Assistant Secretary, Veterans'
Employment and Training Service, U.S. Department of Labor......    19
Prepared Statement...........................................    57
Mr. Frank C. DiGiovanni, Director, Force Readiness and Training,
U.S. Department of Defense.....................................    21
Prepared Statement...........................................    62
Mr. David Quam, Deputy Director, Policy, National Governors
Association....................................................    23
Prepared Statement...........................................    70

FOR THE RECORD

National Council of State Board of Nursing.......................    78
The Reserve Officers Association of the United States............    81

A REVIEW OF LICENSING AND

CREDENTIALING STANDARDS FOR

SERVICEMEMBERS AND VETERANS:

DO BARRIERS STILL REMAIN?

----------

Thursday, September 10, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:20 p.m., in
Room 224, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Brad Wenstrup
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Wenstrup, Costello, Radewagen,
Bost, Takano, and Rice.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN BRAD WENSTRUP

Dr. Wenstrup. Good afternoon, and welcome to the Veterans'
Affairs Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity's hearing today
entitled, ``A Review of Licensing and Credentialing Standards
for Servicemembers and Veterans: Do Barriers Still Remain?''
For several years, many have tried to do what on face value
should be a fairly easy task, ensuring that the training and
knowledge that servicemembers gain from their time in the
military seamlessly translates to civilian licenses and
credentials when they return home.
The translation of skills is critical. As we know, so many
positions in our economy could remain unfilled due to the ever-
growing skills gap of our workforce. We simply should not
continue to spend millions of dollars training servicemembers
to do a job in the military and then require them to turn
around and retake unnecessary courses or exams for the same job
in the civilian workforce.
After many years of great work done by many of our
witnesses here today as well as others, I think we can safely
say that their hard work is finally paying off. Last week, the
Bureau of Labor Statistics announced that the unemployment rate
for veterans in August was 4.2 percent, the lowest it was been
in many years.
So news like this is very encouraging, but I still remain
concerned about the number of younger veterans who remain
either unemployed, underemployed at their current job, or have
left the workforce altogether. These are the types of veterans
that can benefit from redoubling our efforts to improving
licensing and credentialing standards and programs for our
veterans.
Before I recognize the ranking member, I want to recognize
the efforts of members of our first panel. Veterans groups like
the American Legion and nonprofits like the Lumina Foundation
are the ones who are on the front line making huge strides in
addressing this issue. It is groups like these, not the Federal
Government, that are turning the tide.
I also want to thank the National Governors Association for
their work and attendance here today. Congress can create all
of the new Federal programs we want, but if the States don't
participate and step up and change their laws and regulations
to recognize the skills and knowledge that our servicemembers
gain through military service, then the programs are doomed to
fail.
So, with that, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses
today about how Congress can help facilitate improvements in
this area, and I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Takano,
for his opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER MARK TAKANO

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I am very happy to
join in today's examination of the challenges veterans face as
they translate skills and training they have received in the
military to their best advantage in the civilian workforce.
I appreciate the witnesses appearing here today from the
various sectors most involved in this process. The chairman and
I are both committed to eliminating unnecessary barriers to
veterans' employment, and I look forward to learning how we can
improve current policies to ensure that veterans' military
experience and training effectively translates into meaningful
civilian employment.
In examining this issue, it is crucial that civilian
industries recognize and need the certifications that our
veterans are pursuing. I am concerned about the lack of
legitimate third-party accreditation of most licenses and
credentials, and I worry that, without clear standards,
veterans may be pursuing certifications that don't lead to
jobs.
In particular, I am extremely troubled by the fact that
many veterans are chipping away at their valuable post-9/11 GI
Bill entitlement, a month at a time, in order to pay for
licensing or credentialing tests, especially if those
certifications don't lead to meaningful careers.
I look forward to your testimony about how we can improve
our current policy of charging veterans 1 month of post-9/11 GI
Bill entitlement per licensing or credentialing test. Surely,
there is a better way to pay for these tests than to remove 1
full month per test from the veteran's 36-month entitlement. I
am looking into a legislative solution, and I hope Chairman
Wenstrup will also be interested in considering ways to fix
this particular problem.
We have got a lot to get through here today, and so I just
want to say welcome. Welcome back, everybody. And thank you
again for being here and answering our questions. And I look
forward to the testimony from all of you here today.
I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. I thank the ranking member and now welcome
our first panel of witnesses to the table.
With us today we have Mr. Steve Gonzalez--welcome back--
Assistant Director of the National Veterans Employment and
Education Division for the American Legion; Dr. Roy Swift,
Executive Director of Workcred, which is an affiliate of the
American National Standards Institute; Mr. Jamie Merisotis,
president of the Lumina Foundation; and Ms. Denise Roosendaal,
Executive Director of the Institute for Credentialing
Excellence.
Thank you for all being here today.
Mr. Gonzalez, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEVE GONZALEZ

Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon, Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Takano,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee. On behalf of
National Commander Dale Barnett and over 2 million members of
the American Legion, we thank you and your colleagues for the
work you do in support of our servicemembers, veterans, and
their families. The American Legion commends you for holding
this hearing.
In early 1996, the American Legion launched the first
groundbreaking credentialing study to report on those skills
for which the armed services provided training and for which a
license or certification is required in the civilian workforce.
The education, training, and experience obtained during an
individual's military service not only provides tangible
benefits for the Nation's defense but can also contribute
significantly to a highly skilled civilian workforce. The
military invests millions of dollars training its uniform
personnel, providing a broad base of knowledge and experiences
that can carry over to civilian occupations.
However, transitioning from military occupations to
civilian jobs can present significant challenges for
servicemembers. Postsecondary education credentials are
arguably even more important today than ever before. Those
individuals who hold the credential generally have lower
unemployment rates and greater earning power. Since 2008, jobs
in the workforce that require some postsecondary education or a
degree have increased by 3.6 million, while jobs for people
with a high school diploma or less have declined, leading to
higher unemployment rates.
However, when civilian credentialing boards, States, and
employers fail to fully recognize military education, training,
and experience, both the servicemember and the Nation are
impaired. The veteran faces reduced chances of obtaining a job
on par with his or her skills, and the civilian workforce
cannot take full advantage of the extensive skills training in
which our Nation has invested.
Still, the process for a veteran to get licensed is not as
easy as showing up to an office with a DD 214 providing
relevant military training. Conflicts between Federal and State
requirements for credentials complicate the issue, which
remains far from resolved around the country.
Earlier this year, the American Legion hosted its second
national credentialing summit in Washington, DC, to identify
best practices for implementing State laws and for lobbying new
ones. Policymakers and other key stakeholders were part of the
collaborative discussion. The American Legion is in the process
of issuing a post-summit report in the next several months.
In the past several years, a variety of Federal and State
legislation, administrative initiatives, and new Department of
Defense and Department of Labor programs have been developed to
reduce barriers to credentialing for servicemembers and
veterans. We applaud these efforts but remain concerned about
how to ensure the quality of the credentials that are paid for
by the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Currently, the VA does not require periodic reapproval of
certification programs. Certification tests and organizations
at present are only approved once, and there are no
requirements for reapproval. However, certification
requirements are adapted, and changes to exams are made by the
certifying agency on a regular basis. The American Legion
recommends a reapproval process to ensure that the tests and
organizations continue to meet the statutory requirement for
payment.
Another barrier is the difference between post-9/11 and the
government GI Bill payment system. The American Legion
encourages this committee to eliminate the requirement that
post-9/11 GI Bill recipients use an entire month's worth of
entitlement for a licensing or certification test fee even when
the fee amounts to far less than the full month's entitlement.
Under Title 38, U.S.C. Section 3315, license and
certification tests, post-9/11 GI Bill recipients are charged 1
full month of entitlement, which may amount to over $1,000,
even if the licensing or certification fee is significantly
less than that. One of our recommendations is to reduce
proportional to the cost of the licensing and exam fees.
While I have only highlighted two barriers and solutions
within my oral remarks, my written testimony further explains
barriers and Legion recommendations to Congress.
This concludes my testimony. The American Legion
appreciates the opportunity to address this topic as well as
identify ways to continue to break down barriers that would not
only benefit those who have served but benefit our economy and
workforce. I will be happy to answer any questions you might
have.
And thank you, Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Steve Gonzalez appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much.
Dr. Swift, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROY SWIFT

Mr. Swift. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Roy Swift, and I am the Executive Director of
Workcred, an affiliate of the American National Standards
Institute. ANSI is the coordinator of the U.S. standardization
system, and Workcred is a separate affiliate whose mission is
to strengthen workforce quality by improving workforce
credentials and the credentialing system.
Before launching Workcred, I spent the previous 10 years
building ANSI's internationally recognized accreditation
programs for educational certificates and certifications.
It is important to note that Workcred is separate from and
respects the impartiality of ANSI's accreditation services.
Nonetheless, both organizations share an ongoing commitment to
fostering a more robust and qualified American workforce and
enhancing the quality of credentials.
As a retired United States Army colonel who served a 28-
year career in the U.S. Army Medical Department, I am deeply
honored to testify today on the credentialing of servicemembers
and veterans.
U.S. military personnel gain valuable training, skills,
and, at times, do earn civilian credentials during their
service, particularly in the medical arena. Credentials can
contribute to career development and enhance the potential for
promotion for servicemembers. After military service,
credentials can help demonstrate to civilian employers that
training and skills attained in the military are on par with
those gained through traditional civilian pathways.
Unfortunately, many servicemembers that have earned a
military occupational specialty are often not licensed or
certified to perform a comparable job in the civilian
workforce. This situation creates an artificial barrier to
employment.
With an estimated 250,000 military personnel expected to
leave the service every year, the need to translate military
skills into civilian careers is as important as ever. But we
face a tremendous challenge. There are more than 4,000
certifications in the U.S., and less than 10 percent of these
are accredited or reviewed by a third-party accreditation body.
This lack of third-party review creates a buyer-beware
environment because most certifications would not meet a
national or international standard.
Accreditation is an independent third-party assessment of a
certification body's competence, and it plays an important role
in increasing the credibility and continuous quality
improvement of certifications.
ANSI's accreditation process is designed to increase the
integrity and mobility of certified professionals and provide
confidence to the market that they have the required
competencies as advertised. Millions of professionals currently
hold certifications from ANSI-accredited certification bodies.
In ANSI's view, the global nature of personnel
certification demands accreditation to international standards.
That is why ANSI's accreditation program is based on a national
standard and international standard, ISO 17024. And that is why
ANSI was the first U.S. accreditation body to deliver this
accreditation in accordance with the requirements of 17011.
17011 is the basis for mutual recognition of accreditation
bodies in countries around the world. This assures that
credentials are seen as equivalent and are transportable across
borders, broadening the global labor market and opportunities
for employers and employees.
With respect to veterans' employability, ANSI has long been
an active leader in working with the government on private
credentialing solutions. For example, the military
Credentialing Opportunities Online, COOL, program and the
Department of Labor highlight ANSI accreditation.
With a broader vision, Workcred is focused on building a
competency-driven credentialing economic system. We want to
create alignment between industry, training, and credentialing
organizations. This will advance the quality workforce
credentials that have validity and are market-valued and will
promote an open, transparent exchange of information.
ANSI and Workcred, in collaboration with the American
Legion, were instrumental in working with the Army's TRADOC to
identify high-quality, industry-recognized credentials relevant
to Army soldiers as candidates for Army credentialing pilot
programs.
Together with partners from George Washington University
and Southern Illinois University, Workcred has just launched
the Credentialing Transparency Initiative Pilot Program to
create clarity in the U.S. credentialing marketplace. Funded by
Lumina, the initiative will create a voluntary registry that we
think has great potential for use by the Department of Defense.
All Americans have a stake in a strong and effective
credentialing system. Both ANSI and Workcred are committed to
supporting the employability and successful transition of
military servicemembers into the workforce.
Thank you, sir.

[The prepared statement of Roy Swift appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much, Dr. Swift.
And, Mr. Merisotis, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMIE P. MERISOTIS

Mr. Merisotis. Thank you very much for the chance to be
here today. I am Jamie Merisotis, president of Lumina
Foundation.
You know, the issues being discussed here today are vital
not just to the millions of individuals who are directly
affected but to the growing demand for talent that will impact
our entire Nation and its future. At Lumina Foundation, which
is the Nation's largest private foundation focused specifically
on increasing student access to and success in postsecondary
education, we are working to improve the Nation's talent
profile by focusing all of our efforts on one specific goal,
what we call ``Goal 2025.''
That goal is this: By the year 2025, we want 60 percent of
Americans to hold a high-quality postsecondary degree,
certificate, or other postsecondary credential. We are
convinced that this level of educational attainment is a
national necessity that is the only way to ensure our country
can thrive in the global economy.
Unfortunately, today, only about 45 percent of Americans
now hold any kind of postsecondary credential at all. So,
clearly, we are a long way from having the workforce that we
need for the 21st century.
Certainly, servicemembers and military veterans can help
close this gap. In fact, they represent a huge asset, a rich
source of talent that this Nation sorely needs. Unfortunately,
as you have already heard, their vast potential is not being
fully realized, in part because of barriers imposed by issues
related to education credentialing.
Lumina is involved in many different areas of work related
to credentialing. When we embraced this idea of Goal 2025, we
realized very quickly that things must change significantly
when it comes to credentialing if we have any hope of reaching
that 60-percent rate. Simply put, our Nation's postsecondary
system needs to be revamped so that it can serve students
better and serve far more of them than it ever has before,
including the millions of our military veterans.
In short, we need a student-centered system, one that
recognizes and rewards not just time spent in the classroom but
actual learning, no matter where or how that learning was
obtained. This is critical for servicemembers and veterans. If
there is one barrier to postsecondary success facing our
returning veterans, that is it: being recognized for what they
learned while in service. Any workable redesign of higher
education must address this barrier, which results from the
complexity and confusion of our current approach to
credentialing.
Today's credentialing marketplace is highly fragmented,
with a vast array of credentials that don't always connect--to
each other, to other educational opportunities, or to careers.
We need a credentialing system that does connect, one that
actually functions as a system, not as a collection of
disparate parts.
A great deal of our recent work has been focused on
reimagining this type of interconnected system. In fact, as Dr.
Swift mentioned, we are part of a partnership of more than 80
national organizations--business, education, workforce, labor,
and other organizations--that have begun a national dialogue on
this topic.
A reimagined credentialing system would be competency-
based, interconnected, and continually updated. It would ensure
quality, and it would enable users--students, education
providers, and employers--to compare the value of various
credentials. Clearly, a system with these attributes would be
of enormous benefit to veterans as they make their transition
to civilian life.
Of course, the effort to create this type of interconnected
system is one that will require concerted action by a range of
stakeholders, including the Federal Government, which has
supported credentialing reform through its leadership, through
funding, and through participation and research.
The Departments of Labor and Education, among others, are
already testing approaches to a more inclusive system of
credentialing for all students. The Federal Government should
work to link those efforts to the many others underway to build
a credential system that works for all learners.
Frankly, there are few issues far more urgent than meeting
our Nation's growing need for talent. Assuring that the talent
of our veterans is recognized, that they obtain appropriate
credentials for what they know and what they can do, and that
they have opportunities to develop their talent has great
import for the veterans themselves, for their families, their
communities, and for our Nation.
I am very pleased that this committee and others are
considering approaches to breaking down barriers and finding
ways to recognize learning and skills however and wherever they
are achieved. I am happy to answer your questions about the
steps that the Federal Government might take in this effort or
to provide further information on the work that we are doing in
this area.
Thank you very much for the chance to testify.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Merisotis appears in the
Appendix ]

STATEMENT OF DENISE ROOSENDAAL

Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Merisotis.
Ms. Roosendaal, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Roosendaal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Denise Roosendaal. I am the Executive Director
of the Institute for Credentialing Excellence. It is a
501(c)(3) membership organization representing credentialing
bodies across the country. The National Commission for
Certifying Agencies, NCCA, is our accrediting arm and has
accredited over 300 personnel certification programs to its
standards since its inception in 1977.
I would like to thank you for the invitation to speak with
you today on such an important topic. ICE has been involved in
this topic for several years, supporting the establishment of
the Army-Navy COOL Web sites back in 2003 as well as the two
credentialing summits held by the American Legion in 2012 and
2015.
In my written testimony, I outlined anecdotal evidence of
some of the success stories that we have heard about from
several credentialing organizations, such as the American
Culinary Federation and the Human Resources Certification
Institute. These organizations connected with the military in a
meaningful way to create a smooth pathway for Active Duty
military servicemembers and veterans to access the private-
sector certifications.
I have also outlined in my written testimony six areas that
I think still need some attention. These are somewhat technical
in nature, but I do believe that in order for us to move
forward in connecting private-sector credentials with the
important experience and knowledge that military servicemembers
and veterans bring to the marketplace they should be addressed.
Very quickly, these areas are: the alignment of required
knowledge, skills, and competencies between military experience
and the civilian certification; some of the challenges in
understanding and communicating certification and military
nomenclature and classifications; the eligibility requirements,
where there are no alternative pathways outlined to help
identify equivalents in military experience; the lack of
awareness of some of the best practices, such as governance
structures, the separation of education from certification
practices; the need to educate employers on the value of
certifications for veterans; as well as inadequate resources
for necessary activities that would help resolve some of these
technical areas.
So the first one that I mentioned, the alignment of
required knowledge, to many of our organizations has become
clear as one of the most important to address. The alignment of
acquired knowledge is sometimes--the misalignment is sometimes
fueled by that misunderstanding of the military nomenclature,
and it is probably the most significant obstacle.
Some private-sector credentialing organizations have found
great success in their military programs by conducting an
extensive and often expensive gap analysis mapping the military
knowledge and skills back to the certification's own job
analysis of required skills.
Other programs, like the Human Resources Certification
Institute, overcame this obstacle by creating a direct
connection to the military through the Army's Training with
Industry, TWI, program. This is where they place a liaison in
the office of HRCI, and for at least a year they understood and
began to communicate the differences between the military HR
requirements and the private-sector certification.
Without that direct personal connection, however, the gaps
have to be analyzed on paper. And sometimes those gaps are
easily identified; sometimes they are identified and filled
with just specific training. Such as the Culinary Institute,
they identified certain skills that were lacking in the
military experience, and they were able to fill that gap with
employer-based and employer-funded training.
But, more often, the gaps are not easily or accurately
identified, especially around eligibility requirements. We are
seeing that there is some misunderstanding of, when private-
sector certification requires a certain number of years of
experience--say, 5 years of relevant experience, it is not
clear whether or not the military 5 years experience is
equivalent.
The COOL site has helped immensely in connecting
certifications with specific MOSs, but I think helping the
private sector understand that connection a little bit better
would be very helpful.
In ICE's research, 89 percent of certification bodies are
nonprofit, 501(c)(3) or (c)(6), with a median staff size of
about six individuals. So it does make it difficult to find the
resources to help fill these gaps and address these issues.
I would be remiss if I concluded without expressing ICE and
NCCA's commitment to identifying quality credentialing
programs. The NCCA standards were originally created through a
federally funded grant to create standards for quality
personnel certification programs. The third-party accreditation
is the best means for assessing quality programs, and our
military servicemembers deserve that quality.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you
today. I do hope that ICE and NCCA can continue to be a
resource for this committee.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Denise Roosendaal appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you very much.
I thank you all for your testimony.
I am going to now yield myself 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Gonzalez, in your written statement, you address the
concern of the services informing servicemembers of the
opportunities that may exist with credentialing and licensing
after their service.
One of my thoughts is, maybe, yeah, you can do it
throughout their service career, but I also think it can be a
recruiting tool and be brought up from the very beginning,
depending upon what someone's MOS is going to be, obviously,
what those opportunities are, just like the GI Bill is a
recruiting tool.
I just wanted to get your thoughts on that or other methods
that you think might be helpful.
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Chairman, I believe that you are
absolutely right, so I agree with you that it should be done in
a process and it should be done as the military now
transitions--and you, Mr. Chairman, who sits on the Armed
Services Committee--it is a lifecycle.
So it is making sure that that individual understands in
their particular profession within the military what else they
can be doing, not just to better themselves, but also it helps
the readiness of the military. A better workforce for the
military is a better ready military.
But, also, it helps those individuals that when they do
transition out, one, it decreases unemployment for the
military, what they pay out, but also it helps retain those
individuals, whether it is in the Reserves or National Guard,
for the total military force.
And then, of course, how do we figure out how to leverage
technology, Mr. Chairman. How do we use technology to still get
information, not just individuals within the continental United
States but also overseas regardless of where they are stationed
at, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Wenstrup. You mean technology for continued training in
certain skills? Is that what you are----
Mr. Gonzalez. Technology as far as how we deliver those
types of material--study material, information. And, in some
cases, and I know there are other organizations like a
Princeton Review, and how do we deliver those types of exams.
Can we deliver those exams through new technology platforms
that, regardless of where you are at, you can still be able to
take that test and be prepared while you are overseas. And
then, of course, when you get back, you are still prepared, Mr.
Chairman.
Dr. Wenstrup. Yeah. Just like when you deploy and you may
want to continue your military education classes online or
whatever, depending upon where you are, you can do that.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes, sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. Okay. I appreciate that input.
Now, this might seem like a very obvious question, but I
would ask all of you: What is the number-one thing that this
subcommittee and Congress could do today or quickly to improve
licensing and credentialing opportunities for veterans, in your
opinion?
And we can go down the line.
Mr. Swift. Well, the word ``certification'' is pretty
meaningless these days. You can say that you are certified when
you pay $50 to get it, or it could be one in which it is fully
accredited by a legitimate accreditation agency. So, often, it
is a buyer-beware market, and it is very confusing to soldiers
and the Department of Defense.
And that is why, in our pilot program where we are looking
at using an electronic means via to look at the transparency of
credential of the National Transparency Credentialing
Initiative. We think that this sort of national registry would
be dynamic, because it has a platform where it spiders down and
obtains the most recent information, and that registry would
allow applications, such as the Department of Defense to put an
application on the registry about the requirements of
particular military occupational specialties, and match it to
competencies related to specific credentials that meet certain
criteria that have been developed by the Department of Defense.
Naturally, we think that if we are going to say that we
will only reimburse for higher education that is accredited,
institutionally or programmatically accredited, and we think
certification is important--which we believe it is--to moving
people to obtain jobs, then the Department of Defense should
not be accepting any certifications unless they are accredited
or have had some sort of third party review in that regard.
Dr. Wenstrup. I think it is probably also important for the
servicemember to have some understanding of what States
recognize a certain credentialing. Like you said, you can get a
credential, but if no one recognizes it parlays into a
legitimate job, then you have been had.
Mr. Swift. Right.
Dr. Wenstrup. I think that is important information to get
out. Am I understanding you correctly there?
Mr. Swift. Yes, absolutely.
And this national registry which was funded by Lumina
Foundation is designed to have descriptors that would establish
a profile, not just what are the terminal competencies so there
could be a match between military occupational specialty and
the competencies, but what is the transfer value of that
credential it is related to state regulation and who recognizes
it, if anybody. There are about 18 descriptors, sir, that at
another time and another place could be discussed.
It is in the pilot stage, but we do think that this could
be one of the answers to begin increasing this communication.
Because we found, even with the meeting that we had with the
American Legion--we brought about 20 certification bodies to
meet with TRADOC. The difficulty of communication between
higher education, the credentialing organization, and industry
seems to be very difficult without some sort of facilitation.
I talked enough. I will be quiet.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, and my time has expired, and I see
people nodding, so, at this time, I will recognize Mr. Takano
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
I recognize that need for that coordination among the three
entities you just mentioned.
Do any of you see a potential in the area of licensing and
credentialing for the kind of predatory marketing that has
often gone on in the for-profit sector in higher education? If
so, what can we as Federal policymakers do now to protect
veterans and the integrity of Federal programs designed to help
them transition into meaningful civilian employment?
Mr. Merisotis. It is an enormously difficult question. As
you know, as a member of the Education and Workforce Committee,
these issues are cutting across Federal programs in so many
different ways.
And I think, ultimately, this issue of protecting the
interests of students, the learners themselves, comes down to
the fact that we have to change the paradigm of what we are
actually getting at in these programs.
We have talked about it; whether it is in the GI Bill
benefit programs, whether it is in education programs or
others, these are all time-based programs, right? So you
accumulate college credits, your benefits expire after 36
months. All of these are rooted in these concepts of time
instead of concepts of learning.
And we should be increasingly pushing these concepts that
all of us, I think, have talked about today, which is
competency in these programs and then driving the consumer
protection element around whether or not students, whether they
are veterans or other students, have actually learned in these
programs. What have they gotten academically? What do they
know? What are they able to do out of these programs?
Then we would worry less, frankly, about whether it is a
for-profit or a not-for-profit. We would focus more on what are
the learning outcomes. Frankly, we have some abuses in not-for-
profit educational providers, as well, that we have to address.
So I think these issues that you are talking about, which I
think are real and serious, ultimately we have to get at that
root cause of the fact that competency should be what we should
be focusing on in all of our postsecondary learning programs.
Mr. Takano. Dr. Swift.
Mr. Swift. And around that competency, I would like to talk
about the triad, that you can't just talk about competencies.
First of all, are they validated competencies?
Mr. Takano. Right.
Mr. Swift. Have they been validated by industry or the
appropriate organization that is looking into this?
And, thirdly, what is the quality of the assessment?
Because we may get the competencies right, but, as Mr.
Merisotis was saying, if we don't have the correct assessments,
we will never know whether learning took place or not.
So one of the weak links--and this is true of
certifications too; if the exam doesn't discriminate--we don't
know whether learning takes place if our assessment instruments
aren't strong enough to discriminate between those who know and
those who don't know.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you.
Mr. Gonzalez, as I understand it, the post-9/11 GI Bill
recipients use an entire month's worth of entitlement for a
certification or licensing fee, whether or not that--excuse me,
I am looking at the--they use an entire--or licensing fee does
not apply to Montgomery GI Bill recipients. Their entitlement
is reduced proportionally.
Why do we take so much more away from post-9/11 GI Bill
recipients? I am comparing the two different programs. Is it
just easier for the VA to do recordkeeping?
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Takano, when the post-9/11 was first
introduced, I was still in college. So, to be honest, behind
the scenes and what was the formula that was used to calculate
post-9/11, I am not aware of.
However, Montgomery GI Bill does pretty much prorate in
what the cost is, thus saving you entitlements for the longer
education process. And I know this is something that I would
definitely love to talk more in detail with the committee
itself on how can we kind of revert certain sections of post-9/
11 to what Montgomery had in place to ensure that that
particular individual is not exhausting its entitlement and, of
course, keeping in mind within fiscal constraints and making
sure that CBO can score it properly and it is something that is
amenable with Members of Congress too, Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Great.
Well, since the VA is not here, can you describe for us the
supposedly stringent criteria VA uses to approve credentials
for the GI Bill?
Mr. Gonzalez. There is no standard, Mr. Takano. If you want
the honest truth, there is no standard. It is whatever the
checklist is from the State approving agency gets stamped, and
once that program is stamped as approved, it is a done deal.
Mr. Takano. So the American taxpayer could indeed be paying
for these tests and credentials, which really don't result in
anything.
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. There is no reapproval process by the
VA. So there is no incentive for the VA to come back and say,
we are going to do an audit, we are going to reexamine your
certification program in general.
And I can give you an example of us, ourselves, and the
American National Standards Institute meeting with the VA about
a year and a half ago to bring this particular subject up to
their knowledge and make them aware of it, and their response
was, who are we hurting?
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, I really thank you for the time and the
subject matter you have brought before us. We have a lot of
work I plan to do and work with your office on this in the days
to come.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. Mr. Costello, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to all of you for being here and for what you do
every day.
Obviously, the name of this subcommittee is the Economic
Opportunity Subcommittee, and so the focus is on creating more
economic opportunity for veterans and making sure that we carry
through legislatively and from an implementation perspective to
provide that economic opportunity.
With the hearing title being ``Do Barriers Still Remain?'',
I think the answer is, yes, barriers do remain. I think the
added question is, well, what can we do about those barriers?
It seems to me, given the principle of federalism, that States
certainly have some--well, they do have flexibility and
discretion in terms of what their particular occupational
licensing standards are. Fine. It also seems to me that that,
in and of itself, can create a barrier.
And so what can we do, either from a preemption perspective
federally or from just a best-practices perspective, to align
them better so that a veteran who wants to return to my State,
Pennsylvania, or maybe to Miss Rice's State, New York, doesn't
decide--and Miss Rice is terrific--to go to Miss Rice's State
because the occupational licensing standards there are more
favorable to what that veteran has acquired from a skills and
experience perspective but yet Pennsylvania--and I am using it
as not an example but for purposes of hypothetical--
Pennsylvania's may be more difficult? And so we want to align
that so that that doesn't occur for a veteran wanting to choose
where they may live.
So my question is twofold. One, what can we do on the
Federal level to diminish the possibility that the 50 State
occupational licensing jurisdiction doesn't create a barrier
from a legislative perspective on a preemption basis? And,
number two, what can we do from a best-practices perspective in
order to reduce that?
If that question is too much in the land of hypothetical, I
believe it was Mr. Gonzalez or Mr. Merisotis who said, you
know, there are a lot of things we could talk about in terms of
what Congress could do. So that would be sort of the catch-all
question, if you will. And I would open it up to all four of
you.
And, again, thank you for being here and testifying.
Mr. Gonzalez. Mr. Costello, I will make it quick for the
purpose of time.
One of the things our recommendation would be is, how do we
create a clearinghouse on where States themselves who have
passed legislation can acquire information so programs of
instruction by the military, whether it is through the ONET
process at Department of Labor, whether it is through the VA.
And I know it is going to be a daunting task for the DoD, but
how do we make the Federal agencies be able to provide a
platform where States, private entities can actually go and
acquire these programs and instructions? Of course, keep in
mind where we are not compromising national security, so we are
not going to put the programming instructions when we are
dealing with cybersecurity, for instance.
However, there are many other occupations within the
military that will be very, very helpful for those individual
entities to be able to access and be able to compare what have
you actually acquired in the military, regardless of what that
is, to be able to say we are going to recognize and accept or
we are not going to recognize and accept and this is why we
can't recognize and accept, whatever that might be.
Right now, currently, it is very scattered, and how do you
get this information or where do you get this information. And
maybe that is a question also for the next panel, Mr. Costello.
Mr. Swift. I just want to add a couple of sentences to
that.
Being 28 years in the Army, I understand that when somebody
gets their training initially and when they go out of the
service after 3 or 4 years, the competencies are quite
different. And I think licensure and some certifications often
evaluate them on what the competencies were when they took
their initial training. And the military maybe should do a
better job of identifying the customized competencies that one
has achieved over that 4-year experience, because the
experience has changed to a very different individual than the
one that they said, this describes a medic or this describes a
mechanic. There is a big gap difference in the two scenarios
that.
And then the credentialing world needs to do a better job
of learning how to quantify experience. We don't have the good,
sophisticated tools that we need to do that, to make that
match. And, of course, communication is always the issue.
But I think that if we were clear--I remember when I was in
the Army we had something called job books. And those job books
were competencies at every level that we were to achieve, which
allowed us to be able to demonstrate that we had certain
competencies if we were a lieutenant or an E-5 or a sergeant or
whatever, and that is very different than when we were a PFC
and this sort of thing.
So I think those are some of the things that we can do on
the military side that you would have some jurisdiction over in
trying to facilitate that to happen, where we could do a better
job in that regard.
Dr. Wenstrup. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms Rice, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms Rice. Thank you.
Mr. Gonzalez, I just want to go back to that meeting that
you talked about a year and a half ago at the VA. Can you just
expound on that more? What precipitated the meeting, who was
there, and what was discussed?
Mr. Gonzalez. And, again, Mrs. Rice, just due to time, very
quickly, it was--we identified certain certifications that were
being approved by VA, that individuals, of course, can go and
go to the course, go to the school or institution itself and
acquire that particular credential, per se. We had identified a
couple of them, and we brought it up to the economic section of
the Department of Veterans Affairs, brought it to their
attention.
And the conversation went from bad to worse very quickly.
And the conversation pretty much ended as, ``Who are we
hurting?'', from their end. And our response was, you are
hurting the veteran, you are hurting the taxpayers because we
are paying for it. And it just kind of ended like that, and we
just left it alone.
And, ever since then, we have just been pushing in other
ways to push to ensure that VA kind of overhauls how they are
doing things--how they are approving these programs, how they
are evaluating the programs, are they doing reapproval, whether
they are doing surveys, whatever it is that they need to do to
ensure that these programs are actually meeting some standard
and some quality assurance.
Ms Rice. So you got the sense that there was no rhyme or
reason as to----
Mr. Gonzalez. I got the sense that, because it is not their
money, it is not coming out of their pocket, they can care
less.
Ms Rice. So what about their process made you go to--I am
trying to figure out exactly what they are doing. They are
saying that these programs are okay when they are not?
Mr. Gonzalez. Yes. So the programs--and I don't know if you
want to chime in.
Because Dr. Swift was also at the meeting, and he can chime
in on more of the technical side.
If you care to.
Mr. Swift. Sure.
One of the things--the reason that we were concerned is
that a lot of the agencies that had been approved talked about
training. And certification needs to be a third-party
assessment that is firewalled away from training, that is a
judgment that competencies have been achieved.
So we are saying--and they do have a self-attestation
questionnaire that the State approving agencies use. But it
looks like--is from our brief meeting--that VA probably needs
to have--there needs to be more resources for the people who
are trying to use that attestation questionnaire to determine
if they are a legitimate certification body.
Because it appears that maybe we have allowed some through
that weren't really certifications, but what we would call
certificate programs that has education and training and
measures learning outcomes, where certification is to be an
agency that does an analysis of what the skills are to be
successful on the job.
Ms Rice. So what would you suggest that the VA do?
Mr. Swift. I would think that we need to relook at the
criteria they are using, the questionnaire. And I think we need
more resources to do training of the people in the States that
have the responsibility of determining whether this is a
legitimate certification body or not. One of the ways to
achieve this would be to re-authorize the old Professional
Certification & Licensure Advisory Committee to the Secretary
of the VA.
Ms Rice. Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Wenstrup. Mrs. Radewagen, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for Mr. Gonzalez.
And, yes, I welcome you, as well. Thank you very much, all
of you, panel, for appearing today.
You mentioned in your written statement that all 50 States
have now passed some form of new licensing and credentialing
laws. Does this include the United States territories?
And, also, could you please go into more detail as to what
these new laws are and how they will increase consistency
across the States and territories for servicemembers and
veterans trying to obtain certain credentials?
Mr. Gonzalez. I cannot talk to the U.S. territories. I am
not aware of the laws, if they have been changed, or the
statutes in any U.S. territories. But within the 50 States,
some type of credentialing current statutes have been changed.
And it varies from State to State. So you might have
something as simple as how an electrician gets their licensure,
and, of course, in the State of Georgia versus the State of
Washington, who might just have complete control and says, we
are just going to make one massive overhaul, versus some States
who want to do it in increment processes or increment
progression to ensure that they are not compromising the public
safety in some capacity.
I know in one of the States that we have been doing it very
slowly, and it is my home State of New York. It has been very
much a slow process, whereas, again, you have some Midwestern
States like Indiana, like Washington, Ohio, who has just done
one massive overhaul. Of course, Iowa, as well, is another
State.
So it depends. But as far as U.S. territories, I am not
aware of--I can go back and come back with the actual
information for you, ma'am.
Ms. Radewagen. I appreciate that.
You also discussed how only certain occupational licenses
are reached by Federal law, but many, including nursing,
paramedics, et cetera, are regulated at the State level. For
these certain occupational licenses, what can we do in Congress
to ensure consistency of protocols all across the States and--
of course I am going to say--the U.S. territories?
Mr. Gonzalez. I would think----
Ms. Radewagen. We are part of the family.
Mr. Gonzalez. If it is okay with you, ma'am, I think my
colleagues who might be a little better versed on some of that
and better answer that question. I would--I don't know if they
want to answer, since I have two of the biggest accreditation
bodies here who can actually also give you that understanding.
And, of course, some of those particular topics are very
much a hybrid in nature, where the Federal Government does have
a role but then, of course, the States also have their own
role.
Ms. Radewagen. Okay. If we could go to the--I am running
out of time. Thank you.
Mr. Swift. Well, licensure is a difficult issue because it
is a State function, and, frankly, scopes of practice are done
by the legislature, and it is a political process about who can
lobby the best. And that is why you have differences among
States in regard to scope, and some people can administer
medication, and some can't. And this is true for a lot of--and
then some States may license a dental hygienist and some not.
And it is the whole range of how you interpret what public
protection is all about, because licensure is supposed to be
strictly about public protection.
And there are several issues associated with this. First of
all, licensure is based on the whole idea that scope of
practice is mutually exclusive from anybody else. So if you say
``wound healing'' in one scope, God help you if you are another
professional who says, ``Well, we look at wounds, too,'' you
know. And, of course, the workforce is not going that way of
having these boundaries of scopes. And so that is why I think
it is very difficult for the Federal Government, because it is
very State-controlled.
Now, the federations, like the State boards of nursing and
physical therapy, psychologists, they try to bring some
standardization, but even the nurses, who are very, very active
in trying to create a compact of mutual recognition across
borders, I think--don't quote me on this, but I think there are
around 30, but you would think they would have all 50 States,
you know, in looking at this sort of thing.
So it is difficult. I think that a recent initiative by the
Department of Labor to look at giving grants in relationship to
how we can decrease these barriers with licensure is a good
start, to force the States to begin looking at, do we really
need to license this profession or is this just a barrier that
we put up that is really not necessary?
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Wenstrup. Mr. Bost, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think I would kind of like to continue down that because
of my experience in the State. And I am trying to figure out--
first off, this would be a pretty broad step towards removing
States' rights and their abilities. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Swift. Yes. That's why I say it is very difficult,
because it is considered a State responsibility.
Mr. Bost. And I don't know other States, but I can give you
Illinois. Illinois, though we might have the department of
professional regulation that handles one area, we also have
other boards and other groups that handle other licensing. So
how would we work to combine them in a positive way so that we
could have one standard, I guess? Do you have any suggestions
on that?
Mr. Swift. I actually don't.
Mr. Bost. Yeah. That is my----
Mr. Swift. I just think that there may be financial
incentives for States to begin looking at streamlining, to help
mobility of people in the workforce and multinational
corporations, and to try to be encouraged to move away from
these mutually exclusive scopes.
Because let's just take healthcare for a sample. As we move
from hospital-based care to community-based care, we have to
have people who can multitask and are working in the home and
in the community. And so, to say that you can only do one
little thing by the license is going to be an impediment to
deliver good healthcare in this regard.
So I guess I would approach it from that. But I don't think
I have a good answer for you.
Mr. Bost. But this particular proposal is not just on
healthcare licensing; it is on all licensing.
Mr. Swift. No, no. I was just giving healthcare as an
example.
Mr. Bost. I know, for example, for cosmetology, the level
of training required and for licensing in the State of Illinois
is so much different than States around them. And so where do
we set the standard? Do we set it at the Illinois standard, or
do we set it at one of the other--the lower State standard?
Mr. Swift. This is probably something for the National
Governors, who is up in the next panel, to talk about, because
I think it is very difficult, because it is a legislative
process. Scopes of practice are determined by the legislature.
And so how to deal with that difficulty with these
differences, you know--I mean, the differences are some State
says, well, we have to protect the public with this profession,
and another State will say, oh, no, we don't need to protect
the public with this profession. And so the differences are
extreme at times as to who supposedly is protecting the public.
Whether it is protecting the profession or protecting the
public is sometimes debatable.
Mr. Merisotis. I want to just add quickly here on this
point.
Mr. Bost. Please.
Mr. Merisotis. This is one of the reasons I mentioned in my
testimony this idea of having this national dialogue on
credentialing. Because this cacophony that you are talking
about, I think, is precisely the problem. From the consumer
perspective, whether it is veterans or any other group seeking
postsecondary learning, that complexity inherent in the system
is a big barrier to their eventual success. And so a lot of
people get ripped off by the system, they never complete the
programs, they never get appropriately credentialed. So it is a
real mess out there.
I am loathe to seek a Federal solution to this, I confess.
And so, I think, go with your gut on that, because I am not
sure----
Mr. Bost. Yes, because I have a tendency to believe that
it, like, jumps all over States' rights.
Mr. Merisotis. Yes. Yeah. On the other hand, I think the
Federal Government could set the tone----
Mr. Bost. The base standard.
Mr. Merisotis. That is right--set the tone for what the
expectation should be and give States the opportunity to
differentially regulate based on what they want to accomplish.
I do think, though, that this issue of we really have to
have a higher bar within and across States is very different.
You know in your State that you have a real cacophony, a real
mix, a sort of mess of different programs and different boards.
Other States have different models. And I think we need some
sort of basic framework, some sort of overall approach that
everyone could agree to--national, not Federal.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you.
A very interesting conversation, obviously, and not a
simple fix. But, you know, what goes through my mind is
focusing on what we may be able to do to allow States to make a
decision. Because that is where it is going to have to come
from. And I think we will hear from the National Governors
Association and see what they have to say, but they are not
going to want to give up those authorities, and probably
rightfully so. But, at the same time, what can we do to provide
each and every State or territory with information they need
about the level of education and training that this person
received that could help them make a decision in their
credentialing process. And maybe that is where we need to
focus.
If there are no other questions, I want to thank you all
for answering our questions, and you are now excused. Thank you
for joining us today.
I now want to welcome our second and final panel to the
witness table.
We welcome back Ms. Teresa Gerton, Acting Assistant
Secretary for the U.S. Department of Labor's Veterans'
Employment and Training Service. We also have Mr. Frank
DiGiovanni, who is the Director of Force Readiness and Training
at the U.S. Department of Defense. And, also, we have Mr. David
Quam, deputy director of policy for the National Governors
Association.
I want to thank you all for being here today.
Ms. Gerton, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERESA W. GERTON

Ms. Gerton. Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Takano,
members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the Department's efforts on licensing and credentialing
for veterans and servicemembers at today's hearing.
Mr. Chairman, as you mentioned, last week the Department's
Bureau of Labor Statistics released the August unemployment
report. And the unemployment rate for veterans over the age of
18 is 4.2 percent, compared to 5.6 percent 1 year ago.
Ms. Gerton. The total number of unemployed veterans in
August 2015 was 449,000, down from 501,000 the previous month,
and down 25 percent over the last year.
We believe our collective interventions contribute to these
recent positive employment trends for our veterans. And,
overall, August was the 66th consecutive month of private
sector job growth.
As the economy improves, Secretary Perez and I remain
committed to ensuring our workforce meets the needs of our
businesses and workers. I know you share our belief that
veterans are critical to building our economy. The Department
prioritizes efforts to facilitate veteran attainment of
licenses and credentials. At the American Legion's National
credentialing summit earlier this year, Secretary Perez said,
``we owe to our veterans to break down the barriers to
employment that they too often face as they reintegrate into
civilian life''. Breaking down these barriers requires the
cooperation of Federal agencies, State licensing boards,
educational institutions and the private sector.
VETS worked closely with our colleagues in the Department's
Employment and Training Administration over the last year to
implement landmark workforce legislation, the Workforce
Innovation and Opportunity Act, or WIOA, emphasizing job-driven
training that leads to industry-recognized post secondary
credentials, and promotes the use of career pathways and sector
partnerships to increase employment in in-demand jobs.
WIOA reflects our shared understanding that training
leading to credentials demonstrates skills in a way employers
understand, a way to get workers, including veterans, jobs.
That is why Congress added a new performance measure to WIOA to
track and encourage credential attainment. In 2010, the
Department set a high priority goal for credential attainment
in our training programs. We have met or exceeded that goal
ever since.
With the new WIOA measures, we are confident we will
continue to see success. And, of course, under WIOA, veterans
and eligible spouses continue to receive priority for all
services, as is true with all DOL-funded workforce programs.
Another key department investment is the Trade Adjustment
Assistance Community College and Career Training grants
program. Over 4 years, we have awarded over $2 billion to
community colleges nationwide to help them develop skills
training programs leading to industry-recognized credentials
and good jobs. The TAACCCT program has enrolled more than
11,500 veterans through September 30th, 2014. And the last
round of TAACCCT grants was awarded last year, but the
Department hopes to continue the important momentum and
innovation built through these investments.
Our investments have worked, and the latest employment
numbers show that, but we recognize and appreciate the value of
knowing more. The VOW Act of 2011 required DOL to carry out a
demonstration project on credentialing ``for the purpose of
facilitating the seamless transition of members of the Armed
Forces from service on active duty to civilian employment.''
DOL funded the project with a contract with the National
Governors Association to both engage governors in accelerating
credentialing and licensing for veterans, and to move veterans
into civilian employment by reducing or eliminating barriers to
credentials, certifications or licenses. NGA designed and
implemented the demonstration project in six participating
States and explored accelerated career pathways for
servicemembers and veterans in selected, high-demand civilian
occupations.
Also, under the VOW Act, the Department entered into a
contract to study equivalencies between the skills of various
military occupational specialties and the qualifications
required for related civilian jobs. We studied 68 military
occupations that covered 57 percent of all enlisted
servicemembers, and created a more robust military-to-civilian
crosswalk for those 68 military occupations.
The Department remains committed to licensing and
credentialing efforts, but as we discussed, the authority for
credentialing most professions lies ultimately with the States.
Many States are identifying and addressing licensing barriers.
The President's budget proposes $15 million to encourage more
State action to increase interstate portability of licenses,
remove other barriers and provide easier access.
Participants in the Department's registered apprenticeship
receive an industry-issued, nationally recognized credential
that certifies occupational proficiency. Yesterday, President
Obama announced that the Department of Labor is awarding $175
million in American apprenticeship grants to 46 winning
consortia to train and hire more than 43,000 new apprentices.
Some of these programs have specific veteran components, and I
am happy to discuss those.
Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Takano, thank you again
for the opportunity to testify today. I look forward to your
questions.

[The prepared statement of Ms. Gerton appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Mr. DiGiovanni, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF FRANK DIGIOVANNI

Mr. DiGiovanni. Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Takano,
distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you today. As a 26-year veteran of the
United States Air Force, this is an issue near and dear to my
heart.
In June of 2012 the Department stood up a licensing and
credentialing task force. It was stood up for two purposes:
First, to give meaning to the profession of arms. It is not
only just about military courtesy, but it is also about a
professional course that is both licensed and credentialed.
We also believe that licensing and credentialing is
pointing to military transition, so that is the ability to
translate what one learned both from training, education, and
experience, and how that translates into the private sector.
The program of licensing and credentialing in the
Department falls along three lines of action: The first is when
you finish your initial qualification training, if you are
qualified at that time, then there is an opportunity to secure
a license or a credential. The second time is mid career when
you have sufficient experience. And the third is as you begin
to transition from military services.
In October of 2013, per the direction of Congress, we did a
set of pilots, we submitted a report to you all in 2013. And in
that report, we looked at areas such as truck driving,
logistics, healthcare, manufacturing, IT and other areas which
have direct portability from the military into the civil
sector.
For example, on the one line of action that I spoke of, the
Army has been very aggressive in their 91 Echo Allied Trade
Specialist schoolhouse. Since 2012, over 2,000 initial
graduates of that course have been awarded American Welding
Society certification, and 2,350 members have been awarded
certification from the National Institute of Metalworking
Skills.
Also, with DoD assistance, there have been 79 bills enacted
in each of the 50 States, 40 of which have made changes which
encourage colleges and community colleges to give military
members credit for their training, education and experience.
What we are working on now is that by fiscal year 2016, all
four services will pay for credential. The latest was the
Marine Corps which started their program this month, the other
three, two of which actually started paying in 2015, and the
Navy have been paying for credentials since 2008.
We are also working on a DoD instruction to consolidate the
policies that come from this body and other places. And we also
have a DoD credentialing working group where we are looking to
get the four services together to look at best practices and
standardization.
There is also a standup of AWS, the DoD COOL Web site,
Credentialing Opportunity Online, that will now not only be
able to get that from each of the four services, but there will
be a central place for them now to go where you can get access
to all four service sites. And the task force that I spoke of
that was set up in 2012 has been extended to the end of 2017.
For the way ahead, certainly what you have done has been
fantastic. It certainly helped our military members. There have
been great laws that have been passed; in particular, one which
authorized our military members to receive initial skills job
training up to 6 months before they get out. So that becomes
their place of employment for up to 6 months before they leave
military service. That program, or that authority, is called
SkillBridge.
We are also starting to shift the center of gravity to the
States. We think that when you look at the States, the
licensing issue certainly, as was discussed earlier, is a State
issue. The other center of gravity is the professional
associations themselves.
We also think there is an opportunity to partner with
community colleges. For example, in our study, only four of 395
accredited paramedic colleges actually have a pipeline course.
And what a pipeline course is is where they look at a military
member's training, education and experience. You get credit for
that time, you also get a competency-based exam, and then they
custom design a set of coursework that only fills the gaps in
what you need.
What we have seen for the paramedic, that cuts between 6 to
7 months of school time for transition. It is interesting that
only 4 of the 395 institutions have that capability.
The last area that we are looking at is in combat arms, and
we are looking at soft skills in helping those folks
transition. I thank you for the opportunity to speak to you
today and I will stand by for questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. DiGiovanni appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. DiGiovanni, for your input and
feedback in your testimony. Mr. Quam, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID QUAM

Mr. Quam. Chairman Wenstrup and members of the
subcommittee, good afternoon. It is good to see you all, and it
is a real privilege to be here on behalf of the National
Governors Association. Governors have been very focused for
years on veterans, the military and the National Guard. As
commanders in chief of the National Guard, the last decade has
seen governors very much focused on not only the protection of
our troops when they go abroad, but their protection when they
come home. I think this has been a really great example of what
governors can do to help when these military men and women,
including the Guard and our active military are coming back to
the States. So it was a real privilege to be able to work with
the Department of Labor to start to find those best practices.
I think you heard a lot today that every single State, and
I will say some of the territories as well, have taken steps to
really help the veterans returning with regard to licensing and
credentialing and trying to accelerate those pathways. Well,
what we found during this 18-month, really intensive process,
was that implementation is key. There aren't a lot of Federal
solutions that need to be imposed, licensing and credentialing
is a State issue for a reason. It has to do with public safety,
it has to do with geography, it has to do with the economy. All
those licensing boards and credentialing criteria were put in
place for a reason.
And State and local government has control over that
because it is important for this to remain local. That being
said, governors have found that there are barriers to trade and
there are things that have to be done and the governors play a
key role.
As we work through this demonstration process, there were
five key recommendations that came across for what can be done
to really implement these programs. There was a blueprint put
in place for all States to follow. The first recommendation:
Assemble a team. It is remarkable only the governor has the
authority across all the agencies to bring everybody together
to get the level of coordination and collaboration that you
need to get this done. The effort in the State of Ohio for
instance, the governor called a task force together, gave it to
the governor's workforce task force, they identified 33
different State agencies that were involved in the hiring of
vets, the credentialing and licensing, 33 just in the State of
Ohio. Every State has that level of complexity, the governor as
convener is key.
Second, you have to do your homework. What is the
information? How many veterans are coming back? What were they
trained in? What does your economy need? Where are the jobs?
What institutions do you have that can provide that training?
And can you match it all up? Without all that information, you
can't make really strong decisions.
You need then data, this is where working with some of the
national credentialing bodies, national licensing bodies is
critical. The nurses were able to do a nationwide gap analysis
comparing what the military did with what some of the States
do. That type of data allows the State to start to really focus
on what do we need to make sure that our veterans are ready for
that civilian workforce.
It is interesting, if you think of a medic who is trained
to help soldiers who are injured in combat, there is a
different level of training to handle that versus handling,
say, infants, who you might have to service as a nurse or a
practitioner, or the elderly. And so you have to make sure that
the licensing and credentialing is there for a reason to make
sure that that quality control is servicing the civilian sector
by taking into account the training and experience to be gained
in the military.
Next one, don't reinvent the wheel. This is a big one. Best
practices, the States have started to really share across State
lines. You had six different States involved in this
demonstration process--demonstration program, and probably the
best thing that came out of it is them talking to each other.
What did you do that worked? How did you work with your
legislature? How did your State licensing board set up? What
other bodies are you concerned with? What other are the
politics that are involved there? How did you fund it? States
talking to States is a key to making this work in the end.
The last one: Share information. If I have one role for the
Federal Government to play, it is to help with the sharing of
information from the Federal Government and from the agencies
to the States. A true partnership will require the flow of
information so you don't have to go looking. One of the
interesting findings as I was talking to some of the people who
put together this report, they had to do workarounds just to
get the basic information of what vets were coming back to
their States and what have they been trained in. Those are keys
to bring the policy decisions together to really make this
work. Happy to take questions and it has been a pleasure to be
here.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Quam appears in the
Appendix]

Dr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you, Mr. Quam. I appreciate all
of your testimonies. I will now allow myself 5 minutes for
questioning.
I will just continue with you, Mr. Quam, if I can. I
appreciate what you said about governors taking the lead on
some of these issues within the States, and best practices. I
have always contended that one of the advantages of having
States and territories is you have the opportunity to find best
practices. You have over 50 labs to try different things to see
what works, but it takes the communication and the knowledge of
what is working and see if it works in your own State. And, of
course, some of the differences between States are sometimes
based upon--the protocols can be based upon the need of a
State, right? Some States need different professions more than
others, and so they may change their needs, their rules based
on their needs.
So, again, going back to the question I asked before in the
previous situation is, what is it that you think that we can do
here for the States to make the process easier? I ask that from
the VA side, or DoD side, really.
Mr. Quam. I am going to go back to what some of the
previous speakers mentioned and one of the recommendations I
was making, it is a flow of information. There is information
that is held at the Federal level that needs to be communicated
to the States in order for the States to make really good
decisions.
I will tell a story that I was just told yesterday about
how this works, and it really brought it to light for me, and
that is, one the States who was trying to figure out whether to
put a paramedics training session together needed to know A,
how many paramedics do we need in the State? They had that
information. But B, how many folks do we have coming into the
State who have that training and may be looking for that type
of job? They asked the Federal Government, and part of this
lies with several different Federal agencies.
At the end of the day, the only way they could get that
information was to send a FOIA request to the Federal
Government to get it out. They couldn't get it any other way.
Even the National Governors Association, we did this
demonstration project, we had to also put in a FOIA request to
get the information we were looking for.
So there was some talk about a clearinghouse to have some
of this information in better flow between the Federal silos
amongst themselves, but then the Federal partnership with the
State and local partnership--if we can just get the information
going back and forth, that alone is going to streamline this
process and you get some better policymaking. We would love
your help with that.
Dr. Wenstrup. My first question is, can you compile a list
of the type of information that you need from the Federal
Government that we can help try to expedite so that you can
have this stuff available to you that is appropriate and so you
do not have to go through that.
Mr. Quam. And certainly, from the demonstration project, I
think we have got some very specific information we can look
for, work with you, have your help. Happy to bring that to you,
yes.
Dr. Wenstrup. If you could please forward that to us, we
would be glad to take that information and try and take that
ball and run with it.
Mr. DiGiovanni, there is a sharing of information that we
are talking about. Where do you think the DoD is right now as
far as sharing information that may be necessary, or what
barriers are in your way in the process of sharing information
about the skills of our servicemembers?
Mr. DiGiovanni. Sir, from my several years of working this
issue, the biggest problem for us has been access. So as
military members begin to transition, a lot of people in
industry are looking, so how do we talk to these 250,000
servicemembers that are getting out every year? And I think it
was alluded to in the earlier testimony, but I think the
technical means, the use of social networking capabilities,
Twitter and other types of communication devices allow it to
scale. It is too hard to try to find out individually what
250,000 people, where they are going to go. And a lot of it is
up to the servicemember, do they really want to release that
information, do they know--do they even know where they want to
go yet? So there is a lot of devil in the details when it comes
to that question.
But I think the biggest thing I have seen is just how do we
use maybe technology that allows people to scale and reach out
to them in a way that is voluntary? So if they want to be
contacted, they can opt in and then provide that communication.
Dr. Wenstrup. So you are talking about really the outside
access to these skilled people?
Mr. Quam. Yes, sir. And I think once you do that, then you
do have a database that kind of says those are the people that
are opted in, this is where they want to go and this is the
kind of job they are looking for, which is what we are trying
to do as part of the SkillBridge authority. We are trying to
use that authority to help advertise back and forth.
Servicemembers looking for job field training opportunities and
companies looking for people to train.
Dr. Wenstrup. Connecting the dots.
Mr. DiGiovanni. Yes, sir.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Mr. Takano, you are now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Mr. DiGiovanni, in your testimony, you talk
about how partnerships with community colleges can help student
veterans bridge their military experience to obtain civilian
licenses and credentials. How can community colleges improve
outcomes for new student veterans? And is there any way we can
better incentivize the best practices in this particular area?
Mr. DiGiovanni. Sir, great question. I--one of the things
that we did as we saw the law started to get changed which
opened up that kind of licensing board and flexibility to take
advantage of military training, education and experience,
because we went out and contracted something that I call the
technical data package. What that did is we went and did a deep
dive at those four places, for example, that we are doing
paramedic pipelining. In that technical data package, we
captured how they translated military training and education to
college credit. And we also captured the competency-based exams
they were giving these folks.
So one of the things that we need to do is just, as you
said, get the information out. I mean, it is sitting there. The
States just need to just say, look, does the Federal Government
have anything that has best practices? So that is one thing, it
is really getting the best practice out. I think the second
thing is incentivizing these community colleges in some way to
build these kinds of programs that not only in the healthcare,
but in other areas where we see our military veterans migrating
to.
Mr. Takano. You cite paramedics as an example, but have
they tried other lines of vocations at all?
Mr. DiGiovanni. We haven't, sir. The first study really
took a hard look at healthcare because it was such--there was
this great alignment between what the military is doing and the
private sector, so that was really the first look.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Quam, what are States doing to conduct
meaningful gap analysis of their credentialing requirements
against military training requirements? I think you mentioned
nursing as one example.
Mr. Quam. Nursing was one where the national body does some
licensing, they did it on their own. The States went to them
and they actually partnered together. Some States then went
beyond that, they took what the gap analysis from the National
Association, and then they did their own at the State level.
But the work with some of the those national licensing bodies--
we talk about some of the groups who are trying to create some
more uniformity without a Federal law, it is important to work
with them because they have got the experts to do that initial
gap analysis, and then for the States to come in and apply this
specifically.
I will say this, that with regard to gap analysis and with
regard to all of this, specificity is a key. We tried to do
this for all occupations and all licenses, we tried to take on
everybody and streamline everything. We have found that that
does not work. You have got to really focus on some of the key
industries, the key places where the military training and most
people are coming to get the most bang for the buck and have
the most success.
Mr. Takano. I would agree that you have to look at the key
occupations. Nursing is one of those areas where there is an
independent third-party validation, setting the credential at
least, right?
Mr. Quam. Correct.
Mr. Takano. But, let me ask you this question: I mean, you
talk about the State's role. I respect the State-Federal
distinction. I come from local government as well. But say you
have a strong credentialing body, such as nursing, or physician
assistants, do the States really retain the autonomy to be able
to talk about scope and also set the number of years, say, it
takes to be an RN? Or is it really the National Association
that is doing that?
Mr. Quam. I think for--the National Association has a huge
role to play. This is still legislative and it is law. So at
the end of the day, the States have a very, very strong say.
What you are seeing, though, is that for some of these
professions is, I think it was well-put, finding national
solutions to national problems, not necessarily Federal
solutions to those problems, but national. I think that is an
important distinction. This is one of the reasons, though, why
we are saying the collaboration and cooperation between those
national bodies and the States, that is critical, because there
are some expertise there where States can build off of the work
that has already been done.
Mr. Takano. I would love to be able to engage with you off-
line. I have some further questions about how all this works,
especially with nursing, physicians' assistants. The military
may require less, but some reason they go into the civilian
world they have to do more. Is it really necessary or are there
other factors going on here. My time is up. But it's a topic
that I would like to explore further with you.
Mr. Quam. I would like to have that discussion.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Dr. Wenstrup. Mr. Costello, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. DiGiovanni, I have heard--elsewhere, I've heard through
testimony elsewhere about the TAACCCT program and the need to
improve coordination between DoD and the VA. Could you identify
for me where you think maybe the--I don't want to say problems,
let's say challenges--where the challenges are and what you are
doing to make it more seamless and what, if there is anything
Congress can do, I'll keep it open-ended for you.
Mr. DiGiovanni. Sir, unfortunately I am not the expert on
the TAACCCT program. Most of the areas that I engage in are in
the licensing and credentialing piece. I will take that
question for the record, sir, and I will get an answer back.
But that office is run by Dr. Susan Kelly. And so I really need
to defer to her expertise here, sir.
Mr. Costello. Okay, appreciate that. I yield back.
Dr. Wenstrup. Ms. Rice, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is for Ms.
Gerton, can you--you talk about working with the private sector
in your role to find out--actually, I want to ask you how
closely you work with the private sector to identify what the
workforce needs are, and then how you integrate those needs
into your credentialing program.
Ms. Gerton. Sure. Let me speak generally about the
Department of Labor, and then talk a little bit about what VETS
does specifically. The grants that the Department of Labor
offers through the State workforce system require a very close
integration of local businesses and employers with the
workforce boards, and then the State workforce agency or the
grantees so that the training programs that we allow States to
fund are actually totally integrated in building job pathways,
career pathways for that local economy.
It is very much a sort of a centrally-funded but locally-
executed program, so the local businesses are required members
of the workforce investment boards, and they then drive the
training programs that are offered in those regions so that the
training programs are consistent with the job opportunities in
that area.
One of the powerful ways that the Department of Labor helps
veterans particularly that is the VETS organization works
directly with employers who want to employ veterans, and we
help them take advantage of the public workforce system to
build those job pathways so that they can bring veterans in. So
we teach them how to use job training programs,
apprenticeships, a variety of different workforce-funded
options, to create a career pathway that closes skill gaps for
veterans. That is the first.
The second is that the Department of Labor, through its
network of job centers, can actually work, especially with
transitioning servicemembers, to help them navigate from where
they are separating from the service to where they want to be.
And we have a dislocated worker program. It is a fabulous
program, and definitely not as well-known as it could be for
which transitioning servicemembers qualify for 6 months prior
to separation, and a year afterwards where they can get direct
counseling on the skills that they currently have, how they
might apply to jobs where they want to be, and then be
counseled through the process of filling those skill gaps.
Oftentimes with DOL-funded training DOL, through the dislocated
worker program, may be able to fund the credentialing test that
is required to port that skill to the new State.
There is a great deal of resources here that will link
employer needs, in general, in communities and then
specifically for veterans so that training programs can be
designed through the public workforce system and that
transitioning servicemembers and veterans can take advantage
of.
Ms Rice. Okay. Mr. Quam, my home State of New York has
launched an initiative in 2011 called Experience Counts, which
expanded our State's licensing, and higher education
credentials to better integrate military skills and training.
Now, it is my understanding that over a dozen licenses and
certifications covered under this initiative, and that the
entire State University of New York and City University of New
York system, which was one of the largest State university
systems in the country are participating.
So I know that you were talking about how you don't need to
reinvent the wheel, I think it was number 4 in your list of
five things.
Mr. Quam. Right.
Ms Rice. I had to say, I had to profess ignorance as to
whether we got that idea from someone else, or if it is
something that came from us and should be exported. Are there
other examples like that around the country? How is it that you
facilitate the sharing of information so they don't have to
recreate the wheel?
Mr. Quam. That is a great question. And part of the
demonstration project, I have to compliment the Department of
Labor for all their help with this, is designed to take the
best practices and help us disseminate them. And so an interim
came out just this year, the final report will come out later
this year with the Department of Labor, both the National
Governors Association and the Department will be disseminating
this to all States to share.
As a matter of fact, one possibility is even though we did
six States, it is to fund--if there are funds available, to do
another cohort, to share with another set of States. But we
will be sharing all this information with the governors, with
the State workforce agencies, parts with the veterans--the
folks who handle veterans affairs in each of the States.
It is remarkable how many agencies touch on this issue,
education, workforce, licensing and credentialing, all can be
separate boards. It will be our job to take the information we
find, disseminate it to everybody, and then continue this
discussion, both among the governors and among those folks who
are chiefly responsible for it. DOL will be a critical partner
in getting that done.
Ms Rice. Great, thank you very much.
Dr. Wenstrup. Ms. Radewagen, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
panel for appearing today.
Mr. DiGiovanni, what do you see as the biggest impediment
to achieving better cohesion between military training and
civilian licenses and credentials? It seems to me that it might
be easier for the States and territories to try to conform to
one similar standard for popular licenses and credentials than
to have DoD try to adjust training and procedure for a variety
of different State standards.
Mr. DiGiovanni. So our approach has been primarily market-
driven. So one of the things that we have asked anyone who has
asked, or anyone we talked to from industry is, what is the
goal in certification? What is the goal in licensure? So that
we can advise military members that if you are seeking a career
in, say, metalworking or truck driving, which is pretty simple,
you obviously need a CDL, but one of these kind of
manufacturing or logistics, what are the certifications that if
a military member walked into your H.R. office and you lay that
on the table, that would be exactly the certification they are
looking for.
So from our perspective, we are looking for, again, this
information, but this time, toward the Department, to help
better inform our military members, what certifications and
licensures matter, particularly in the kinds of jobs that they
are looking for.
I think we also not really trying to, the military to date,
has not taken on the task of trying to do the gap training
themselves. They do have a military requirement, and then they
train and educate those military servicemembers to the specific
requirements of the Department. And then what we have done is
then provide them with information mechanisms to find out what
the gaps are and then help them locate where they can get those
gaps filled. And so that is--it has kind of been that process
and also that demand-driven process, what is the marketplace
looking for as far as licensing and credentialing?
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you. Ms. Gerton, it is nice it see you
again. Understanding the results of the NGA study on
credentialing are not final, but what are other steps that you
think we should take to incentivize States and the territories
to pass laws and regulations that account for skills and
training that servicemembers already have when looking at
licensing and credentialing standards?
Ms. Gerton. I think there are a number of initiatives
already on the table. The interim report is out there, and it
does lay out in draft form the blueprint that Mr. Quam talked
about. We would certainly encourage those on the committee to
take the report back to your home States and share those
results, as we have already posted it out to the State
workforce agencies, so they can begin working on it.
And career pathways and job-driven training are a huge
focus of the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act. I think
that there is an opportunity here for us to continue the type
of grants that TAACCCT and Ready To Work and some of the other
labor grants represent that encourage innovation in this space,
and encourage the development of innovation, particularly
course curricula as a result of the TAACCCT grant that is
shared in the public domain, so that other folks who wanted to
pick that curriculum up already have that written. That is a
prerequisite of the TAACCCT grant.
I think there is that. And I think another key piece is
increasing the capacity in the workforce system to do this kind
of counseling and training because to answer one of
Representative Takano's earlier questions about the cost of
credentialing, some of those costs are already covered in the
public workforce system. We don't need to replicate those
costs, we can, by referring folks through the public workforce
system, have some training paid for, some of their costs and
credentialing paid for, and have individual counseling for them
that helps them leverage the variety of these different kinds
of tools. This is especially critical for veterans as we
approach this issue.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Dr. Wenstrup. If there are no other questions, I want to
thank you all for answering our questions today, and you are
now excused. And I think we have a lot of valuable information
out of this hearing today. I thank you all for your presence.
I want to thank everyone for joining us today. It is
important that our servicemembers and veterans have a seamless
transition into civilian jobs, and especially ones that they
are qualified for due to their military service. A major part
of this is getting a licensing and credentialing process right.
So I thank you for your input.
I look forward to all of us continuing to work together on
this as we move forward. Again, I thank the members and all of
you here today for participating.
And finally, I ask unanimous consent that all members have
5 legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and
include extraneous material. Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:59 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement of Roy Swift

Workcred, an affiliate of the American National Standards
Institute
[emailprotected]
; 202.331.3617
My name is Roy Swift and I am executive director of
Workcred, an affiliate of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI).
ANSI is the coordinator of the U.S. standards and
conformity assessment system, and Workcred is a separate
501(c)(3) affiliate organization whose mission is to strengthen
workforce quality by improving workforce credentials and the
credentialing system. Before launching Workcred, I spent the
previous ten years building ANSI's internationally recognized
accreditation programs for personnel certificate and
certification programs.
It is important to note that Workcred maintains a
separation from and respects the impartiality of ANSI's
accreditation services. Nevertheless, both organizations share
an ongoing commitment to fostering a more robust and qualified
American workforce, and enhancing the quality of credentials
for both military and civilian personnel.
As a retired United States Army colonel who served a 28-
year career in the U.S. Army Medical Department, I am deeply
honored to testify today on the credentialing of servicemembers
and veterans.
U.S. military personnel gain valuable training, skills, and
at times do earn civilian credentials during their service.
Credentials can contribute to personal and professional career
development and enhance the potential for promotion for
servicemembers on active duty. After military service,
credentials can help demonstrate to civilian employers that
training and skills attained in the military are on par with
those gained through traditional civilian pathways.
Unfortunately, many servicemembers that have earned a
military occupational specialty are often not licensed or
certified to perform a comparable job in the civilian
workforce. This situation creates an artificial barrier to
employment for veterans. With an estimated 250,000 military
personnel expected to leave service every year, the need to
translate military skills into civilian careers is as important
as ever.
But we face a tremendous challenge. There are more than
4,000 certifications in the U.S., and less than ten percent of
these are accredited or reviewed by a third-party accreditation
body. This lack of third-party review creates a ``buyer
beware'' environment because most certifications would not meet
a national or international standard. In fact, many self-
identified ``certifications'' are actually educational programs
with a test to measure learning outcomes and are not
competency-based assessments of the individual's ability to
perform in the workplace. Certification must be fire-walled
away from education to be a third-party judgment that
competencies have been acquired. Certification must be time
limited and have the ability to take away the certification for
unethical behavior or incompetence.
Accreditation is an independent, third-party assessment of
a certification body's competency to perform the functions as I
have just stated, and it plays an important role in increasing
the credibility and continuous quality improvement of
certifications.
ANSI's accreditation process is designed to increase the
integrity and mobility of certified professionals, and provide
confidence to the marketplace that they are competent. Millions
of professionals currently hold certifications from ANSI-
accredited certification bodies. In ANSI's view, the global
nature of personnel certification demands accreditation to
international standards. That's why ANSI's accreditation
program is based on the American National Standard (ANS) and
international standard ANSI/ISO/IEC 17024. And that's why ANSI
was the first U.S. accreditation body to deliver this
accreditation in accordance with the requirements of ISO/IEC
17011, another international standard that represents the
highest globally accepted practices for accreditation bodies.
This 17011 standard is also the basis for mutual
recognition of accreditation bodies in countries around the
world. This assures that credentials--just like products and
quality management systems--are seen as equivalent and are
transportable across borders, broadening the global labor
market and opportunities for both employers and employees.
With respect to veterans' employability, ANSI has long been
an active leader in working with the government on private-
sector credentialing solutions. For example, the military's
Credentialing Opportunities On-Line (COOL) programs and the
Department of Labor highlight ANSI accreditation.
With a broader vision, Workcred is focused on building a
competency-driven workforce credentialing ecosystem. We want to
create alignment between industry, training, and credentialing
organizations. This will advance quality workforce credentials
that have validity and are market valued, and will promote an
open, transparent exchange of information. And an associated
benefit to society should be to reduce unemployment by
narrowing the ``Skills Gap.'' ANSI and Workcred, in
collaboration with the American Legion, were instrumental in
working with the Army's Training and Doctrine Command to
identify high quality, industry-recognized credentials relevant
to Army Soldiers as candidates for Army credentialing pilot
programs.
Together with partners from George Washington University
and Southern Illinois University, Workcred has just launched
the Credential Transparency Initiative to create greater
clarity in the U.S. credentialing marketplace. Funded by Lumina
Foundation, the initiative will develop common terms for
describing key features of credentials. It will create a
voluntary, web-based registry for sharing the resulting
information. And it will test practical software applications
for employers, students, educators, and other major credential
stakeholders like the U.S. Department of Defense. The registry
holds great promise to make civilian credentials more
transparent. For example: DoD, in cooperation with partners
such as the American Council on Education (ACE), could use an
``app'' to more efficiently connect Military Occupational
Specialty (MOS) competencies to credentials in the civilian job
market.
All Americans have a stake in a strong and effective labor
market credentialing system--especially our nation's military
servicemembers. Both ANSI and Workcred are committed to
supporting the employability and successful transition of
military servicemembers into the workforce. We look forward to
continuing to partner with the military, government agencies,
and groups like the American Legion to advance this effort.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.

About Workcred

Formed in 2014 as an affiliate of the American National
Standards Institute, Workcred is a nonprofit organization whose
mission is to strengthen workforce quality by improving the
credentialing system, ensuring its ongoing relevance, and
preparing employers, workers, educators, and governments to use
it effectively. www.workcred.org.

About ANSI

ANSI is a private, non-profit organization that administers
and coordinates the U.S. voluntary standards and conformity
assessment system. In this role, the Institute oversees the
development and use of voluntary consensus standards by
accrediting the procedures used by standards developing
organizations, and approving their finished documents as
American National Standards.
Internationally, the Institute is the official U.S.
representative to the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) and, via the U.S. National Committee, the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). ANSI's
membership is comprised of businesses, government agencies,
professional societies and trade associations, standards
developing organizations (SDOs), and consumer and labor
organizations.
The Institute represents the diverse interests of more than
125,000 companies and organizations and 3.5 million
professionals worldwide. ANSI works closely with stakeholders
from both industry and government to identify consensus-based
solutions to national and global priorities--an inclusive,
collaborative partnership between the public and private
sectors. www.ansi.org.

Statement on Federal Grants and Contracts

Dr. Roy Swift is presenting this testimony on behalf of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the ANSI
affiliate organization, Workcred.
While ANSI has not directly received any Federal grants and
contracts within the previous two fiscal years that are
relevant to the subject matter of this testimony, we have
partnered on some projects that are supported by grant money,
and we have relationships with agencies that we wish to
disclose as relevant. These include:

The Department of Energy (DOE) working with
the National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS) and
industry stakeholders developed the Better Buildings
Workforce Guidelines, voluntary national guidelines to
improve the quality and consistency of commercial
building workforce credentials for four key energy-
related jobs: Building Energy Auditor, Building
Commissioning Professional, Building Operations
Professional, Energy Manager. ANSI is designated as an
accreditation body for these schemes by DOE. ANSI is a
subcontractor to NIBS for this initiative, which did
receive funding from DOE; however, this funding was not
provided directly to ANSI by DOE. The certifications
are part of a coordinated effort under DOE's Guidelines
for Home Energy Professionals project, which also
developed Standard Work Specifications (SWS) for Home
Energy Upgrades, available at sws.nrel.gov.

ANSI and the Interstate Renewable Energy
Council (IREC) developed a joint accreditation program
for energy efficiency or renewable energy related
certificate programs. This initiative was funded by DOE
grant money; however, this funding was not provided
directly to ANSI by DOE.

ANSI's Certificate Accreditation Program (CAP)
has accredited three federal agencies: the U.S. Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the FBI Academy, and the
U.S. Army Combat Readiness/Safety Center. These
agencies paid accreditation fees but did not enter into
grants or contracts with ANSI.

Workcred does not have any Federal grants or contracts to
disclose.

Statement of Jamie P. Merisotis

Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Takano, members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify this
afternoon. I very much appreciate the opportunity to speak with
you about licensing and credentialing issues and how they
relate to members of the armed services and military veterans.
These issues are vital, not just to the millions of individuals
who are directly affected, but to the growing demand for talent
that will impact our entire nation and its future.
I am Jamie Merisotis, President and CEO of Lumina
Foundation, a private foundation based in Indianapolis. Lumina
is the nation's largest private foundation focused specifically
on increasing students' access to and success in postsecondary
education. I've been at Lumina since 2008, and throughout my
tenure, we've been working toward one specific, clearly focused
goal. We call it Goal 2025.
The goal, simply stated, is this: By the year 2025, we want
60 percent of Americans to hold a college degree, certificate
or other high-quality postsecondary credential. We are
convinced that this level of educational attainment is a
national necessity--that it's the only way to ensure that our
nation can thrive in today's dynamic, global economy. And we
are not alone in this view. Labor economists and other experts
tell us that the overwhelming majority of new jobs require some
form of postsecondary credential--as will two-thirds of ALL
jobs in this country by the end of this decade.
Unfortunately, only about 40 percent of Americans now hold
at least a two-year degree, with perhaps another 5 percent
holding a quality credential at the sub-associate-degree level.
That's a long way from the 60 percent goal that we're working
toward, which means we're a long way from having the strong,
flexible, well-prepared workforce this nation needs to succeed
in the 21st century.
Certainly, servicemembers and military veterans are a
growing and increasingly vital part of the dynamic workforce
that this country so desperately needs. They are now returning
from service and entering postsecondary programs in large
numbers--and that represents a tremendous opportunity for our
nation's future. Our servicemembers and veterans are a huge
economic and social asset--a rich source of talent that can
move America forward by great strides. Unfortunately, the vast
potential of these dedicated individuals is not being fully
realized, in part because of barriers imposed by the issues
this subcommittee is here today to explore: issues related to
education credentialing.
At Lumina, we've done a lot of work in the credentialing
area in recent years--work that stems directly from our
commitment to the Goal 2025 effort I just mentioned. When we
committed to that goal, we realized very quickly that things
would have to change significantly for the nation's attainment
rate to reach 60 percent. Simply put, we realized that our
nation's postsecondary system would have to be redesigned so it
could serve far more students than ever before--including
millions of military veterans and active duty servicemembers--
and serve them better.
In short, our higher education needs to change because our
students have changed--dramatically.
Today, there are more than 20 million people enrolled in
the nation's two- and four-year institutions, including over 1
million military veterans. A sizable majority of these 20
million Americans--including all of the veterans and
servicemembers--are students who do not fit the profile of a
traditional college student. About 40 percent are 25 years old
or older. More than one-third attend part time, and nearly 20
percent are holding down full-time jobs as they attend college.
About 40 percent of today's students attend community colleges
or for-profit schools--and this is true of a much higher
percentage of first-generation students, and those who are
African American or Latino, and those who come from low-income
families. If traditional students are those that go to college
directly from high school and attend full-time, that's less
than a third of today's students. Those who are also identified
as a dependent on their parent's tax return and live on campus
are an even smaller percentage. I would argue that federal
policy has been overwhelmingly focused on students who are a
small and shrinking share of all the students and potential
students we should be considering. When more than three out of
four students are considered ``non-traditional,'' it's time to
rethink some of our assumptions.
Today's veterans are a window into who today's students
really are. They are older. They have significant work and life
experiences. Many of today's students, including most veterans,
are working adults, with responsibilities and commitments that
extend far beyond the classroom.
In other words, today's ``typical'' student, if such a
thing even exists, is nothing like the student that higher
education was originally designed to serve and that federal
policy is based on. That means it's time--past time, really--
for a redesign. What we need is a system that is structured
specifically to meet the varied needs of today's students--a
system that is flexible, affordable and committed to quality.
Fundamentally, a commitment to quality boils down to one
thing: assuring that educational programs result in genuine
learning--that they give students the knowledge, skills and
abilities they need to succeed in the modern workplace and in
life. Unfortunately, most postsecondary programs aren't set up
to assure genuine learning. Students earn their degrees and
credentials, not by demonstrating actual knowledge or skills,
but by earning a specified number of credits by spending a
certain number of hours in classrooms or labs.
Again, the approach here is institution-centric; it's not
designed around the needs of students. That has to change. We
need a student-centered system--one in which credits and
credentials are awarded, not when a certain amount of time is
served, but when the proper knowledge and skills are
demonstrated.
In short, we need a system that recognizes and rewards
actual learning--and it shouldn't matter where or how that
learning is obtained. The knowledge, skills and abilities that
individuals develop in non-academic settings--on the job, in
volunteer roles, and certainly during military service--all of
this learning matters. And that means it all needs to count.
Students should be credited for that learning, be able to apply
it toward a postsecondary credential, and be assured that that
credential will be recognized when they seek employment or
further education.
If there's one barrier to postsecondary success facing our
returning veterans, that's it: being recognized for what
they've learned while in service. Any workable redesign of
higher education must address this barrier. It starts with
embracing what educators often call students' ``prior
learning.'' Institutions and states must find better ways to
assess this learning, grant academic credit for it, and include
it in the record that qualifies a student for a credential.
Awarding credit for prior learning is critically important,
but our work has shown it is not enough. Like you, we have
concluded that we must find ways to better integrate and
organize the often-bewildering array of education credentials
being offered.
There are myriad credentials in today's postsecondary
landscape, including degrees, educational certificates,
occupational licenses and industry certifications. New types of
credentials, such as digital badges and enhanced transcripts,
are also emerging. However, there's little clarity about what
these various credentials actually mean--their value, their
quality and how they connect.
The confusion isn't really surprising; it merely reflects
the unstructured development of the U.S. credentialing
marketplace over many decades. That marketplace is now a
complex, loosely connected collection of education and training
providers, personnel certification bodies, accreditation
organizations and federal/state regulatory agencies and boards.
The result: a highly fragmented, multi-layered system that
presents major challenges for anyone attempting to obtain a
credential to get a better job or advance their career, as well
as employers and education providers who need to compare and
evaluate different credentials. In short, we have an ever-
growing group of providers offering a vast array of credentials
that don't always connect--to each other, to other educational
opportunities, or to careers.
We need a credentialing system that does connect--one that
actually functions as a system, not as a group of disparate
parts. We need a system with common definitions--one that
engenders trust and facilitates student movement and progress,
much like a currency exchange enables international financial
transactions.
At Lumina, a great deal of our recent work has been focused
on reimagining and helping to build this type of interconnected
system. In fact, we have helped forge a growing partnership of
national organizations--more than 80 so far--that have begun a
national dialogue on this important topic.
Some of our thinking about how to improve the system is
presented in a brief report that is included with your copies
of this testimony--a report titled Connecting Credentials:
Making the Case for Reforming the U.S. Credentialing System.
I won't go into too much detail here about that report, but
I do want to highlight one important section. It's a list of
the five key attributes that the reshaped American
credentialing system should have.

First, it should be easily understandable. All
postsecondary credentials--from badges to degrees and
beyond--should be based on competencies, making them
easier to understand and use by students, employers,
educators and workforce agencies.

Second, it should assure quality. Users must
be able to rely on the quality of credentials,
including their accuracy in representing the
competencies possessed by a credential holder.

Third, the revamped credentialing system
should be up to date. Credentials should be continually
updated and validated to ensure they stay relevant to
employer needs.

Fourth, it should be interconnected. All
students should understand how credentials connect and
be able to see several pathways to increase career and
economic mobility. Users also must be able to combine
credentials to fit their needs and inform their
education-career planning, including job transitions.

Finally, it should enable comparisons.
Stakeholders must be able to compare the value of
various credentials and determine which credential best
fits their needs.

Clearly, a system with these five attributes would be of
enormous benefit to military veterans as they make the
transition to civilian life. It would make their educational
and career pathways much more clear--thus saving time and
helping to ensure the best return on the investment of public
dollars for education benefits.
Such a system would convey other benefits as well; these
are detailed in the Connecting Credentials report, which I
commend to your attention. I also urge you to visit a website
that we've established to provide a platform for the national
dialogue that I mentioned earlier. The website is called
connectingcredentials.org.
I want to make it clear that neither our current
credentials system nor the stronger, revamped system I am
describing is a federal system in any way, shape, or form.
However, the effort to improve postsecondary credentialing is
one that will require concerted action by a range of
stakeholders--including the federal government.
The federal government has supported credentials reform
through its leadership, funding and participation in research.
There is more to be learned and there are already discussions
underway to test approaches to supporting and funding a more
inclusive system of credentialing for all students. As I noted
above, while the need for the reforms is clear for all
students, it is especially so for veterans and servicemembers.
I am glad to see that you, too, are considering approaches to
break down these barriers and find ways to recognize already-
achieved learning and skills.
I have thought a lot about these issues in recent years,
particularly the need to recognize skills and knowledge
whenever, wherever, and however they have been obtained. In
fact, in my new book America Needs Talent, published this month
by RosettaBooks, I endeavor to show how the national need to
develop and recognize talent is driven by more than meeting the
growing demand for educational and economic opportunity, as
vitally important as that is. I argue that our economic and
social future as a nation will in large measure be determined
by our ability to build a system that expands talent. There is
no better place to start than by assuring that the talent of
our veterans is recognized, that they obtain appropriate
credentials for what they know and can do, and that they have
opportunities to develop their talent for the benefit of
themselves, their families, their communities, and the nation.
I needn't tell you that these men and women deserve our
very best efforts--and that we as a nation can gain
immeasurably by giving them every opportunity to succeed. I
stand ready to answer any questions and would be happy to
provide further information on the work we are pursuing in this
area.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to offer testimony to
the Subcommittee this afternoon.
Thank you.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Statement of Teresa W. Gerton

Introduction

Good afternoon, Chairman Wenstrup, Ranking Member Takano,
and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
the opportunity to participate in today's hearing. As Acting
Assistant Secretary for Veterans' Employment and Training at
the Department of Labor's (DOL or Department) Veterans'
Employment and Training Service (VETS), I appreciate the
opportunity to discuss the Department's efforts on licensing
and credentialing for veterans and servicemembers.
Facilitating veteran attainment of licensing and
credentialing is one of the Department's most important and
challenging objectives. Addressing this requires joint efforts
between Federal agencies, state licensing boards and
educational institutions, and the private sector to eliminate
the barriers between military and civilian occupations.
Ultimately, authority for regulating entry into most
professions lies with state governments. Although federal
agencies and national professional associations can propose
standards and guidelines, state licensing boards make final
decisions about whether alternative pathways, such as military
training and experience, are adequate to uphold public safety
standards, based on professional norms and state laws and
regulations. Governors and states are addressing this through
Executive Orders and legislation directing licensing boards to
recognize and award credit for veterans' military training and
experience. Since 2010, all 50 states and Puerto Rico have
enacted some form of legislation assisting active duty
servicemembers and veterans in transferring and obtaining
occupational licenses and certifications.
In April of this year, Secretary Perez attended the
American Legion's National Credentialing Summit to address a
crowd of credentialing experts and advocates for veterans and
military spouses. The group had gathered to explore connections
between military experience and civilian credentials. At this
meeting, Secretary Perez said, ``We owe it to our veterans to
break down the barriers to employment that they too often face
as they reintegrate into civilian life.'' The Department is
following through on that commitment.
Servicemembers are trained in hundreds of occupations with
relevance to employment opportunities in the civilian workforce
and veterans should easily be able to turn that training and
work experience into civilian jobs. However, many civilian
occupations have highly formalized pathways for entry,
requiring licenses or certifications that present barriers to
employment for those trained outside of those pathways. Despite
the highly relevant skills and experience veterans possess,
state- or locally-established requirements often require re-
training outside of the military.
VETS, in close collaboration with our colleagues in the
Department's Employment and Training Administration has been,
and will continue to be, actively working to eliminate these
barriers and connect military training and experience with
civilian credentials and licenses. The Department is currently
engaged in a number of efforts and programs to address this
important issue, including: initiatives conducted in
partnership with other Federal agencies; activities authorized
under the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA); a
Licensing and Credentialing Demonstration; and the President's
Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 Budget.

Cross-Agency Federal Initiatives

Since 2011, the Department has been an active participant
in a number of initiatives to enhance the civilian career
prospects of servicemembers and veterans. These include the
First Lady's Joining Forces Initiative, the Veterans'
Employment Initiative Task Force implemented by the Departments
of Defense (DoD) and Veterans Affairs (VA), the DoD
Credentialing and Licensing Task Force, a joint effort between
the Department and VA to streamline access to GI Bill benefits
for veterans in registered apprenticeships, the Pilot Program
on Civilian Credentialing for Military Occupational Specialties
implemented by DoD and the military services, and the Military
to Mariner Transition initiative of DOL with the Departments of
Defense, Transportation, and Homeland Security. It is through
federal partnerships such as these that we have been able to
begin addressing gaps in licensing and credentialing for
servicemembers and veterans at the federal level. Additionally,
the Military to Mariner Transition initiative seeks to identify
and remove the barriers that prevent servicemembers from
attaining the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG)--National Maritime Center
(NMC) credentials necessary to qualify for employment as
merchant mariners.
Initiatives such as these show how, through inter-agency
partnerships, we can identify needed licenses and credentials
in the civilian sector, link them to related military
occupations, and bridge the gaps in training and licensing
requirements for transitioning servicemembers and veterans.

Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act (WIOA)

The Department offers veterans, transitioning
servicemembers, and eligible military spouses the opportunity
to receive a range of career and training services through the
nationwide network of local American Job Centers that are part
of the public workforce system authorized under WIOA. WIOA
emphasizes engaging employers across the public workforce
system to align training with needed skills and match employers
with qualified workers. The law also emphasizes training that
leads to industry recognized post-secondary credentials and
promotes the use of career pathways and sector partnerships to
increase employment in in-demand industries and occupations.
American Job Centers, also known as One-Stop Career Centers,
bring together various Federal, state, and local programs to
assist veterans in obtaining credentials and entering into or
advancing within in-demand occupations. Veterans and eligible
spouses receive priority of service. Available career services
under WIOA include job-search and job-placement assistance,
access to useful labor market information, career counseling,
comprehensive assessment of an individual's employability, and
the development of an individual employment plan. Veterans,
transitioning servicemembers, and eligible spouses may also be
eligible for DOL-funded training services, which include
occupational training, work-based training (including
Registered Apprenticeship and on-the-job training), and
supportive services including assistance with child care and
transportation. Areas with a higher than average demand for
employment and training activities for dislocated military
servicemembers and eligible spouses are eligible for National
Dislocated Worker Grants.
Community colleges are a key partner of the public
workforce system: they are eligible providers in Adult,
Dislocated Worker and Youth program formula grants under WIOA
and part of the partnerships eligible for grant under a number
of strategic DOL investments because of their unique ability to
address specific community workforce needs. The Trade
Adjustment Assistance Community and Career Training (TAACCT)
grants program, an Administration flagship investment of $2
billion over four years, is one example of funds targeted to
community colleges nationwide to help them enhance their
capacity to develop skills training programs in in-demand
occupations and industries that will result in industry-
recognized credentials and employment. The TAACCT program has
enrolled more than 11,500 veterans through September 30, 2014.

DOL Licensing and Credentialing Demo

Section 237 of the Veterans' Opportunity to Work to Hire
Heroes Act of 2011 (VOW Act) required DOL to carry out a
demonstration project on credentialing ``for the purpose of
facilitating the seamless transition of members of the Armed
Forces from service on active duty to civilian employment.''
Recognizing that the authority to regulate entry into most
professions lies with the states, DOL funded the demonstration
project with the intent to both engage governors in an effort
to accelerate credentialing and licensing pathways for veterans
and to move veterans into civilian employment by reducing or
eliminating barriers to credentials, certifications, or
licenses requiring similar skills, training, or experience
within a select number of military occupations. A cost study
will also examine savings to federal programs, which may be
achieved when a veteran completes an accelerated pathway
towards licensure instead of a duplicative training under a
full-length pathway.
Through a contract with the National Governors' Association
(NGA), the Department explored accelerated career pathways for
servicemembers and veterans in selected high-demand civilian
occupations, (i.e. truck driving, law enforcement, and
healthcare support). Working with a panel of experts, NGA
designed and implemented a demonstration project in six
participating states: Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Nevada,
Virginia, and Wisconsin.
During this demonstration NGA identified the following
challenges regarding state efforts to design, establish, and
improve strategies for accelerated pathways:

Veterans with equivalent training and
experience as licensed civilians may have difficulty
providing documentation recognized by civilian
licensing boards.

Veterans that experience gaps between their
military training and experience and civilian
requirements may have to participate in duplicative
training to attain relevant civilian licensure and/or
certification.

Administrative rules and processes within
civilian licensing and credentialing systems may create
hurdles for veterans to obtain licensure and/or
certification unrelated to their ability to competently
provide professional services to the public.

In turn, the demonstration identified several strategies
that states may utilize to streamline the licensing and
certification of veterans, including:

To address documentation challenges, states
can license veterans by endorsement, or permit veterans
with relevant training to sit for civilian licensure
examinations.

To address training gaps, states can work with
educational institutions to set up new accelerated
programs for veterans that bridge gaps, or provide
veterans advanced standing in existing programs.

To address administrative or procedural
challenges, states can assess any non-skill related
requirements that may disadvantage veterans such as
fees or length of experience, or take steps to make
civilian employment pathways friendlier to veterans
through concerted outreach to both veterans and
prospective employers.

DOL, with the support of NGA, will share the best practices
identified through the demonstration project in a final report
that includes a blueprint for other states to follow as well as
the results of the cost study.

Raising Awareness of Translating Military Skills to Civilian
Employment

Under Section 222 of the VOW Act, the Department also
entered into a contract for a study to identify equivalences
between the skills developed by members of the Armed Forces
through various military occupational specialties (MOS) and the
qualifications required for related positions in the civilian
workforce.
The project studied 68 military occupations that engage a
significant portion of each service's overall population, and
which represent the occupations of 57 percent of all enlisted
servicemembers. The study resulted in the creation of a more
robust military to civilian crosswalk for those 68 MOSs, and
identified additional information on the nature of the matches
with regard to rank attained and length of military service.
The enhanced crosswalk provides numerous additional career
options for military servicemembers and veterans to consider,
is integrated in DOL and VA online job search tools for
veterans, and is available to other web developers. These tools
also link to information on related civilian certification and
licensing requirements. The study report was transmitted to
Congress in September 2014.
In addition, the Department, together with the Department
of the Treasury and the Council of Economic Advisers, recently
released a report which highlights the growth in occupational
licensing, its effects on the labor market and on
servicemembers, veterans, and military families in particular,
and suggests several best practices to improve licensing
policies.

FY 2016 President's Budget

The President's FY2016 Budget proposes a number of
investments that would help veterans overcome transition and
employment challenges. Among those is a $400 million increase
to the Wagner-Peyser State Grants to expand the availability of
intensive, staff-assisted counseling and other reemployment
services to displaced workers, including veterans. These staff-
assisted services will include the use of workforce and labor
market information to guide participants in their job search
and training decisions, as well as other assessment tools and
resources to assist individuals identify occupations in in-
demand industries.
The President's Budget also includes a $100 million
increase for Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessments
(RESEA) for Unemployment Insurance (UI) claimants. This $181
million program would build on the successes of the evidence-
based RESEA initiative. RESEA pairs UI eligibility assessments
with reemployment services. Under the Budget proposal, RESEA
would be made available to all transitioning veterans receiving
Unemployment Compensation for ex-servicemembers in addition to
the top one-third of UI recipients profiled as most likely to
exhaust their benefits.
Additionally, a number of states have taken action in
recent years to identify and address unnecessary licensing
barriers. Such steps are critical to ensuring economic
opportunity and geographic mobility for servicemembers,
veterans and their families. To encourage even more states to
follow suit, the President's Budget proposes $15 million to
support states in these efforts. This would serve to increase
interstate portability of licenses, reduce or remove other
unnecessary barriers to employment, and provide easier access
to high-quality jobs.

Conclusion

The Department of Labor remains committed to our
servicemembers and veterans and looks forward to working with
the Committee to ensure the continued success of our efforts to
properly recognize the value of military training and
experience. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify
today, and I am happy to answer any questions you may have at
this time.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

For the Record

Chairman Wenstrup and Ranking Member Takano:
Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony for your
subcommittee's hearing entitled, ``A Review of Licensing and
Credentialing Standards for Servicemembers and Veterans: Do
Barriers Still Remain?''
The National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN) is
an independent, non-profit association comprising 59 boards of
nursing (BONs) from across the U.S., the District of Columbia
and four U.S. territories. BONs are responsible for protecting
the public through regulation of licensure, nursing practice
and discipline of the 5.2 million registered nurses (RNs),
licensed practical/vocational (LPN/VNs) and advanced practice
registered nurses (APRNs) in the U.S. with active licenses, in
addition to the approval of prelicensure nursing education
programs in the U.S. NCSBN was created by these boards of
nursing to act and counsel with one another and to lessen the
burden of government. The mission of NCSBN is to provide
education, service and research through collaborative
leadership to promote evidence-based regulatory excellence for
patient safety and public protection. Through NCSBN, BONs can
work together on policy matters that will affect the future of
nursing and healthcare.
The 2013 White House report, ``The Fast Track to Civilian
Employment: Streamlining Credentialing and Licensing for
Servicemembers, Veterans and Their Spouses'', encourages states
to support legislative efforts that will transition veterans
into the civilian workplace. NCSBN wholeheartedly joins these
efforts valuing the contributions veterans have made in the
military by acknowledging their training and experience. NCSBN
supports federal and state legislation that will help veterans
safely and competently enter civilian careers in nursing.
Recently, there has been an emphasis placed on
transitioning military medics, corpsmen and airmen to civilian
roles as LPN/VNs. NCSBN staff, with consultation from leading
experts in the areas of nursing and military education,
conducted an in-depth analysis of the healthcare specialist
(medic), corpsman and airman curricula, and compared these with
a standard LPN/VN curriculum. The following are key findings
and recommendations that will be helpful for policymakers
introducing legislation related to this topic.
LPN/VN education is different than the training received by
healthcare specialists (medics), corpsmen or airmen. NCSBN
encourages legislation that supports the development of LPN/VN
bridge programs allowing healthcare specialists (medics),
corpsmen and airmen to receive credit for the knowledge,
skills, and abilities they acquired in the military, and
recommends focusing content on gaps in knowledge, the nursing
process, and differences between the military and LPN/VN roles
and scope of practice.
NCSBN and BONs are working with many groups to address
different aspects of this project and should be involved in any
discussions regarding this endeavor so that it can assist in
assuring that veterans have a safe and smooth transition into a
career in nursing.
Additionally, NCSBN has supported the continued inclusion
of the NCLEX-RN and NCLEX-PN (National Council Licensure
Examination) to the qualified list of non-federal government
licensure/certification examinations by the Department of
Veterans Affairs. The NCLEX is the nationally recognized exam
taken by RN and LP/VN graduates to ensure every licensed nurse
has met state education requirements and is competent to
practice nursing safely. The inclusion of the NCLEX allows for
eligible veterans and their dependents (as defined by the
Department of Veterans Affairs) to be reimbursed for the cost
of test(s) given to qualify an individual for a vocational
license or certificate. Currently, qualifying veteran
candidates have no limit as to the number of times the exam can
be taken.
NCSBN also strives to offer providers the opportunity to
practice safely and competently across state lines without
undue licensure burdens. One way that we have worked to
facilitate interstate mobility of nurses is through our Nurse
Licensure Compact (NLC), an interstate compact that allows a
nurse to have one multistate license (in his or her state of
residency) that grants the privilege to practice in other NLC
participating states (both physically and electronically),
subject to each state's practice laws and regulations. NCSBN
launched the NLC in 2000 in an effort to expand the mobility of
nurses as part of our nation's healthcare delivery system.
Currently, 25 U.S. states have adopted the NLC. That number is
expected to grow in the coming years as the states begin to
adopt a newly enhanced version that addresses concerns raised
by states that have not yet joined.
In addition to the NLC, we have also developed a compact
that would facilitate interstate license portability for APRNs,
who are increasingly delivering primary care and helping with
chronic disease management via telehealth. The APRN Compact
maintains most of the same principles as the NLC, including a
mutual recognition licensing model that would allow an APRN to
practice in any participating state with just one license.
BONs under the NLC facilitate interstate cooperation and
coordination through participation in NCSBN's Nursys program,
the only national database currently available for verification
of nurse licensure and discipline for RNs, LPN/VNs and APRNs.
Nursys allows access to the status of a nurse's license and
provides information about any history of discipline.
Ultimately, the NLC and the APRN Compact create the
necessary legal structure that requires BONs to report and
share license and discipline information with one another, a
key component to ensuring nurse competency and patient safety
across the country.
NCSBN looks forward to continuing to work with the
Committee, veterans, and other stakeholders to address issues
involving veterans and their efforts to become a civilian
licensed nurse. We appreciate the opportunity to provide
testimony on this important issue. If you have any questions or
need any additional information, please do not hesitate to
contact us. Elliot Vice, NCSBN's Director of Government
Affairs, can be reached at
[emailprotected]
and 202-530-4830. We
look forward to continuing the dialogue with you on this very
important issue.
Sincerely,

Kathy Apple, MS, RN, FAAN,

Chief Executive Officer

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
