- THE STATE OF VA'S FISCAL YEAR 2015 BUDGET

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE STATE OF VA'S FISCAL YEAR 2015 BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JUNE 25, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-29

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
98-646                          WASHINGTON : 2016
______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American
Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, June 25, 2015

Page

The State of VA'S Fiscal Year 2015 Budget........................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Jeff Miller, Chairman............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    39
Corrine Brown, Ranking Member....................................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    41

WITNESSES

Hon. Sloan Gibson, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    41

Accompanied by:

James Tuchschmidt, M.D., Interim Principal Deputy Under
Secretary for Health, Veterans Health Administration,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
Edward Murray, Acting Assistant Secretary for Management and
Interim Chief Financial Officer, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs,

And

Gregory Giddens, Principal Executive Director, Office of
Acquisitions, Logistics, and Construction, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

THE STATE OF VA'S FISCAL YEAR 2015 BUDGET

----------

Thursday, June 25, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 11:04 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Walorski, Abraham,
Zeldin, Costello, Radewagen, Bost, Brown, Takano, Brownley,
Titus, Ruiz, Kuster, O'Rourke, Rice, Walz, and McNerney.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JEFF MILLER

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. I want to
thank everybody for coming today to talk about the state of
VA's fiscal year 2015 budget. Members, I called this hearing
two weeks ago following a series of concerning and inconsistent
reports from veterans and Department of Veterans Affairs
employees around the country about the current state of VA
funding. I don't believe anybody was aware then of the
troubling extent of VA's current budget crisis, except maybe
those in the central office. And, unfortunately, I suspect that
had I not called this hearing, we would still not be aware
today of the $2.6 billion funding shortfall that the Veterans
Health Administration is currently estimating, largely as a
result of increased veteran demand for non-VA care and rising
costs of hepatitis C treatments that VA did not properly plan
for or manage.
Given the extensive pent-up demand for care that was
exposed during last year's hearings on wait time manipulation,
VA had ample time to adjust its budgetary needs with the Office
of Management and Budget to prevent what we are now seeing
today. February through April of this year, Secretary McDonald
appeared at four separate budget hearings. Since those have
concluded, the Secretary and I have met and spoken regularly on
a number of important emerging issues. At no point in those
discussions or hearings has the Secretary expressed to me that
the Department had a budget shortfall of a magnitude of $2.6
billion, one that threatens VA's ability to meet its
obligations to the veterans of this country, nor did other VA
leaders or officials communicate how much in the red VA was
either even though the committee was informed late last week
that the Department knew as early as March that there were
giant disparities between the amount of money that VA was
spending and the amount of money that had been budgeted.
The only message that Congress received in March regarding
the state of VA's budget was the quarterly financial report
that VA submitted to the Appropriations Committee for the first
quarter of fiscal year 2015, which showed that VA was actually
under plan in terms of its spend-out rate. Meanwhile, just 2
weeks ago, VA proposed a plan that Congress authorized at the
Department's urging to transfer $150 million in fiscal year
2015 funding to support the continued construction of the
replacement center in Aurora, Colorado. VA also proposed an
across-the-board rescission of just under 1 percent in fiscal
year 2016 funds to devote to the Aurora project, a proposal, by
the way, that the Veterans Health Administration's chief
financial officer told committee staff last week that she did
not even know about until after it had already been transmitted
to Congress.
I think these actions clearly show that VA leaders believe
that moving forward with the Denver project, which is not
scheduled to open to veteran patients until 2017 at the
earliest, is a higher priority to the Department than ensuring
that veterans who need care now are able to access that care. I
have come to expect a startling lack of transparency and
accountability from VA over the last years. But failing to
inform Congress of a multibillion dollar funding deficit until
this late in the fiscal year while continuing to advance what I
believe are lower priority needs that further deplete the
Department's coffers in support of a construction project that
benefits no veteran for at least 2 more years is disturbing on
an entirely different level.
Earlier this week, VA issued a fact sheet that claims that
VA formally requested limited budget flexibility in February
and in March and in May of this year and that plainly
articulated VA's need for additional resources. Now, buried on
page 167 of the second volume of VA's budget submission is a
single statement that reads, and I quote: ``In the coming
months, the administration will submit legislation to
reallocate a portion of Choice program funding to support
essential investments in VA's system priorities,'' end quote.
Secretary McDonald repeated this testimony without providing
any additional supporting details or justification. And to
date, there has been no legislative proposal that has been
submitted by the administration to the Congress.
In May of 2012, a letter was sent to the chairmen and
ranking members of the House and Senate Veterans Affairs
Committees and Appropriation Committees regarding the Denver
project. And VA stated that the Department, quote, ``requests
flexibility to make the Choice program work better for veterans
through limited authority to use funds from section 802 of the
Choice Act to fund care in the community to the extent it
exceeds our fiscal year 2015 budget,'' end quote. Again, no
further information or supporting materials have been provided.
If those two statements, absent of any other supporting
evidence or details, are what VA calls ``formally requesting
budget flexibility and plainly articulating the Department's
needs,'' then I understand why VA has, in fact, found
themselves suffering nothing but string after string of
failures since last year. Is more, it proves to me once more,
that VA's current problems reflect a management issue far more
than they represent a money issue. This committee cannot help
VA solve its problems if VA refuses to be honest, to be
upfront, and to be transparent with us and with the American
people about the position it is in, the struggles that it is
facing, and the help that it needs.
Congress has consistently provided VA with the funding that
the Department has requested. And as a result, VA funding has
risen 73 percent since 2009 while the number of veterans using
VA for care has grown by only about 2 percent. And this comes
from VA's own testimony. I know that I speak for every member
of this committee when I say that we are committed to ensuring
that VA has the funding it needs to deliver the world-class
healthcare our veterans deserve. But VA has got to do its part
to confront and correct its poor budget planning and poor
management issues, to hold poor-performing executives and
employees accountable, and, perhaps most importantly, to
prioritize our veterans' needs over the wants of a bureaucracy.
And if the current shortfall shows us anything, it is that
what our veterans need and what they want is to have a say in
when and where they get their healthcare. Assuming VA's numbers
are true, non-VA care appointments now make up 20 percent of
all of VA appointments, with veterans receiving more than 1
million appointments from community providers each month. In
the coming weeks, I will work with my colleagues on the
Appropriations Committee to try to give the VA flexibility it
is seeking to use a limited amount of Choice funds for non-VA
care and ensure that no veteran suffers as a result of VA's
mismanagement of the generous budget the American taxpayers
have provided. However, going forward, there has to be a
dedicated appropriation account to fund non-VA care under a
single streamlined integrated authority with a dedicated
funding stream contained within VA's base budget, rather than
the seven disparate, ill-executed, non-VA care programs that
are outlined in VA's testimony.
This morning, I look forward to discussing the proposal
with my friend, Deputy Secretary Sloan Gibson, and with
committee members who all share the same concerns and want the
same outcomes. I want to thank you all for coming back so
quickly. I appreciate the ranking member being here today. And
I will yield to Ms. Brown for her opening statement.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Jeff Miller appears in
the Appendix]

OPENING STATEMENT OF RANKING MEMBER CORRINE BROWN

Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today's hearing is on
the State of VA's Fiscal Year 2015 budget. I can tell you all
that the state of VA's budget is not strong.
The VA is facing a shortfall of $2.6 billion for veterans'
healthcare. This shortfall must be addressed immediately. We
cannot put the health and lives of our veterans at risk by
spending our time and attention pointing fingers and assigning
blame.
The VA is facing shortfall at the start of the next fiscal
year in October. A shortfall that will be made worse by the
cost-saving steps that VA is taking right now. We must address
this upcoming shortfall.
I know that this Committee, as we have done so many times
in the past, will work together to solve this crisis and fix
this mess. I know that we all recognize that sometimes it takes
new money to really fix a problem, and not just slapping some
tape on it and calling it a day.
So in the words of Deputy Secretary Gibson, we will ``get
our checkbooks out.'' But I am concerned that there may be
nothing left in the account as long as we continue to pretend
that we can fund the essential requirements of government with
our arbitrary budget caps. We seem to be heading, I am sorry,
let me be clear, we are heading toward a government shutdown.
Let me say that again: We are headed toward a government
shutdown. I am concerned over the effects such a shutdown will
have on veterans seeking healthcare.
Ten years ago, we addressed another VA shortfall. That
shortfall was due to lack of sufficient planning and years of
not providing the VA the resources that it needed. Today's
shortfall also seemed to be caused by the lack of proper
planning regarding the demand of veterans for VA healthcare. I
am also concerned that inadequate planning leads to
insufficient resources requests. We need to begin to fix these
problems.
My bill, the Department of Veterans Affairs Budget Planning
Reform Act of 2015, passed the House in March 420 to 0. It is a
much needed reform in how the VA plans and budgets for the
future. It is time that our colleagues in the Senate pass the
bill and send it to the President.
If the VA is going to be there for our veterans, then we
are going to have to fix the problems. This will call for more
than us just opening our checkbooks or writing blank checks to
the VA. It will require thoughtful and major reform so that we
can ensure that in the years ahead the VA is worthy of our
veterans.
But today, right now, we have veterans that need healthcare
and checks we need to write to pay for that. And we need to
make sure that these checks are not returned because we don't
have sufficient funds in the account.
Then, and only then can we start the reform efforts so that
VA is the model of how we care for those who have sacrificed
for us and honored us with their service. Thank you.
And I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.

[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Corrine Brown
appears in the Appendix]

The Chairman. I thank the ranking member for her comments.
And I associate myself with the vast majority of them,
especially the one where we call on the Senate to please move
and pass Ms. Brown's budgeting bill. I think we all agree that
it is the appropriate thing to do. And at the same time, while
I call on the Senate to do that, I hope Ms. Brown will join me
on in calling on the Senate to pass the VA-MILCON
appropriations bill over there that is so critical to funding
for our veterans so they, can get the healthcare that they have
earned. Thank you for your comments. Joining us on our first
panel this morning is the Honorable Sloan Gibson, Deputy
Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs. Joining him
today is Dr. James Tuchschmidt, the Interim Principal Deputy
Under Secretary for Health; Edward Murray, the Acting Assistant
Secretary for Management and Interim Chief Financial Officer;
and Gregory Giddens, the Principal Executive Director of the
Office of Acquisitions, Logistics, and Construction.
Thank you all for being here with us today.
Mr. Gibson. you are now recognized for your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SLOAN GIBSON, DEPUTY SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; ACCOMPANIED BY JAMES
TUCHSCHMIDT, M.D., INTERIM PRINCIPAL DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR
HEALTH, VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS; EDWARD MURRAY, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
MANAGEMENT AND INTERIM CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF VETERANS AFFAIRS; AND GREGORY GIDDENS, PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ACQUISITIONS, LOGISTICS, AND CONSTRUCTION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS

STATEMENT OF HON. SLOAN GIBSON

Mr. Gibson. One year ago today, 290,000 veterans were
waiting more than 30 days for care. That number represented
veterans needs we were unable to meet timely. For the past
year, improving access to care has been among VA's top
priorities. And we have made real progress: We completed 7
million more appointments for care inside VA and in the
community than in the previous 12 months, double the additional
capacity to required to meet those veterans' needs of a year
ago; average wait time for completed appointments, 4 days for
primary care, 5 days for specialty care, 3 days for mental
health; scheduled appointments inside VA are up 12 percent;
authorizations for VA care in the community are up 44 percent;
97 percent of appointments inside VA are completed within 30
days of the clinically indicated date or the date that the
veteran requested.
We know that for many veterans, 30 days is far too long to
wait. So we track shorter timeframes: 93 percent completed
within 14 days; 88 percent completed within 7 days; and 22
percent of appointments completed on the same day. After hours
and weekend appointments are up 12 percent. We have expanded
the use of virtual care; secure messaging up 36 percent; mental
health up 19 percent; e-consults up 36 percent; the NEAR list,
the New Enrollee Appointment Request list, down 93 percent; the
electronic wait list down 47 percent, all clear indications of
improving access.
To achieve this, VA has been executing a strategy focused
on building capacity through staffing, space, productivity and
VA community care. Highlights: We have grown VHA staffing by
12,000 since April last year, including 1,000 physicians and
2,700 nurses. We activated 80 new VHA leases that add 1.3
million square feet to our healthcare footprint, plus another
400,000 square feet in VA-owned properties. Our relative value
units, a standard measure of clinical output, have increased 10
percent, while our healthcare budget is up less than 3 percent.
And 1.5 million veterans have been authorized for care in the
community, a 36-percent increase year over year.
Clearly, we are improving access, providing more care to
more veterans. What is the challenge? As we improve access,
even more veterans are coming to VA for their care. As a
result, appointments pending over 30 days are now up 50 percent
from where they were a year ago. Consider Phoenix, after adding
337 staff, completing 100,000 more appointments, and a 91-
percent increase in care in the community, wait times are
actually up. Why? In the same period of time, the number of
veterans in Phoenix receiving primary care is up 11 percent,
specialty care up 17 percent, and mental healthcare up 16
percent. We also saw it in Las Vegas, where we opened a new
facility 2 years ago. Since then, the number of veterans
receiving care there has jumped 18 percent.
Now, as we think about what is going on, let us not lose
sight of the broader context. We are dealing with an aging
veteran population. Over half of those veterans that are
receiving care at VA are over 65. More veterans are filing
disability claims for more conditions. The average degree of
disability today is near 50 percent. Among veterans receiving
disability, the average disability is 50 percent, meaning that
many more veterans are eligible for healthcare in VA.
We also know that many veterans prefer VA healthcare. VFW's
March survey of veterans reports that 47 percent of veterans
who were offered Choice elected to wait to get their care
inside VA; 78 percent said they were satisfied with their VA
care experience; and 82 percent would recommend VA to a felony
veteran.
One more thing that is very important for all of us to keep
in mind, most veterans already have a choice: 81 percent have
either Medicare, Medicaid, TRICARE, or some form of private
insurance. Many come to VA because of the disparity in out-of-
pocket costs between their insurance and VA care. For example,
the average Medicare reimbursement for a knee replacement is
about $25,000, with a copay of 20 percent. Choosing VA saves
veterans $5,000.
So as VA improves access, which we are continuing to do,
more veterans are going to come to VA because they either want
to come or because they have a financial incentive to come.
Now, as we look inside VA, what you are seeing here is evidence
of is a sea change in the way we operate. Historically, as many
of you heard me say, in the past, we managed to a budget number
instead of managing to requirements based on veterans' needs.
As we improve access to see veterans within 30 days, veteran
response is placing extraordinary demands on resources.
Could we have managed this transition more effectively? I
think we could have and should have. But, remember, we are
running the largest healthcare organization in the country on a
20 year-old financial management system. We have had a hard
time effectively factoring into our predictive analysis market
penetration, changing veteran reliance on VA, and improving
access and the impact that that has on veterans' choices. We
didn't fully appreciate the challenge associated with changing
internal VA processes quickly enough to accommodate the shift
to Choice. We underestimated the time required for third-party
administrators to build provider networks and the resistance
that many providers would have to join those networks.
Notwithstanding our best efforts and much help from our VSO
partners, many veterans still don't understand how Choice
works. The limitations, particularly around geographic burden,
which Congress has recently amended, made it impossible to use
Choice in many instances and created additional demand for VA's
traditional community care programs.
Lastly, veterans are demonstrating very clearly that their
decision cycle timeline for care far outpaces the Federal
budget cycle timeline. Likewise, medical breakthroughs don't
follow the budget cycle timeline either. Hepatitis C treatment
is an example of a new requirement impossible to forecast when
our 2015 budget was first proposed. The first of the new
generation of drugs to cure hepatitis C was approved by the FDA
in early fiscal year 2014, over a year after we began the
fiscal year 2014-2015 advanced appropriations budgeting process
and less than a year before the fiscal year actually began.
After adding these drugs to our formula in April of 2014, we
soon realized we wouldn't have enough money to pay for them in
2015.
In September, we alerted Congress to the impending
shortfall. Since then, the FDA has approved two more hep C
drugs, all oral, no injections, fewer side effects, greater
rate of cure, but expensive. To cure veterans of hep C in 2015,
we moved $697 million from VA community care. But it wasn't
enough. Veterans' desire for this treatment has been
extraordinarily strong. And, simultaneously, we built capacity
internally to meet veterans' needs quicker than we anticipated
we would.
In May, to keep hep C veterans from needlessly waiting, we
asked for some budget flexibility to use a limited amount of
Choice program funding. Secretary McDonald raised the
flexibility issue with this committee in February when he asked
to use some Choice funding to meet the needs of veterans as
they arose. Now, the Choice program is making a positive
difference in the lives of veterans. And in every instance, if
a veteran is eligible for Choice, we want to use Choice rather
than any other community care option. I would point out that in
February, approximately 5 percent of Choice-eligible care in
the community was being authorized through Choice. By the time
you get to the first week in May, that number was 10 percent. I
now receive daily updates on our Choice penetration for Choice-
eligible care. As of the 19 of June, we were up to 33 percent
of the authorizations that were Choice-eligible. And I expect
that number to continue to climb. But we still need flexibility
in the use of Choice funds for the balance of 2015 and for
2016.
Further, we expect to need Congress' help as we consolidate
community care channels as the chairman alluded to, including
fewer program-by-program restrictions on those channels.
Existing Choice Act funding can help meet these needs, needs
more urgent now than when we first made the request in
February.
But our investments have paid off. We are providing more
care to more veterans. To keep progressing and providing
veterans greater access to care today, we need the flexibility
to use as much as $2.5 billion of Choice funds that were
appropriated for veterans' care to pay for veterans' community
care, exactly what Choice is for. And we already anticipate
that we will rely heavily on Choice in fiscal year 2016 to meet
veterans' growing needs in that fiscally tight year.
For our part, our strategy will remain the same, leverage
staffing space, productivity, and VA community care to its
maximum capacity. We are going to do the right thing for
veterans and be good stewards of taxpayer resources. And we are
going to continue to work to make Choice a success. But to
succeed, we need the flexibility to use funds to meet veterans
as those needs arise. We look forward to working
collaboratively with this committee and with Congress. And we
look forward to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Mr. Sloan Gibson appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Can you tell us when you first became aware
of the major budget shortfall, what is now becoming a
multibillion dollar shortfall, at what point was that evident
to you or the Secretary?
Mr. Gibson. I actually brought with me in my folder a memo
that I received from the VHA CFO dated 16 of March which
indicated that, based on our financial system, we were still
showing that we were underobligated. From that time forward, a
process launched that covered several months during which
millions of individual transactions in the fee-based care
system were audited and reconciled in order to be able to
determine the magnitude of the shortfall. It has only been
within the last 3 or 4 weeks that we have been begun to get
clarity around the magnitude of this disconnect.
Three issues here: One has to do with the push to
accelerate access to care. One has to do with an antiquated
financial system that doesn't have the automated interfaces
that it needs with other systems like the fee-basis care
system. And the third fundamental change that affected us this
past year is the requirement in the Choice Act that we pull all
of the budgeted funds for care in the community out of the
medical centers and consolidate it in the chief business
office. Those three factors together created this disconnect
and the lack of clarity around what was actually going on in
the fee-basis care area.
The Chairman. I was looking at a document that encapsulates
the first quarter, which would have been the last quarter of
last year, that was provided to the appropriators in March, of
this year. And it is showing everything is on track at that
point.
Mr. Gibson. We were still showing everything was
underobligated through February. And the questions that I kept
asking were how can we be underobligated when we have got a 40-
percent increase in authorizations for care in the community.
The Chairman. What was the response?
Mr. Gibson. And that is what launched the review and
reconcilement of the millions of transactions that were sitting
out in the fee-basis care system to determine actually what had
been obligated.
The Chairman. So you can see why the questions that are
going to come from this committee today are absolutely----
Mr. Gibson. Absolutely right. Inexcusable. But find a
healthcare company out in the private sector of our order of
magnitude that is operating under a 20-year-old financial
management system, you are not going to find that.
So part of what we have to do is we have to find
workarounds. We did what Congress asked us to do, pulled all
the budget money in. What had historically happened was that
care in the community against the budgeted funds got managed
out in the medical centers. Well, care in the community
decisions were still being made out in the medical centers, but
all the budget dollars were sitting centrally. And so you had a
fundamental disconnect between those two elements. Now, what we
are going to have to do is build a workaround. Should we have
built a workaround? Yes, we should have. Should we have asked
Congress for relief from that requirement? Yes, we should have.
We see that clearly with the benefit of hindsight.
The Chairman. Have you requested any specific legislation
or changes at this point? Or is the central office still
working on a detailed request? Because, again, as I stated in
my opening statement, we have gotten very few statements that
say VA would like to get more, money and would like to reform
the Choice program. But I haven't seen any requests from VA
yet.
Mr. Gibson. We will, we have done briefings with staff. We
will deliver very promptly a written request asking for
flexibility in the utilization of Choice funds to pay for care
in the community for veterans.
The Chairman. If we go down this path, and it is not a path
that I want to go down, but it may be the only solution to a
problem that has been coming for a considerable amount of time,
reforms have got to be made and they have to be specific. We
want to work with you as we go through that process.
Ms. Brown.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you. Thank you. And we appreciate that.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. I am going to ask a question because
I want something cleared up. Explain the difference to us
between the fee-based and the Choice.
Mr. Gibson. The fee-basis care system is a system that we
use to track individual authorizations for care. And that is
where we ultimately wind up reconciling all the way back to an
in invoice and ensuring that we receive the clinical
information from the individual veteran's care. Unless I am
mistaken, I think fee-basis care system also captures Choice
authorizations----
Ms. Brown. We need to be clear what is fee-based. I cannot
go to a doctor before we passed Choice in the community.
Mr. Gibson. That is, there is an authorization process that
veterans would pursue, either working directly through their
medical center when they are calling to ask to schedule an
appointment, and if we can't schedule it timely, they get
referred to the third-party administrator to schedule an
appointment in the community. Or, alternatively, if they are 40
miles from their facility, then they would just call the third-
party administrator directly to get that appointment for care
scheduled.
Ms. Brown. And Choice.
Mr. Gibson. That is Choice. That is Choice. And other,
there are six or seven--it is in the written testimony--six or
seven different programs. The chairman alluded to this, and I
completely and totally agree, we have got do reconcile the six
or seven different programs that we utilize for Choice in the
community. It confuses veterans. It confuses our staff. It is
confusing to providers, different payment reimbursement rates,
different payment mechanisms, different requirements for
authorization, different processes. It is thoroughly confusing.
Ms. Brown. I understand that it is. But are the veterans
getting the care in the community?
Mr. Gibson. We are estimating right now that in fiscal year
2014, we will see somewhere in the neighborhood of between 21
million and 23 million appointments for care in the community.
That is up from about 16.5 million in 2014. And, as I
mentioned, there are a record number of veterans who are
receiving authorizations for care in the community, 1.5 million
over the last 12 months, a 36-percent increase over the prior
period.
Ms. Brown. Is any of that in the mental health area?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am. It is.
Ms. Brown. What percentage?
Mr. Gibson. Mental health for us historically has been a
relatively smaller percentage of care referred into the
community because oftentimes veterans experience issues that VA
providers are potentially better positioned and more
knowledgeable to be able to respond to. There is certainly
mental healthcare out there. But the vast majority of that care
is delivered inside VA.
Ms. Brown. Okay.
I am going to yield back my time. And I hope we are going
to have a second round.
The Chairman. I think we will have an opportunity to do
that.
One question real quick, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Over the past months, we have examined
improper procurement practices, failures to pay providers in a
timely fashion, gross mismanagement of construction projects.
We all know about Aurora. And I am going to be yielding to the
gentleman from Colorado in a second. These are all big news
stories. But this committee has also heard many instances of
simple, smaller waste, fraud, and abuse by poor management and
bureaucratic inertia that appears to be the culture within the
system. I know you are trying to root it out. But one in my
State--in particular, is the Augustine and the CBOC that is
there right now. How can VA continue to justify paying
thousands and thousands of dollars in fines and penalties each
month to retain a CBOC in a facility when they knew a long time
ago that they were going to have to relocate from that
facility? How does that happen?
Mr. Gibson. It happens when we fail to forecast far enough
in advance the need to relocate from an expiring leased
facility. And what happens is we wait too long. And then we
start working to define requirements and run through all the
process. And we find, for instance, here, I think there were
issues associated with site selection that delayed it. And we
wound up in the situation precisely that you are describing.
We have got--I don't know how many--hundreds of lease
transactions in the pipeline right now. That has become a major
part of our business. We have under allocated resources to that
part of our business. And we have got to better manage it, as
well as streamlining the processes, as well as developing more
standardization in lease design so that we can work through
these, through the process and the design more expeditiously.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown, since it is your part of the
State.
Ms. Brown. It is my part of the State. And, in addition, we
had a briefing on that when you, and I were in Orlando. And it
is not as simple, it is more complicated in that the city and
the county and how we can, and this is something we need to
address, that if a city wants to give us some property to
relocate, we can't just take it. That is something that we need
to address.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. All apples are not the same.
Mr. Gibson. But the chairman's point is an accurate point.
And St. Augustine is just one examine. In fact, this happens
all too often, where we have not made plans far enough in
advance to be able to run through all the process--and it is a
long process--to get to the point where we have actually got,
we are ready to replace the facility before the lease actually
expires.
Ms. Brown. And this not only happened in St. Augustine. It
happened in Tallahassee also. So this is something that we, as
a committee, need to address.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. And change the process.
Mr. Gibson. We are working it. And that is the guy right
there that is principally responsible for fixing it.
The Chairman. I saw him point at you, Mr. Giddens.
Mr. Giddens. Sir, yes, sir.
Mr. Gibson. I point at him quite often these days. We are
going to talk about supply chain at some point. I am going to
point at him again.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
St. Augustine is very important not only to the veterans
that are in that area but also to trying to change this culture
that has been allowed to go on for too long.
Mr. Lamborn. you are recognized.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the ranking member for your leadership.
Secretary Gibson, although I am glad to see in your written
statement that the VA is, quote, ``committed to doing what is
right for the veterans in the Colorado region and completing
this major construction project without further delay,''
unquote, I am still deeply disturbed and disappointed by the
additional time and money that it is going to take. Thanks to
recent legislation and a reallocation of funds, we are now good
through the end of the fiscal year, but much more remains to be
funded. This is a critical facility that our Colorado veterans
have earned and need. And I remain committed, along with my
colleague, Representative Coffman, and others to ensure that we
bring this project to completion.
However, as we are sitting here talking budget shortfalls
and mismanagement. I have to ask, where is the accountability?
When we have poor management, whether it is forecasting the
budget, or whether it is poor construction projects, where is
the accountability? We have given you additional legislative
authorization, you and the Secretary. And we really don't see
that being used. Where is the accounted ability, Mr. Gibson?
Mr. Gibson. If you look back, as I have, at the entire
chain of command, from the Secretary all the way down to the
project engineer, I believe there is only one person that was
substantively involved in the project who still remains at VA.
And I think that is the project--not project engineer but
project executive. There has been an AIB that is in the process
of wrapping up. I think we have talked earlier in this
committee about early evidence that was gathered by that AIB,
which was being used to prepare charges against a senior
executive who then retired in the face of that impending
personnel action.
A similar process happened recently with the senior
attorney that was involved very heavily in Denver. And I expect
the AIB to wrap up very quickly. And we will consider the
evidence raised by the AIB for any additional individuals that
are still on the payroll in the Department.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
And also, Secretary Gibson, you have asked for additional
flexibility in allocating your funds but haven't provided what
I believe is the supporting data needed for that. More
importantly, I want to ensure that there isn't the impression
that the VA has decided to fund the Denver Hospital project
ahead of hepatitis C treatment or any other veteran medical
care. That won't be the case, will it? And can you clarify?
Mr. Gibson. Certainly, there is not any intention to trade
off hep C care for Denver. We have gone through a whole series
of proposals on Denver, starting with what I continue to
believe was the best proposal for veterans and for taxpayers,
which was to utilize construction funds, nonrecurring
maintenance and minor construction, that were provided as part
of the $5 billion under Choice. That got nowhere. There were
other alternatives considered where we would reprogram dollars
from major construction projects, projects that aren't due to
start construction for 3 years or 4 years. That got nowhere.
We have looked at alternatives to reduce, to move proposed
funds in 2016 from nonrecurring maintenance and minor
construction. That got nowhere. So what we have finally gotten
to is the tactic of an across-the-board cut with an intention
that VA would have the time over the course of the year to be
able to manage those reductions on a very micro level so that
we ensure that we are not adversely impacting veteran care.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I want to speak for myself and I am sure
every member of the committee would agree, we can't do any fix
that in any way compromises veterans' healthcare. Thanks for
being here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Takano, you are recognized.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Secretary Gibson, for your acknowledgment
that things could have been better planned out. And there could
have been better management. When you talk about this financial
management system, are you talking mainly about administration
or outdated software? What is it you are referring to?
Mr. Gibson. We have, like companies in the private sector,
we have a major technology system, IT system, software system,
that we use to account for all of the financial activity of the
Department. I recently interviewed a candidate to come in and
head IT who was astounded to learn that we were still using it
because he had helped develop it back when he was a beginning
software engineer 30 years ago.
Mr. Takano. We are talking about IT?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, we are.
Mr. Takano. And I know that there is problems engaging non-
VA providers. The VA has the obligation to manage
accountability with those providers. And there is a lack of
ability to use electronic medical records with the system. So
we definitely need to look at investing and upgrading that
system. I understand a large part of the shortfall comes from
increased payments for fee-based care or contracts with non-VA
providers. When you say ``community care in the community,''
you mean non-VA providers, right?
Mr. Gibson. That is exactly what I mean.
Mr. Takano. Do you have an estimate for how much of that
care could have been provided through the Choice program but
wasn't? In other words, how many of those veterans would have
qualified for Choice but received care by another means because
of the slow rollout of the Choice program? If you don't have
that number, you can get it to me later.
Mr. Gibson. Let me take that for follow up. But I will tell
you it is not 100 percent because we can't use Choice dollars
for long-term care. We can't effectively use it for dentistry
because you can't find many Medicare-approved dentists out
there. We can't use it for obstetrics because, as you might
expect, there aren't many obstetricians who are Medicare
providers. But it is a very substantial amount that could have
been channeled to Choice.
Mr. Takano. So a big chunk of this money we are talking
about----
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Takano [continuing]. Could have been used for Choice?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Could have qualified them?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Takano. And you are saying that there is all those
different reimbursement rates out there for the different kinds
of non-VA care. My next question was of the remainder of the
folks that would not have qualified, how much of that, could
you quantify that in terms of how much of that was attributable
to a lack of capacity at the VA, that were not fully staffed up
at the VA? If you were fully staffed up, could we have taken
care of more people who would not have qualified for the Choice
Act?
Mr. Gibson. I think the short answer is yes. If we were
fully staffed up, if we had all the facilities we needed, yes,
we could have. But there are instances, for example, we have
relied and come to rely heavily, for example, on state nursing
homes to care for veterans. And so that winds up being I am
going to say $1.5 billion, round numbers.
Ed, is that in the neighborhood?
Mr. Murray. It is close. It is $1.1 billion.
Mr. Gibson. And so that is a substantial portion of that
that we have come to rely on outside providers for that.
Mr. Takano. I want to turn to hepatitis C for a moment. I
am very concerned to hear about the lack of funds to continue
to provide treatment for veterans with hepatitis C. It is
estimated that more than 184,000 veterans are infected with
hepatitis C. And these men and women served their country and
should not be denied access to a cure. And I commend the work
that the VA has done to build capacity to treat veterans with
hep C. And we can't lose ground. The new treatments for hep C
can be extremely expensive. It can cost as much as $1,000 a
pill commercially. Fortunately, I understand the VA has been
able to negotiate with the drug companies to a lower cost. I
have heard estimates that VA is, instead, paying closer to $600
a pill, is that correct? You may not have an----
Mr. Gibson. I would like to not have to answer that
question. We work very closely and collaboratively with the
manufacturers of those drugs and have been able to reach
attractive arrangements for the continued purchase of those
drugs. And we continue to have those conversations.
Mr. Takano. What I am curious about is if maybe our
veterans are maybe choosing to go to VA as opposed to the
private care or TRICARE or other options because they might get
access to this medication more easily, and the doctors might be
able to get the treatment done in a more timely manner.
Mr. Gibson. I think that is certainly the case. If a
veteran who is Medicare-eligible was to go to a private
provider, he would wind up with a very substantial copay that
he would have to pay in order to be able to receive that care.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Takano.
For the record, this Congress has provided hundreds of
millions of dollars in the past few years, in fact, one
particular system was called Core FLS. This money was
squandered. And we actually have nothing to show for it. I
think that additional investments are going to have to be made
to be brought up to par.
Mr. Takano. Can you explain more to me about the Core FLS?
The Chairman. It was a financial system.
Mr. Takano. Oh, you are talking about the IT?
The Chairman. Yes. I agree with what you are saying. I am
just saying there have been, again, hundreds of millions of
dollars spent in error somewhere, never been used.
Mr. Takano. I appreciate that. And my sense, since I have
been here, that the rollout, I kind of had this feeling that if
they didn't have this ability to have electronic medical
records and doing it all by paper and photocopying things, that
they were going to have a hard time engaging non-VA providers
then. That is my point.
The Chairman. And an excellent point. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bilirakis. You are recognized.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate very
much.
And thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your testimony. The VA
has estimated a $2.6 billion shortfall for the remainder of the
year, which will impact the delivery of care to veterans and
may affect the following year's budget. How accurate, how firm
are you on that $2.6 billion?
Mr. Gibson. I think it is a very, at this point in the
fiscal year, we are just slightly over 3 months away, I would
say it is a very accurate forecast. It does, it does assume
business as usual.
Mr. Bilirakis. How do you come to that conclusion?
Mr. Gibson. Well, this was built, as I alluded to earlier,
we have had people go back and look and do reconcilements,
millions of transaction reconcilements in the fee-basis care
system looking at past patterns of authorization and numbers of
appointments per and the cost of each of those appointments,
looking at the month-by-month track record and the numbers of
authorizations, so it is really a forecast that is built from
the bottom up.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Considering VA's inability to
adequately plan to implement programs and construction projects
resulting in cost overruns, such as the Denver project, how
much of the shortfall in your estimation would you say was due
to mismanagement of funds as opposed to the level of funding
appropriated by Congress? Because, again, since 2009, we are up
40 percent. Do you agree with that? How much is due to
mismanagement?
Mr. Gibson. I don't think any of it is due to
mismanagement. Should we have done a better job of managing the
buckets of different money that had been appropriated?
Absolutely, the answer is yes. But what we have basically done
here is pushed to accelerate access to care. This issue, what
has happened is we have, back to my point earlier, a 36-percent
increase in the number of veterans that have been authorized
for care in the community.
Mr. Bilirakis. None of it is due to mismanagement?
Mr. Gibson. This is about providing more care to more
veterans. That is what this is about.
Mr. Bilirakis. How much has the VA spent in performance,
retention, and relocation bonuses for fiscal year 2015?
Mr. Gibson. I will have to take that for the record. I
don't know the answer.
Mr. Bilirakis. Can anyone on the panel, can they answer
that question?
Mr. Gibson. I think most of the performance awards are paid
at the end of a fiscal year. But there are some that are paid
on an ongoing cases to physicians, as I understand it. I will
get you a number.
Mr. Bilirakis. Can you get that information to me?
Mr. Gibson. Sure. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. I appreciate that very much. Can't some of
these unobligated funds in those accounts be reprogrammed for,
to address a portion of the budget shortfall? Again, do you
need specific authority from Congress to do that, to reprogram
some of these funds?
Mr. Gibson. I would not expect that we would need authority
from Congress to reprogram some of those funds. And as we
work----
Mr. Bilirakis. Is that your intention to reprogram some of
those funds?
Mr. Gibson. We are looking everywhere we can look to
identify funds to be able to support care for veterans in the
community.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Browney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was back in my district last week and had a meeting with
our veterans and TriWest came out and we talked a lot about the
Choice program and provided more information and education to
our veterans there.
And I also had a meeting with the VISN network director in
my district as well. And she provided me with some information.
I am hearing from my veterans, I heard from her as well, that a
group, private group called the Oxnard Family Circle, that
provides adult day services in my district, they happen to be
right next door to our CBOC. So there is a certain synergy
there between the CBOC and the adult day center for our
veterans. And we have been told now, because of lack of funds
from the VA, that the Oxnard Family Circle is not going to be
receiving any more funds. And we now have a queue of 15
veterans who are waiting to get into that facility. And the VA
has said: Sorry, we are not going to be able to accommodate
that. Maybe on a case-by-case basis, given extenuating
circumstances, we might be able to accommodate a few.
That is a certain for me because I am beginning to already,
at least in my district, feel the implications of the dilemma
that you are presenting here. And I am concerned that that is
going to, you know, bleed into other areas, in-home healthcare
services, other kinds of things. At the same time, we have
providers in the district, mental health providers that VA has
contracted with, and yet we are not utilizing them to the
extent that they can be utilized. And we are not pushing our
veterans to those contracts.
And, thirdly, I would say that TriWest I think is very
committed to administering the Choice program. They have
indicated that they plan on hiring lots and lots of folks to do
a better job of providing the Choice program. So all of these
issues that I am raising right now are sort of fighting against
each other. We are going to need resources for the Choice
program in order to increase and enhance the program. And we
wouldn't want TriWest to hire a lot of people and then tell
them: Sorry, we have got to push more people to the people that
we have already contracted with.
And yet my veterans in Ventura County are not receiving the
services and are beginning to feel this dilemma. So I am not
sure that I have a question. I am not sure I have a question
except to say I thank you for your leadership. I do believe
that if you weren't asking the hard questions, your issue
around financial, the financial management system and
continuing to ask those hard questions, you and the Secretary
both, that we still might not be aware of this problem
surfacing the way it is surfacing. So I appreciate that.
I don't think we can look back in terms of our past
mistakes. We have got to look forward. And so I do believe that
we need the flexibility because the money really needs to
follow the veteran in terms of what he or she selects in terms
of their service. So, again, I am just very, very concerned
about what is happening in my district to my veterans as we
speak and wondering if there is any remedy to that.
Mr. Gibson. Well, we are concerned as well. Two of the
categories that you mentioned, adult daycare and home-based
care, are two services that we are not able to use Choice to be
able to fund. That would be part of the flexibility that we
would really love to be able to have because we don't want to
see that care disrupted. We will do some homework on the mental
health providers and look into that. The other point that I
would make is, I mentioned earlier that across VHA, we are up
to about 33 percent of all authorizations for care in the
community are going to Choice. And TriWest territory, they are
up to 41 percent. And I think it is because of that determined
effort that they are making out on the ground day in and day
out to see that we are using Choice in every case we possibly
can.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. If I could just add on about the mental
health providers, we do have relationships, long-standing
relationships with 87,000 providers around the country. And we
are doing everything in our power to reach out to those folks.
We have sent them a letter. We have asked local leadership to
meet with those providers, encouraging them to sign up and
become Choice providers. So we want the patients that--the
providers that our patients have been seeing to continue to be
able to see those people under the Choice program.
Ms. Browney. Thank you.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. On that, I had a similar situation. And I
brought in the HUD vouchers, and we were able to get 30 of our
veterans signed up because they had no income and now they will
have that income. So that is something that we need to keep in
mind because these agencies need to work together.
Ms. Browney. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Benishek.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thanks for your testimony, Mr. Gibson. Frankly, I am a
little bit shocked by the fact that you sit there and tell me
there has been no mismanagement, and we have got $1 billion
cost overrun on the hospital in Denver. That can't be, if it is
not mismanagement, then it is just the standard way of doing
things at the VA.
And, frankly, I was really hoping that the new Secretary
would be able to revamp the VA because I think that business as
usual has not been working very well for the last 30 years and
that the layers of the bureaucracy, where there is so many
layers of the bureaucracy at the VA as compared to, say, a
private sector corporation of a similar size would be much more
streamlined. And I was hoping to see a dramatic change in the
organization of the VA so that things would be much leaner and
meaner and that 20 year-old IT systems wouldn't be used as an
excuse to explain why we are hearing at a late date there is a
$2.7 billion cost overrun.
So, you know, I still have a level of hope that something
like that is still in the offing. Is anything like that in the
offing, a complete revamping of the bureaucracy of the VA? Or
is it going to continue the way it is? I am just not happy with
the progress that we are seeing today, another instance of a
surprise cost overrun, not being able to figure out that
hepatitis C is going to cost us money, and all of the things
that you mentioned.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir. First of all, to be very clear, there
was gross mismanagement in Denver. The question, as I heard it,
that I was being asked had to do with the $2.5 billion----
Dr. Benishek. That is part of the whole deal, right? There
is $2.5 billion missing and----
Mr. Gibson. It is not missing. No, sir, it is not missing.
It is money that is going to pay for veteran care in the
community. That is what we are talking about.
Dr. Benishek. I understand that. But it is a cost overrun
that somehow money in your Department has been spent on all
kinds of stuff. We don't know what most of it is because it all
disappears. IT, we spent hundreds of millions of dollars, it
hasn't been updated. It just disappears within your system.
That is what I mean about having more control over what is
happening with the money.
Mr. Gibson. We would love to come brief you on My VA, which
is the long-term plan for the transformation of the Department.
We would relish the opportunity to do that, the organizational
changes, the culture changes, the training, the staffing.
Dr. Benishek. I would like to see something dramatic done
to change the status of the VA so that it is much better than
this bureaucracy that we have here now and that we are hearing
another example of. I want to go----
Mr. Gibson. Well, I would just, I would just mention, you
alluded to the fact that it has been going on for 30 years.
Secretary McDonald has had 10 months. So that doesn't mean that
we don't need to be getting things done. We do. But I think we
have to take into account the fact that changing an
organization as large as VA in less than a year, I am not sure
who would be able to do that, inside the Federal Government no
less.
Mr. Benishek. I have another question about this fee--or,
not actually the fee basis--the Choice Act, okay, and, you
know, the slow implementation of the Choice Act. And I think
part of it is the problem with, you know, getting a provider
list up there.
And it is my understanding that, you know, we were going to
be paying Medicare rates for care. But it is also my
understanding that, you know, the third-party providers are
getting Medicare rates, but the actual people that are doing
the care are not getting Medicare rates. They are getting a
less-than-Medicare rate. And some of the provider people that I
have talked to said that the rates are 30 percent less than
Medicare rates. So they are reluctant to sign up for it
because, you know, they are losing money.
Mr. Gibson. That is the issue that I alluded to in my
opening statement about providers' reluctance to sign on to
Choice.
There is a widely held misperception, and I think a lot of
it has to do with the fact that we wound up having to use the
two third-party administrators for Choice off of the PC3
contract, where it is below Medicare. And so providers out
there associate Health Net and TriWest signing them up with PC3
below Medicare rates, but, in fact, what we pay in Choice is
Medicare. That is what we are paying.
And I have personally had conversations with providers and
academic affiliates where they go, ``Oh, well, we didn't know
that.''
Mr. Benishek. Well, that is not the information that I have
had, okay? Because the people that I have talked to, hospital
administrators for example, have told me that, well, we had a
better deal before when we were doing the fee-for-service stuff
or we had a contract with the VA. And then they don't want to
sign up----
Mr. Gibson. They probably had a better deal before when
they were doing a one-off contract with VA. But I doubt
seriously that they had--I know they would not have had a
better deal under PC3.
We would be glad to share with you the letter that has gone
to providers, which makes it explicit, very clear in the
letter----
Mr. Benishek. I would like to see that, then, because that
runs contrary to the information that I have received
anecdotally from individuals.
Mr. Gibson. And----
Mr. Benishek. I will yield back my time.
Sorry.
The Chairman. Ms. Titus, you are recognized.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Gibson, for being here. You are always
amazingly patient, coolheaded, and straightforward, and I
appreciate that.
I know that the VA has just been overwhelmed by dealing
with problems of the past, but it seems to me that a real
problem, in addition to an old IT system or an old financial
system, is a lack of a planning system.
You know, we didn't have the planning for the cost of
treating the hepatitis, and yet medical technology is changing
so rapidly, and new medicine is being developed. And we didn't
really plan for this backlog that is developing now with the
appeals process, which is a result of resolving the backlog
with the original filing.
And, as you mentioned, we don't have a very good way to
plan for demographic and geographic shifts. I have been saying
since the first day that I worry about places like Las Vegas,
where the demand is increasing. The New York Times said it was
a 20-percent increase in Las Vegas. You said in your opening
statement that it is 18 percent, but, you know, give or take a
few.
We are going through money quicker. Our VISN is burning
through the RVUs. Will we run out of the money sooner? If that
happens, what will I say to veterans in Las Vegas? How did you
make up for that kind of money?
And is there anything in the works to look at the whole
planning process?
Mr. Gibson. That is a great question and a great issue.
The staff brought me my briefing deck to give 2017 budget
guidance to the organization. And when I got to the
recommendation page, my choices were to nudge number up a
little bit, nudge another number down a little bit. And I said,
wait a minute, that is not the way we are going to do this. We
are going to build a requirements-based budget, and the
requirements starts with what we expect to deliver to the
veteran, the veteran's experience.
So I am going to take appeals as an example. You mentioned
it. Let's say, hypothetically, we want to give a veteran an
appeal decision within a year of the filing of their notice of
disagreement. Right now, it is more like 4 years, 5 years,
something like that. We obviously can't meet that standard
immediately. We decide how long it is going to take to meet
that standard. And then the conversation that we wind up having
is about the requirement and the resources needed to meet that
requirement.
Same conversation on hep C. The last time I was here in
this committee, I proposed the idea that, let's take hep C
prevalence among veterans that are getting care at VA to
functional zero within 3 years. Let's let that be the
requirement that we manage to. We all agree to that, and we all
understand what it would cost to do that, and then VA executes
to that requirement.
That is how you build a plan that starts with the veteran
experience that you are trying to deliver. You are absolutely
right.
Ms. Titus. I hope so.
And just for the record, I agreed to go along with the
bridge money for the Aurora hospital that gets us to the end of
the fiscal year. It was a patch, a little here, a little there,
you took from other projects around the country.
But I cannot vote for a 1-percent across-the-board cut. I
think that is a bad way to do budgeting. I have always voted
against amendments that just do across-the-board cuts. I think
you have to look at where you need the money and where you
don't, not just slice it across.
So I hope you will come with another proposal, because,
when the time comes, I cannot cut other veterans benefits
across the board to bail out a bad construction project in
Denver.
Thank you. I will yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Huelskamp, you are recognized.
Dr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I want to follow up on a few things that
have been discussed here. I think the opening questions from
the chairman of the committee was about when did you know, and
I didn't ever quite hear exactly the answer of when you were
actually informed about an approximately 40-percent cost
overrun in this budgetary fund.
Mr. Gibson. It became clear that there was a very large
variance, I would say, in mid- to late May, in that general
timeframe.
Dr. Huelskamp. Okay.
Mr. Gibson. Mid-May probably. And we began working with
OMB, looking at a whole series of alternatives and different
possible solutions within funds that we may or may not have had
direct control over.
Dr. Huelskamp. My second question would be--and I
appreciate that--where are we at today on the Choice fund? How
much have you used? I know the President had submitted a
budget, and there was some strong pushback about raiding the
Choice funds. Can you tell me where we are at on those funds?
Mr. Gibson. I think, under 802, it is a little over a
billion dollars.
Is that right? I can't read that without my glasses.
Mr. Murray. 437----
Mr. Gibson. For care.
Mr. Murray [continuing]. For care. And $402 million under
the 801 section. So it is 940 total.
Mr. Gibson. So $940 million. I was close. I was estimating
about----
Dr. Huelskamp. So is it used or underused or overused?
Which is the----
Mr. Gibson. Well, I would tell you that back when we did
our first estimates on Choice we were looking at utilization
somewhere on the order of $3 billion in the first year. So it
is interesting to us, as we step back and we look at what we
have done in accelerating care in the community and looking at
what we had originally forecasted for Choice utilization----
Dr. Huelskamp. But compared to February, though, when you
came in and proposed that you raid the Choice fund and use it
for other funds--which sounds like what you are talking about
doing here today. Is it where you predicted it was in February
when the President proposed to raid the Choice fund?
Mr. Gibson. I am sorry. I don't understand the question.
Dr. Huelskamp. In the President's budget, he had proposed
to raid the Choice fund and use it elsewhere, including non-VA
care, if I understood his proposal.
Mr. Gibson. Correct.
Dr. Huelskamp. You are here today to say, well, we ran
short, even though we really didn't know about it till May,
even though the President proposed to do that for 2016 in his
February budget proposal. My question is----
Mr. Gibson. I think there was----
Mr. Huelskamp [continuing]. Where are you at today, really,
on Choice funds? You said $940 million. What did you project
you were going to spend?
Mr. Gibson. Between now and the end of the year?
Dr. Huelskamp. Yes.
Mr. Gibson. I would say we will be--an optimistic spend is
a total of a billion and a half dollars, an additional $500
million worth of care. And if we are able to spend that $500
million for care inside Choice, that reduces the two-and-a-
half-billion-dollar shortfall.
Dr. Huelskamp. And following up on when you knew about the
shortfall and when you told Congress, what is typical practice?
You wait till the end of the fiscal year and add up all the
bills and see where you are at?
It sounded like you did something out of the ordinary to
say, hey, let's see where we are at, because it looks like,
eyeballing it, we are 40 percent over. Is that normally--well,
how often do you figure out where you are at on the budget?
Mr. Gibson. We are looking inside the financial management
system, as was mentioned earlier, and providing reports to
appropriators at least on a monthly----
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, how often?
Mr. Gibson. At least on a----
Dr. Huelskamp. You find out in May you are 40 percent
over----
Mr. Gibson. At least on a monthly basis. The point that I
made earlier is, as of the middle of March, March the 16th, I
have a memo that says through the first 5 months of the year we
are under-obligating. And it didn't make sense. And that is why
we had people go back and do manual reconcilements literally of
millions of transactions inside the fee-basis care system to
figure out exactly what had been obligated, because we don't
have the automated interfaces between----
Dr. Huelskamp. I still don't understand what happened in
the--so the March memo you are talking about, was the data
falsified? Inaccurate? Are they----
Mr. Gibson. The data was--they were reporting what was in
the financial management system. And what was in the financial
management system didn't take into account all of the specific
details of every single individual authorization for care.
Dr. Huelskamp. And that is business as usual. They give you
reports, even though they know----
Mr. Gibson. No. In fact, historically, a lot of this
reconcilement would have been done at the medical-center level,
where we used to keep the budget. But when Congress passed the
Choice Act, they required us to take all the money out of the
medical centers and consolidate it into the Chief Business
Office. So we were faced with----
Dr. Huelskamp. And you knew that in March. You knew that in
March.
Mr. Gibson. We knew it in September.
Dr. Huelskamp. That was not a change in March. That was a
change last summer.
Mr. Gibson. We knew it when Choice passed.
Dr. Huelskamp. And so I am still trying to figure out how
you can have a 40-percent cost overrun in this budget, come to
Congress in June and say, oh, by the way, we have a couple
months left, and, oh, by the way, don't forget we asked to raid
Choice in February.
And I am concerned about that. I am concerned about the
implementation of Choice and----
Mr. Gibson. I think that the allusion in the budget
document was an allusion to--and the Secretary has said this
repeatedly--give us the flexibility to be able to use money to
follow the veterans.
And that was my comment about veterans make decisions
faster than the budget cycle. And, quite frankly, we can't
change as fast as we need to change to accommodate the needs
of----
Dr. Huelskamp. And, lastly, a little bit more. If I
understand you correctly, you mentioned about 12,000
individuals you hired?
Mr. Gibson. Net increase. That is net.
Dr. Huelskamp. How many of those were direct care
providers?
Mr. Gibson. More than 1,000 are physicians. More than 2,700
are nurses. I can't tell you how many were psychiatrists,
psychologists, but----
Dr. Huelskamp. Well, I would like to know that, because----
Mr. Gibson. Okay.
Dr. Huelskamp [continuing]. Based on the figures you gave
us, only a third of what you hired was for direct care----
Mr. Gibson. We can certainly do that.
Dr. Huelskamp [continuing]. Two-thirds for something else.
Mr. Gibson. One of the biggest challenges we have
throughout VA is we don't leverage our providers with
sufficient support staff. And that means they can't be as
productive as they need to be.
Dr. Huelskamp. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Ruiz, you are recognized.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
holding this hearing.
Thank you to our guests for being here.
My question is more in line with the implementation of the
Choice program.
So we have some money that you want to take from that
program and put it into other non-VA care and other types of
care. And I am always of the view that we need to take care of
our patients, take care of the VA. So if you need to take care
of them by purchasing more medications for certain ailments or
illnesses, then that is what we have to do.
However, what I am concerned about is why there is this
money that is not being utilized with the Choice program, when
I know, in my district, after speaking with 70 specialists in
high-demand specialties with the TriWest and Loma Linda VA,
like other members here have done, that there is not a clear
understanding of the process or of the implementation or
outreach. There are no education efforts by the VA as much as
we would like to see. And so the actual implementation is, you
know, very slow and not very efficient and effective.
So why is there money left over now from that Choice
program? And is that money that could be used with the
implementation of the Choice program?
Mr. Gibson. Well, I think we are on the same wavelength
here, actually.
First of all, a fine tune: We are not looking to move money
out of Choice. We are looking to be able to use Choice funds to
pay for care in the community. So we don't want to move it
someplace else; we just want to be able to access it to pay for
care in the community.
In the opening statement, I went through a litany of seven
or eight different factors that have gotten in the way. Many of
them have to do directly with the implementation of Choice.
I was actually surprised the other day in one of our daily
standup meetings on access to care when folks were describing
to me the 5-year process that has been underway to put in place
the procedures for utilizing care in the community, our old
traditional program. And they are still working on them after 5
years.
We roll Choice out in 90 days. And, you know, I am reminded
that, when we first went to the industry about Choice to look
for third-party administrators, they said, what you are talking
about is going to take 18 months to put in place. And the idea
that we would put it in place in 90 days, they said it will
never happen.
And I think, 8 months into this, part of what we are
learning is the time required to recruit providers, the time
required to change internal processes, the fact that every one
of our processes has different payment mechanisms, many have
different reimbursement rates, as we have alluded to before--I
think every one of these issues have gotten in the way of our
ability to route care to Choice.
But, as I mentioned before, day by day, that penetration
into Choice is improving.
Mr. Ruiz. So how about the idea of maybe consolidating
these seven different community care programs----
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. And streamlining them----
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz [continuing]. And doing similar processes?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Ruiz. Is that underway?
Mr. Gibson. That is exactly what I referred to in the
opening statement. We want to do precisely that. We are going
to need Congress' help to do that.
Do you want to make a comment on that, too?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Yes.
I was going to say, so we have actually informed the field
that we want Choice to be the number-one mechanism by which we
send people into the community for care.
We have work to do, we know that, to try and streamline
some of those processes. We are training our staff today in
some of those streamlined processes so that we will do more
coordination of that care, the way we have in our purchased
care programs in the past. But that movement to streamline
those various channels is already underway.
Mr. Ruiz. You know, whenever a system wants to change, they
usually have champions or coaches that go into, like, a
hospital or something else. I think that there should be some
coaches that go into a community or a region and help set it up
for the providers, set up training for the veterans, and also
work with the Members of Congress so that we can help others do
that same thing.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I think you are absolutely correct. And,
as I said earlier, TriWest, for example, and our folks are
going around the country meeting with providers in the
community, trying to get those providers to sign up to be
Choice providers. And I think that has been a pretty successful
effort on our part. And I have to laud TriWest because they
have worked very hard to try and make that work.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you.
The Chairman. Okay, members, we are going to take a short
recess. We have two votes. We will resume the hearing
immediately following the last vote.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. Okay, members, if we could resume the
hearing. We have members that are still making their way back
from the last series of votes.
I thank everybody for your indulgence.
Ms. Kuster, are you prepared to go ahead and begin with
your line of questions?
Ms. Kuster. I am.
The Chairman. Ms. Kuster, you are recognized.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here.
I was just looking real quick for an email that I just
received from New Hampshire and wanted to thank you because it
is a little bit of good news. We have signed up an important
community partner of ours in the north country in New
Hampshire, a sparsely populated area with lots of veterans, to
be part of the Choice program.
And I just wanted to reference that because we have talked
quite a bit today about this transition and how long it takes.
And part of that, I know, is to line up these private community
partners, healthcare providers, and, particularly, as we get
into care for seniors, adult daycare, as we get into home care.
Where I want to go, if we could, is looking forward,
because I think we can all agree and there is bipartisan
concern about this transition, but some of my colleagues may
not be familiar with this notion of the other six types of
programs. And as I have sat down with my VA, we have talked
about when the Choice program is applicable, when the other
programs are applicable.
And it seems to me there is a multitude of dimensions, but
if we could just take two, one is the availability of services,
so whether it is a network or whether it is a local provider
that is willing and able and available to provide service. And
the other, not surprisingly, is cost, and both the cost to the
taxpayer to provide the service, but also I think you made a
really important point for people to understand about the out-
of-pocket cost to the veteran. Because until we have an
understanding of these decisions that are being made, we are
not going to grasp the dimension of opening up access.
And we had a note in our memo that said, previously, the VA
has controlled access through distance and delay. And that is
the reality, right? We made this promise to our veterans, and
then the way we kept a lid on the cost of it to the taxpayer
was that for most veterans it was either too far away or it
took too long to get the service.
So help me, going forward, with your magic wand here, with
the change that Secretary McDonald and you, Mr. Gibson, and
others are bringing to this unwieldy organization, what would
be the path forward to streamline these programs, provide
direction within each of these different VISNs in each of these
different communities, and get access to the veteran in a way
that is timely and high-quality and cost-effective and
efficient for the taxpayer?
Mr. Gibson. If I could ask Dr. Tuchschmidt to start out on
that one, because he has done an awful lot of work precisely in
this area.
Ms. Kuster. And I don't want to get too complex, but what
is it that you to need from us? Is this going to be a
congressional change? And how can we get together with you in a
bipartisan way to make that happen?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So we have been working, spending really
almost the last year since the legislation was put in place in
November, working with Deloitte. We asked them to bring their
commercial side of their business in to look at our business
office and how we manage care in the community against and
benchmarked against best practices in private-sector health
insurance industry. They have helped us identify core
competencies, and they have done a maturity assessment against
best practices in the private sector.
We have taken that and are developing a plan to really make
sure that we can build all of those competencies using our
current business office function as the foundation on which we
will build, over the next year or so, some of those
competencies.
We will have to make some decisions about do we build that
ourselves or do we buy that. Because that expertise is out
there, and it is, you know, more cost-effective and more
efficient to go out and buy it.
We have a group right now looking at our TPA processes to
say, going forward, what do those look like, how do they
change, what do we want to put into the TPA contract in the
future to be able to build some of those competencies and
really run a much more robust program.
I think part of what we are going to need help with is, in
fact, rationalizing some of these programs. I mean, I think,
ultimately, we would want Project ARCH probably folded into the
Choice program so that, you know, we can get rid of some of
these multiple channels.
And I think we are going to need some changes to the Choice
Act itself, the way the Choice program is structured. I think
we have alluded to those changes several times, about Medicare
providers versus providers that we believe are qualified to
deliver that care, those kinds of things--60-day authorization
periods.
I think us being the secondary payer under Choice is
problematic. And it is very problematic in places where--I was
just a couple weeks ago in Alaska talking with the DoD folks
and now are engaged with Dr. Woodson and his folks. That is
really problematic if we want DoD to be providers for us.
So I think we have----
Ms. Kuster. I have to tell you, my time is well past up.
But this direction, I would love to get a briefing going
forward, if we could----
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Absolutely.
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. And if we could stay on top of
that. Thank you.
And I apologize to the chair.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Coffman, you are recognized.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Gibson, so what we are, in effect, talking about
is the shortfall in your budget available for healthcare.
Mr. Gibson. Correct.
Mr. Coffman. So, if we look at the VA historically, I think
initially it was for service-connected issues for our military
personnel, not means-tested. Then we expanded that at some
point to low-income veterans on a means-tested basis. Then we
expanded it again at some point to give automatic eligibility
to our returning Active Duty leaving for civilian life that is
not means-tested. I can't remember if that is 4 or 5 years that
they have eligibility.
But in March of this year, VA announced that it would no
longer use the net worth or the asset test to determine VA
eligibility, thus expanding it again. But you did it at a time
where the money--it is my understanding you have the statutory
authority to do that, but you have to make an assessment of
whether you have the resources available to meet that expansion
of eligibility. Clearly, you don't have it. And so what are you
going to do about this?
Mr. Gibson. You know, I am going to have to follow up on
this one for the record.
Mr. Coffman. Okay.
[The information follows:]
Mr. Gibson. But my understanding was, what we did is we
were able to substitute other means tests that we were able to
access directly, either from the IRS or the Social Security
Administration or something like that, in place of an annual
requirement on the part of a veteran to file about net worth.
So it is my understanding, and we will go validate----
Mr. Coffman. Sure.
Mr. Gibson [continuing]. This and come back to you for the
record, but it is my understanding that this wasn't a move to
open the aperture. It was actually a move to relieve a burden,
an administrative burden, on the veteran.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. We need to find that out. Because I got
this information through a veterans magazine, one of the VSOs,
and they were touting it as an expansion of eligibility by
virtue of relaxing the asset requirement and making more
individuals eligible for--well, they would be eligible anyway,
but they would have to pay for a portion of their care. This
would relax that requirement. And so, obviously, then, it is an
expansion of care. I think you would assume that more people
would go through it.
If you would look at that and get back to the committee on
that, because I think that is a concern where we don't have the
resources to meet our current obligations; we really can't
expand eligibility to new populations.
Mr. Gibson. I think you are absolutely right. I agree with
you. And we will follow up for the record.
Mr. Coffman. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for
bringing this to light, this hearing, such a subject.
I am going to ask a couple of parochial questions, first,
if you don't mind.
Given that cost overruns and mismanagement continue to be a
problem, do you feel that the VA could benefit from the
expanded use of public-private partnerships for major
construction projects, where the VA allows non-Federal
stakeholders and construction experts to work on projects?
Mr. Gibson. The short answer, relatively less informed, is
yes. In fact, Secretary McDonald and I met, I think, about 2
weeks ago with the leadership of the Association of General
Contractors and a number of large and smaller contractors that
work with us on a regular basis. This was one of the very
specific topics that we talked about. And, in fact, we have
agreed to come together to look at specifically those
opportunities.
We are also actively considering an opportunity in San
Francisco on a specific project for public-private partnership.
Mr. McNerney. Okay.
Will the cost overruns of the Denver Medical Center cause a
delay of the French Camp community-based outpatient clinic and
other major construction projects that the President has
prioritized in his fiscal year 2016 budget?
Mr. Gibson. I don't expect that what we are doing in Denver
is going to have any adverse impact on any of our major lease
transactions.
And depending on the ultimate funding source that we wind
up working out with Congress, with both the authorizers and the
appropriators, I can't unequivocally say that it won't affect
some major construction projects, because that is at least one
of the options that has been on the table. But I think there is
a strong desire on the part of Congress for us to not adversely
impact those projects. So I think it is less likely that we
would see that as a source of funding.
Mr. McNerney. Well, in April, there was an announcement
about 15 projects, major projects. Five of them were going to
be too late for the Corps of Engineers to be involved in. Five
of them were still being questioned.
Do you have an idea of which projects are still being under
consideration?
Mr. Gibson. In terms of engaging the Corps to become our
construction agent, there were five that the Corps and VA had
agreed were too far along for it to make sense for the Corps to
take on. I think we have taken the number from five up to seven
on the ones that we have agreed with the Corps we would turn
over to the Corps for them to be the construction agent and
three that were relatively smaller transactions that we felt
like made the most sense for us to hang on to.
Mr. McNerney. Could you identify which ones are which?
Mr. Gibson. We will get that for you.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you.
Mr. Gibson. Be glad to. We have the lists. In fact, he may
have it in his book over here, so if he does, we will give it
to you before we walk out the door.
Mr. McNerney. And I am not sure whether this question has
been asked before. What is the price deferential between a VA
medical service versus non-VA medical services by whatever
metric you may have?
Mr. Gibson. I am going to defer to our clinician here.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I am not sure. I don't have that in my
head. But we can take that for the record and get that
information.
[The information follows:]
Mr. McNerney. Okay. Well, following up, what about
healthcare outcomes? What is the difference in healthcare
outcomes from VA-based service versus non-VA-based service for
veterans?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So, again, I don't know that we actually
have our own data around that. But there are plenty of research
studies that have been done looking at outcomes between private
sector and VA and basically have found that the quality of
those services are comparable, whether it is in the VA or
outside the VA.
Mr. Gibson. One of the things I would suggest that we do,
let's plan on a SAIL briefing for the Congressman. This is the
comprehensive tool that we use to evaluate care quality,
patient safety, access, patient satisfaction. And many of the
metrics that we use are metrics that are also used in the
private sector, so we have the ability to be able to compare
across VA and the private sector.
And we will get somebody like Peter Almenoff to come give
you a briefing.
Mr. McNerney. That would be very informative.
How about the outcomes of the new hepatitis C treatments?
Are those showing good healthcare outcomes?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Well, it is very early to assess that in
the process. Most of these are months courses of therapy. But
all of the studies that were done to approve these drugs show
that they have very high cure rates, much higher, with much
lower side-effect profiles than the drugs that we had in the
past.
Mr. McNerney. So, I mean, since so much resources are being
expended in that direction, we need to have a pretty clear
understanding that it is actually showing improved results.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Right.
Mr. McNerney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Dr. Wenstrup, you are recognized.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here today.
I want to expound a little bit upon what Mr. McNerney was
asking about when he was talking about cost, VA versus non-VA.
And we have had this discussion before, and, at one point, you
told me you are a ways away from really being able to assess
that.
And I think one of the best ways is how much are you
spending per RVU that you produce. And by that, I mean your
physical plant, your supplies, your administrators, your
employees. Because that is what a private practice has to do.
And I assume we are not at that point yet. Would that be
correct?
Mr. Gibson. I don't think we are, but I think we are
getting closer.
Jim.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. I mean, we have done cost per RVU based
upon--so the data that I am about to quote I think is based
upon, you know, our salary and benefits direct costs, so it is
equivalent to what we would be paying the provider. And our
cost per RVU is much lower than the private-sector benchmark.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, sure, it probably would be. But you are
not taking into account what the private-sector person is
paying for, for their insurance, for their staff, for their
supplies, for their physical plant, all those things. That is
how you can really evaluate what you are paying for RVU.
Because in a business model, which is really what we are
trying to get to here, which--I don't think the VA was ever in
one before--if we want to get to that point, you have to be
able to assess. Because at some point you have to say, you know
what, we have more buildings than we need, or we need more
buildings than we have, to be more productive. I mean, that is
really where we need to be headed.
And that is why you have to take into account all of those
things, because that is what that private person is doing. When
the VA pays that non-VA provider, they are not accountable for
all those other expenses----
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Right.
Mr. Wenstrup [continuing]. That that person takes in. So we
are not really comparing apples to apples unless we do that.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Right.
Dr. Wenstrup. So hopefully we will continue to proceed in
that direction so we can make wise decisions together as to how
we go forward. You know, and we need to keep looking for--how
do we reduce our fixed costs and still provide the same level
of care?
One thing I was encouraged about today, increase in RVUs 10
percent. Can you tell me how you did it?
Mr. Gibson. I think it is a combination of factors. We have
gone--and, for example, I alluded to extended hours, which has
allowed us, in many ways, to make more efficient use of our
space.
We have gone in and scrubbed primary care panels. We have
gone in and looked at appointment grids. We have gone through
that kind of scrubbing process.
We have developed a couple of different productivity
assessment tools that now push this data all the way out to the
individual medical center, down to the clinic, down to the
provider, so that we are able to look and see how relatively
productive a particular clinic is in relation to the volume of
appointment activity and the demand for care. And folks are
beginning to now make adjustments based on that. They are
realizing that they have excess capacity that they are not
utilizing.
Dr. Wenstrup. Are we reaching out to the providers and
asking them, what is it that you have to do that makes you less
efficient as far as seeing patients? You know, what is it that
we can do?
We talk about things like, you know--you are working out of
one treatment room. We know that is inefficient, right? So we
need that feedback from the providers, especially ones that
have been in private practice, to say, you know, you are eating
me up with doing X, Y, Z, restocking the cabinets, when I
should be seeing patients, those types of things, and all the
way up the line.
So I hope we are getting good provider input.
Mr. Gibson. My sense is that we are. I get it when I am out
in the field. I know, as we look at different particular
initiatives--we undertook a major initiative a year ago to look
at support staff for our specialty providers, which gathered
vast amounts of input from providers out in the field, with the
obvious conclusion that we were way underleveraging our
specialty providers. So one of things we have been doing is
ensuring that we are adding support staff into our specialty
clinics, as an example of that.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
One other thought I had, too, with one of the things you
said today, you know, a lot of veterans do choose to go to the
VA. They want to be at the VA. And there are a lot of veterans
who have other care--private insurance or whatever the case may
be.
If the VA is their choice, why don't we bill their
insurance, get on their plan? They have insurance somewhere
else. And, you know, a lot of veterans don't use VA because
they want more funds to be there for those who need it more.
Mr. Gibson. You are singing Jim's song here.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Yeah. And we do--so today we do--if they
have private insurance, we do bill their insurance. Sometimes
that is Medigap coverage, which without an EOB, Medicare EOB,
we don't get paid. And then we don't have the authority to bill
Medicare or Medicaid or TRICARE.
Dr. Wenstrup. Well, Medicare and Medicaid is robbing Peter
to pay Paul, as far as the big picture of taxpayer dollars, et
cetera.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Right.
Dr. Wenstrup. But private insurance is a different story.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. We do bill those. And, in fact, those
collection rates have been going up steadily year after year
after year.
Dr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Abraham.
Dr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you for being here, gentlemen.
I guess a statement first on just fiscal responsibility. I
was reading in the IG's report last week, and I think he said
that the VA didn't know they had $43 million in an account, and
all of a sudden it was just found after it had been sitting
there for 3 years. So that is, you know, somewhat of an
astounding thought.
And then I look at the Choice Act, and correct me if I am
wrong--I read the act--that there are $360 million put aside in
the Choice Act for awards and bonuses and that type of deal.
Now, you know, being a businessman, I totally support a bonus,
an award, when it is appropriate. But if that is an--is that an
accurate figure?
Mr. Gibson. I think what you--no, it is not.
Dr. Abraham. Okay.
Mr. Gibson. There is no money set aside in Choice for
bonuses. What you may be referring to are the caps on the cost
associated with administration of the plan. It is basically----
Dr. Abraham. Is that $360 million? Is that an accurate
figure?
Mr. Gibson. I want to say the initial tranche was $300
million, if I am remembering right, which is now somewhat
higher than that. But it is the money that we wind up paying
the third-party administrator for basically administering the--
--
Dr. Abraham. The program.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
Dr. Abraham. Let's talk a little bit about the lack of non-
VA providers, or getting them into the Choice program, of a
non-VA provider. And I think you had brought up the subject of
the rate being paid.
What I am seeing in our district in Louisiana--and you have
addressed this in a previous hearing, and we will kind of
redress it again--is not the rate but just actually getting
paid. And I was in the district last weekend and had three
separate providers come up and say, I haven't gotten my money,
and this has been going on for 2 and 3 years.
So what are we doing about that, Secretary? I know that you
gave us some good figures before, that the VISN 16, which I am
a part of, was doing better.
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Dr. Abraham. But the word on the street, so to speak, is
there are still some issues out there.
Mr. Gibson. Two things.
First of all, that is one of the advantages of Choice. The
provider gets paid by the third-party administrator. And that
has consistently happening within 30 days. We watch that and
monitor that. VA has historically been known to pay low and
slow. And that is not how you want to deal with your provider
network.
Dr. Abraham. So we have something in place that that is
going to get better?
Mr. Gibson. And so what we have done over the last 9 months
or so is organizationally consolidate. We were organizationally
doing this payment processing through 21 separate VISN
headquarters in 70 different physical locations, processing
invoices for care. And I would tell you, based on what I have
heard, we were probably doing it in 150 different ways.
And so we have consolidated organizationally. We have begun
to tackle the staffing issues, the process issues, and the
technology issues, none of which were being tackled unless they
were being addressed in some kind of a workaround situation in
some location somewhere.
We had, for example, locations where, instead of
establishing a call center that is available to handle inbound
questions from providers about their payment, we would have a
processor that is processing a payment, and then the phone
would ring, and they would answer the phone and, you know,
doing business in a way that you would never see in the private
sector.
Dr. Abraham. Correct.
Mr. Gibson. So we now have that all organizational
reporting. We are seeing the times improve. Part of what they
are doing is they are sailing into a headwind. They have a 40-
percent increase in invoices being presented for payment over
last year. Now, the good news is they are processing a lot more
invoices than they did a year ago, but they are barely keeping
up.
We have made progress in VISN 16, though.
Dr. Abraham. Okay. Thank you.
And one real quick question, because I am running out of
time. The hepatitis C money for 2016 and 2017 that you are
projecting, do you think you are pretty much spot on, or do you
think you will need to come back to us and say we need more
money?
Mr. Gibson. We are short in 2016. You know, the budget is,
what, $650 million, somewhere in that neighborhood, $650
million to $700 million for 2016, and that won't be adequate
unless we ration that care.
The other option is, as we are doing right now, is
basically when we run out of money to do it inside VA. We refer
those to care under Choice and rely on that sort of safety
valve.
Dr. Abraham. Okay.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brown. do you have another question?
Ms. Brown. I do. However I will pass so, I can be last on
my side.
The Chairman. Mr. Takano, do you have another question?
Mr. Takano. Yes, I do. Secretary Gibson or others or Dr.
Tuchschmidt, I want to continue some of my line of questioning
on the hepatitis C issue. Right now, you don't ration hepatitis
C care, you don't see the need to. And I want to get some idea
about the experience of, say, a veteran who has hepatitis C,
does the physician within the VA have full discretion about
when that medication is supposed to be accessed or prescribed?
Is there an internal process?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. So we have guidelines that we have
published for the treatment of patients with hepatitis C and
the new drugs, both specifying when certain drugs should be
used, as well as kind of a hierarchy of people who have
advanced liver disease should be treated first, et cetera. But
the decision to treat or not treat is an individual decision
between a clinician and a patient.
Mr. Takano. So the doctor, the physician has a considerable
amount of autonomy in terms of making this decision. I have
been reading disturbing cases in the L.A. Times recently about
a woman who has been, and her physician and they are battling
the private insurer. The insurer would rather provide the
medication at a later stage of the disease. And, in this case,
and I don't know what the experience is for people in Medicare,
whether they are in traditional Medicare or Medicare Advantage
Plans, but at least in the VA, you are telling me that the
current situation now is that the physician's judgment is
pretty much honored?
Dr. Tuchschmidt. Yes, we respect the clinician judgment.
There are many places in Medicaid, which will not cover the new
drugs. There are some private insurances that do and some
private insurances that don't. We have covered those drugs. And
for the patient who has advanced liver disease as a result of
hepatitis C, I mean, you are at risk of cirrhosis. You are at
risk of liver cancer from the hepatitis C virus. If you have
advanced liver disease, you are definitely a candidate for
therapy. If you are infected but don't have active liver
disease, right now, you are kind of lower down kind of in a
priority list perspective. But as a patient, I potentially am
infectious to other people. So I am infectious. It is a
bloodborne disease, through contact with my wife and my kids
and other people in my household, people I might be working
with, et cetera. So I think you may not have active liver
disease, but you may still as a patient have a lot of concerns.
Mr. Takano. Secretary Gibson, you were reluctant to reveal
what you actually pay for this drug. Is my understanding
correct that we have just one manufacturer that manufactures
the hepatitis C drug? Or are there more than one manufacturer?
Mr. Gibson. There is more than one manufacturer.
Mr. Takano. Okay. I was under the understanding there was
only manufacturer and maybe one patent. I didn't realize there
was this competition.
Mr. Gibson. There is multiple manufacturers of multiple
drugs, but they each make one patented drug.
Mr. Takano. I see. Now, my understanding is that Medicare
can't negotiate in the way that the VA can and that Medicare
spent $4.5 billion in hepatitis C treatments, 15 times over
what it spent the year before. I don't know what the experience
of the VA is or just what you are spending per patient because
I realize you are not willing to reveal that. And I am looking
at what people are experiencing with private healthcare
insurance. It seems to me that people are making some rational
decisions, especially our seniors that our veterans, who are
low income, that they are probably getting access to a doctor
who can make a decision and not have to wait on an insurance
company and that, in this case, the VA is providing a much more
superior service to those veterans.
And you mentioned, Secretary Gibson, the case of knee
replacement, the out-of-pocket costs. I am just wondering what
the out-of-pocket costs are for the seniors who are limited to
Medicare if they have to get this hepatitis C medication versus
the veteran.
Mr. Gibson. My understanding is that Medicare has an annual
cost ceiling of $7,200. And somebody that is more expert than
me can correct that. And so that would be, you would get capped
out at that amount under Medicare.
Mr. Takano. So the senior would have to pay that
difference?
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Takano. Wow. For that low-income senior, that would be
a big problem.
Mr. Gibson. It is clearly a very strong incentive. And it
applies not to just this hep C treatment but it applies to
whatever a veteran may be pursuing. There is some preventive
treatment that Medicare has no copay on. And so, in that
instance, the veteran truly has a choice without any different
economic consequences. So he can go to VA or he can go to his
private provider and use Medicare. But if it is a procedure
with the copay, then the veteran is going to be making a
rational, economic decision, as you are referring to.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Ms. Brown. May I respond to your comments?
Because I don't think you were here when we passed the
prescription drug bill. When we passed it, we directed the
Secretary not to negotiate the price of the drugs. That was a
part of the bill.
Mr. Takano. Oh, Ms. Brown----
Ms. Brown. It would be the illegal for the Secretary to
address that issue. I am just clearing up what happened. You
weren't here when we did it. But in addition to that, in the
Affordable Care Act that is now standing, we are doing away
with that doughnut hole that you are talking about so seniors
will not be out of pocket for that additional money.
Mr. Takano. Ms. Brown, I was aware of that. And I was
merely trying to suggest that the VA is doing business in a
better way.
Ms. Brown. Oh, absolutely. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Radewagen, do you have any questions?
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and ranking member.
Good afternoon, Secretary Gibson. And thank you for your
testimony, especially about the improvements in access to
healthcare for all veterans. I would also like to extend my
sincere thank you to you and Secretary McDonald for sending Dr.
Wayne Pfeffer, Medical Center Director for the VA Pacific
Islands, to represent your Department during the most important
holiday in American Samoa, Flag Day, commemorating the 115th
anniversary of the raising of the United States flag on our
island.
It meant the world to our veterans. So thank you very much.
I will be very brief. I don't know if you are aware of some of
the shortages of medical personnel affecting the services being
provided in our VA clinic back home in American Samoa. For
example, we have got audiology equipment on hand in the clinic
but no specialist to operate it. We also have brand new
physical therapy equipment on hand but no PT specialist. So I
was wondering how many, if any, of those new VHA staff members
you hired were for the VA clinic in American Samoa?
Mr. Gibson. I am not able to answer your question off the
top of my head. I see Dr. Tuchschmidt writing over here, and I
am sure there are some folks behind be writing. We will get you
an answer back to let you know.
And I will also look into the vacancies in our clinic
there.
Ms. Radewagen. Okay. Thank you. I had another quick
question. How can VA improve its budget planning to ensure that
the Department is better able to anticipate and react to higher
than expected demands for care and/or increased costs of
medications or other necessities?
Mr. Gibson. That is a great question. I alluded in my
opening statement to the challenges that we have as a
Department forecasting reaction to improving access, being able
to forecast changes in reliance on VA care, and then being able
to factor into those forecasts information about market
penetration, where we look at the number of veterans in a
particular market, how many are enrolled for care at VA.
I happen to know from my early visits to Phoenix that
Phoenix was dramatically underpenetrated in the market. So
there is a part of me that looks at the kind of response that
we saw, that I described earlier, that is not necessarily
surprise. But we don't typically factor those elements in or
measure them very effectively. I think when we go through a
process like we are now, where we are dramatically improving
access to care in a relatively short period of time, it is
giving us an opportunity to gain better insight and
understanding and data.
So that as we are forecasting future instances, we are able
to look at those and understand a little bit better what the
anticipated response might be. And I would tell you, lastly, on
medications, I think the lesson, one of the lessons we have
learned from hep C is very early on where we identified what
you might characterize as blockbuster drugs that have a high
price tag is that we start thinking and building into our
planning as early as we possibly can the potential financial
impact of those. There are a couple of cardiology drugs that
are in the pipeline right now that are supposed to be
blockbusters coming down the pipe that we are already talking
about and trying to make allowances for.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Dr. Tuchschmidt. If I could just add to that, I think today
we use one of the best actuarial firms in the world, Milliman,
to do our modeling and projections. I think those models work
well in very stable environments. But when that environment is
perturbed by changing the benefit structure in some way, it
becomes very hard to predict. And I think we have been doing a
lot of work to look at and try and understand what would happen
if we, a lot of interest in making the 40-mile benefit 40 miles
from a place that can deliver that service, we have been doing
a lot of work to try and understand what that does that look
like. But you have to make a lot of assumptions that may or may
not be correct. And I think that in very dynamic, fluid
conditions, it is very hard to do some of the modeling that you
might be talking about.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Brownley. For a very short question.
Ms. Browney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for your indulgence. I really appreciate it. I had highlighted
earlier in my earlier testimony some of the impacts that my
district is already feeling. One of the other issues that they
raised too was that the C&P evaluations are beginning to slow
down as well. I know the folks the work in my congressional
office are feeling that impact. I think you have said that $600
million, you found $600 million, I am wondering will that $600
million begin to mitigate these impacts that my district is
feeling in the short term? And then if Congress doesn't act on
the fiscal year 2015 budget shortfall, what is it going to look
like in the VA in July and August and on October 1.
Mr. Gibson. I think the number I should have used, $348
million, is the amount of the--that we have provided Congress
notice on that we intend to transfer into cover additional
costs for care in the community. I think the farther we go in
the fiscal year without the ability to open the aperture and
utilize additional Choice funds, we get into very dire
circumstances. Before we get to the end of August, we are, we
are in a situation where we are going to have to start denying
care to veterans in the community because we don't have the
resources to be able to pay for it. And that is, I don't think
anybody wants to see that happen. It will be a very unpleasant
and unsatisfactory situation.
Ms. Browney. And will you be giving us any of that
information so that we have, you know, the real data to
understand what those severe impacts are?
Mr. Gibson. As best as we can, I am hoping that we wind up
not having to go there and that we are able to use Choice
dollars that were appropriated for care in the community to pay
for care in the community. And if that is the case, then I
think we are going to be absolutely fine. And we are going to
be able to sustain care for veterans, even in the context of
this increasing demand that we are experiencing. I think
failing that, yes, there will have to be an awful lot of
communication that goes all the way down to the medical center
level so that Members understand what is happening in their
particular districts.
Ms. Browney. So, with this transfer of money, 358, whatever
you said it was, can I go back to my district and tell my folks
who are waiting for adult daycare that we have got some extra
money, and we will be able to address their issue?
Mr. Gibson. Part of what we are going through right now is
some leveling across all of our different locations. So a lot
of that is happening inside of VISN, where a VISN may have one
center that has got some additional resources available, more
than another medical center would. So there is leveling
happening there. There is leveling happening at the top of VHA.
We are going to continue to look internally in the very short
term for opportunities at the top of VHA that we are able to
distribute out to the field while we are waiting for the
appropriator's nod on the additional $350 million that we have
asked that they allow us to transfer. So it is hard for me to
say at this point down to an individual medical center level:
Here's what that $348 million is going to mean to you.
Ms. Browney. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. For some final comments.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. I am going to say right up front that
I don't support across the budget cuts. I would not be
supportive of across-the-board cuts. We gave you all $15
billion, and you have $5 billion is that for healthcare?
Mr. Gibson. For staff and facilities, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. I thought it was just for veterans' care. Did it
just say for----
Mr. Gibson. There is $10 billion for veterans' care, $5
billion for staff and facilities.
Ms. Brown. I need to know what it is that you need from us,
the Congress, what do you need us to do to put VA where it
needs to be? I don't want a constituent calling me saying we
are not providing care for veterans. That is unacceptable.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. When I talked to my colleagues on the floor,
they say: We don't understand what is the problem, we give you
everything you all asked us for, and so I am at that page too.
If you ask us and say this is what you need, I am going to
fight for it. I don't want my veterans saying that we are not
providing care. I have read those stories about me and my
district.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. When you opened up the clinic in my district,
then it just, the demand went through the roof.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. So help me here.
Mr. Gibson. We owe you a formal request. The specific
request in the context that we are talking about here is a
request to allow VA to utilize Choice program funds, section
802 funds, to be able to cover costs for care in the community
that might not otherwise qualify for Choice, meet those
criteria for Choice. I think that will be the central feature
of the formal request to Congress for support that will allow
us to avoid disrupting care for veterans.
Ms. Brown. I hear staff in the back of me saying the
Committee are going to need a number.
Mr. Gibson. Well, the number that we have offered and that
was included in my testimony is $2.5 billion. That is the
forecast--it is not what we are in the hole today--it is the
forecast as we continue to deliver care in the community
between now and the end of the year of what our shortfall would
be.
Ms. Brown. I am confused. If we give you $2-point-something
billion or give VA the authority to move the money around, will
it stop the calls I get from veterans saying they are being
denied care? Because that is how we got to the $15 billion is
because we want to take care of the veterans. When we send them
to war, we have an obligation and a responsibility to take care
of them.
Mr. Gibson. We agree and we feel that same sense of
obligation. What the $2.5 billion will do will allow us to
basically continue on the path that we are on right now. But as
I mentioned earlier, every step we take to improve access to
care, much like your comment about opening a new outpatient
clinic and the demand goes through the roof, that is the same
thing we are experiencing across VHA.
We do something, whether it is additional staffing,
additional facilities or space, whether it is improving
productivity so that we can provide appointments more quickly
and what happens is all of that additional capacity gets more
than consumed with additional demand. And that is why the total
wait times are up. It is the accelerating demand that we are
dealing with.
So you may still get a phone call from a veteran that says
I am not getting timely care. And the veteran is going to be
right because he is not getting timely care. That is because we
improve access to care as fast as we can and the demand grows
even faster.
Ms. Brown. Well, if that veteran wants care at the VA, it
may not be in the time that he wants. But if he wants Choice,
he or she wants Choice, that should be within 30 days.
Mr. Gibson. It absolutely should. And if we get the
additional flexibility so that different kinds of care are
Choice eligible, then you are absolutely right, there shouldn't
be a reason for a veteran to have to wait if he is willing to
go get care in the community. You are right.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The one thing that I am a little confused
about as it relates to the shortfall, you have talked about in
your testimony when you use mitigating factors is the shortfall
of 2.6 or 2.7, whatever the number is, is that after you have
implemented the mitigating procedures?
Mr. Gibson. The $2.5 billion basically assumes, the biggest
mitigant is that we are successful in shifting care into
Choice. That is the biggest factor. And we think, we think that
the current estimates are that we may be able to shift $500
million worth of Choice-eligible care, based on today's
eligibility criteria, into Choice between now and the end of
the year. That is included in the $2.5 billion. So if we were
successful in doing that, that number comes down to $2 billion.
But it is still basically a pool of $2.5 billion for care in
the community where we want to be able to sustain that care for
veterans.
The Chairman. Very good. And one thing that concerns me
about the answer to one of the questions where you talked about
with Mr. Takano getting to a point where you are going to have
to begin rationing care to folks with hepatitis C, I hope it
was not your intent to infer that you would not go to something
that you have already testified today to the fact that you can
go in and take money out of the bonus program to plug that
budget hole if necessary. Surely, you would choose to draw
money out of the bonus plan in order to provide hepatitis C
drugs and not keep that program whole and cause veterans not to
get treatment.
Mr. Gibson. We are not doing any rationing of care today.
We don't expect to do any rationing of care with hepatitis C.
The thing that is allowing us to do that, frankly, is Choice.
If we can't provide, if we don't have the resources to provide
the care within 30 days, then we refer that veteran to a
provider in the community. We stay close and work----
The Chairman. I understand that. But you are still dancing
around the $360 million worth of bonus money that is sitting
there that you can go to. And I don't want to hear anybody say
we choose bureaucrat bonuses over veteran healthcare. And I
know that is not what you----
Mr. Gibson. I understand the point, yes, sir.
The Chairman. Everybody, thank you for being here. We wish
you a happy Independence Day. We have another hearing in this
room in 15 minutes.
So, with that, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:41 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

-------

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Chairman Jeff Miller

Thank you all for joining us for today's oversight hearing, ``The
State of VA's Fiscal Year 2015 Budget.''
I called this hearing two weeks ago following a series of
concerning and inconsistent reports from veterans and Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) employees in the field regarding the current
state of VA funding.
I was not aware then of the troubling extent of VA's current budget
crisis.
And, unfortunately, I suspect that had I not called this hearing, I
would still not be aware today of the two point six billion dollar
funding shortfall that the Veterans Health Administration is currently
estimating, largely as a result of increased veteran demand for non-VA
care and rising costs of Hepatitis C treatments that VA did not
properly plan for or manage.
Given the extensive pent-up demand for care that was exposed during
last year's hearings on wait time manipulation, VA had ample time to
adjust its budgetary needs with the Office of Management and Budget to
prevent what we are now seeing.
In February through April of this year, Secretary McDonald appeared
at four separate budget hearings.
Since those have concluded, the Secretary and I have met and spoken
regularly on a number of important, emerging issues.
At no point in those hearings or in our subsequent discussions
since, has the Secretary expressed to me that the Department had a
budget shortfall of such a magnitude--one that threatens VA's ability
to meets its obligations to our nation's veterans.
Nor did other VA leaders or officials communicate how much in the
red VA was either--even though the Committee was informed late last
week that the Department knew as early as March that there were giant
disparities between the amount of money that VA was spending and the
amount of money budgeted.
The only message that Congress received in March regarding the
state of VA's budget was the quarterly financial report VA submitted to
the Appropriations Committee for the first quarter of fiscal year 2015,
which showed that VA was actually under plan in terms of its spend out
rate.
Meanwhile, just two weeks ago VA proposed a plan--that Congress
authorized at the Department's urging--to transfer one hundred and
fifty million dollars in fiscal year 2015 funding to support the
continued construction of the replacement medical center project in
Denver, Colorado.
VA also proposed an across the board recession of just under a one
percent in fiscal year 2016 funds to devote to the Denver project--a
proposal, by the way, that the Veterans Health Administration's Chief
Financial Officer told Committee staff last week that she did not even
know about until after it had already been transmitted to Congress.
Those actions clearly show that VA leaders believe that moving
forward with the Denver project--which is not scheduled to open to
veteran patients until 2017 at the earliest--is a higher priority for
the Department than ensuring that veterans who need care now are able
to access that care.
I have come to expect a startling lack of transparency and
accountability from VA over the last years; but failing to inform
Congress of a multi-billion dollar funding deficit until this late in
the fiscal year while continuing to advance what I believe are lower
priority needs that further deplete the Department's coffers in support
of a construction project that benefits no veteran for at least two
more years is disturbing on an entirely different level.
Earlier this week, VA issued a ``fact sheet'' that claims that VA
``formally requested limited budget flexibility'' in February and March
and May of this year and, ``plainly articulated'' VA's need for
additional resources.
Buried on page one hundred and sixty seven of the second volume of
VA's budget submission is a single statement that reads: ``[i]n the
coming months, the Administration will submit legislation to reallocate
a portion of Choice program funding to support essential investments in
VA system priorities . . . ''
Secretary McDonald repeated this statement in his budget testimony
without providing any additional supporting details or justification
and, to-date, no legislative proposal has been submitted by the
Administration.
In a May 12th letter to the Chairmen and Ranking Members of the
House and Senate Veterans' Affairs and Appropriations Committees
regarding the Denver project, VA stated that the Department, `` . . .
requests flexibility to make the [Choice] program work better for
veterans through limited authority to use funds from Section 802 of the
Choice Act to fund care in the community to the extent it exceeds our
FY 2015 budget.''
Again, no further information or supporting materials were
provided.
If those two statements--absent any data or details--are what VA
calls ``formally requesting'' budget flexibility and ``plainly
articulating'' the Department's needs, then I understand why VA has
found itself suffering nothing but string after string of failures in
the last year.
What's more, it proves to me once again that VA's current problems
reflect a management issue far more than they represent a money issue.
This Committee cannot help VA solve its problems, if VA refuses to
be honest, upfront, and transparent with us and with the American
people about the position it is in, the struggles it is facing, and the
help that it needs.
Congress has consistently provided VA with the funding that the
Department has requested and, as a result, VA funding has risen seventy
three percent since 2009 while the number of Veterans using VA for care
has grown by only about 2 percent per year, per VA's own testimony.
I know that I speak for every Member of this Committee when I say
that we are committed to ensuring that VA has the funding it needs to
deliver the world class healthcare our veterans deserve.
But VA must do its part--to confront and correct its poor budget
planning and poor management issues, to hold poor performing executives
and employees accountable, and--perhaps most importantly--to prioritize
our veteran's needs over the bureaucracy's wants.
And if the current shortfall shows us anything it's that what our
veterans need and want is to have a say in where and when they receive
their healthcare.
Assuming VA's numbers are true, non-VA care appointments now make
up twenty percent of all VA appointments, with veterans receiving more
than one million appointments from community providers each month.
In the coming weeks, I will work with my colleagues on the
Appropriations Committee to give VA the flexibility it is seeking to
use a limited amount of Choice Funds for non-VA care and ensure that no
veteran suffers as a result of VA's mismanagement of the generous
budget the American taxpayers have provided.
However, going forward, there must be a dedicated appropriation
account to fund non-VA care under a single, streamlined, integrated
authority with a dedicated funding stream contained within VA's base
budget--rather than the seven disparate, ill-executed non-VA care
programs outlined in VA's testimony.
This morning, I look forward to discussing this proposal with
Deputy Secretary Gibson and with my fellow Committee Members.
I thank you all for being here and I now recognize Ranking Member
Brown for any opening statement she might have.

Prepared Statement of Ranking Minority Member Corrine Brown

Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing is on the ``State of VA's Fiscal Year 2015
budget.'' I can tell you all that the state of VA's budget is not
strong.
The VA is facing a shortfall of $2.6 billion for veterans'
healthcare. This shortfall must be addressed immediately. We cannot put
the health and lives of our veterans at risk by spending our time and
attention pointing fingers and assigning blame.
VA will be facing an additional shortfall at the start of the next
fiscal year in October, a shortfall that will be made worse by the
cost-saving steps VA is taking right now. We must address this upcoming
shortfall.
I know that this Committee, as we have done so many times in the
past, will work together to solve this crisis, and fix this mess. And I
know that we all recognize that sometimes it takes more money to really
fix a problem, and not just slap some tape on it and call it a day.
So, in the words of Deputy Secretary Gibson we will ``get our
checkbooks out.'' But I am concerned that there may be nothing left in
the account as long as we continue to pretend that we can fund the
essential requirements of government within arbitrary budget caps. We
seem to be heading toward a government shutdown, and I am concerned
over the effect such a shutdown would have on veterans seeking
healthcare.
Ten years ago we addressed another VA shortfall. That shortfall was
due to a lack of sufficient planning, and years of not providing the VA
the resources it needed. Today's shortfall also seems to be caused by
the lack of proper planning regarding the demand of veterans for VA
healthcare. I am also concerned that inadequate planning led to
insufficient resource requests.
We need to begin to fix these problems. My bill, the Department of
Veterans Affairs Budget Planning Reform Act of 2015 passed the House in
March 420-0. It is a much needed reform in how the VA plans and budgets
for the future. It is time that our colleagues in the Senate pass this
bill and send it to the President.
If the VA is going to be there for our veterans, then we are going
to have to fix the problems. This will call for more than us just
opening up our checkbook, or writing blank checks to the VA. It will
require thoughtful and major reforms so that we can ensure that in the
years ahead the VA is worthy of our veterans.
But today, right now, we have veterans that need healthcare and
checks we need to write to pay for that, and we need to make sure that
these checks are not returned because we do not have enough money in
our account.
Then, and only then, can we start the reform effort so that VA is
the model of how we care for those who have sacrificed for us, and
honored us with their service.
We have got to work together to ensure we are not giving our
veterans a check that will bounce because of insufficient funds.
Failure is not an option!
Thank you and I yield back the balance of my time.

-------

Statement of Hon. Sloan Gibson, Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs

Good morning Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Department
of Veterans Affairs' (VA's) execution of its Fiscal Year (FY) 2015
budget. I am accompanied today by Dr. James Tuchschmidt, Interim
Principal Deputy Under Secretary for Health; Mr. Edward Murray, Acting
Assistant Secretary for Management and Interim Chief Financial Officer;
and Mr. Gregory Giddens, Principal Executive Director, Office of
Acquisitions, Logistics, and Construction.
Caring for our Nation's Veterans, their Survivors, and dependents
continues to be the guiding mission of VA. Each year, VA executes our
budget to ensure we deliver timely, high quality services and benefits
to fulfill this mission. As we emerge from one of the most serious
crises the Department has ever experienced, we face continuing
challenges to ensure our Veterans receive the timely care they have
earned through their service. However, we believe that these challenges
are surmountable and will continue to work with Congress to reach
resolution and develop plans to move forward in achieving our mission.

Improving Access to Care

Before reviewing the challenges to VA's budget this fiscal year, it
is essential to understand the context in which VA is executing its
resources. In response to unacceptable delays in Veterans receiving
medical services, in May 2014, VA launched the Accelerating Access to
Care Initiative, which included immediate actions to improve Veterans'
access to care. Our strategy has focused on four critical activities:
staffing, space, productivity, and VA Care in the Community. While more
work remains to be done, real progress has been made. For example:

In the area of staffing, the Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) has increased onboard staff by 12,179
since April 2014, including 1,086 physicians, 2,724 nurses, and
4,671 other select critical occupations. As part of this
initiative, VHA has hired over 3,700 medical center staff using
the new resources provided in the Veterans Access, Choice, and
Accountability Act (``Choice Act'').

In order to create additional space, during the last
fiscal year VA activated 80 new leases in VHA, totaling 1.3
million square feet and activated newly owned facilities
totaling 420,000 square feet. We have dozens of emergency lease
transactions in process to more quickly increase available
space for Veteran care. Wherever possible, we are increasing
the number of primary care exam rooms per provider in order to
allow providers to see more Veterans each day.

We have extended clinic hours into nights and weekends
in order to best use our limited space and enhance convenience
for Veterans.

Our efforts to improve access to care have been successful.
Nationally, VA completed more than 51.8 million appointments between
June 1, 2014 and April 30, 2015. This represents an increase of 2.7
million more appointments completed than during the same time period in
FY 2013 or FY 2014. In April 2015, VA completed 97 percent of
appointments within 30 days of the clinically indicated or Veteran's
preferred date; 93 percent within 14 days; 88 percent within 7 days;
and 22 percent on the same day. Not only are more appointments being
completed, but Relative Value Units (RVUs), a standard measure of
clinical output, have increased 10 percent year over year, twice the
increase in providers during the same time, confirming improved
productivity.
We are managing to complete these appointments while more Veterans
continue to come to VA for their care, even though 81 percent have
Medicare, Medicaid, Tricare, or private insurance. While the number of
Veterans using VA for care has grown about 2 percent per year, many
locations where space, staffing, productivity, and community care
enhancements have been emphasized are growing at multiples of that
rate. Essentially, as we are improving Veterans' access to care across
VA, Veterans are responding and seeking VA care at higher rates. Our
workload has increased by 10.5 percent in total, for VA care and Care
in the Community combined.

The Veterans Choice Program and Purchased Care Reform Legislation

The Veterans Choice Program is helping VA to meet some of the
demand for Veterans healthcare in the short-term, and VA is thankful
for the Choice Act's funding to help us address our access issue. In
February 2015, when VA transmitted the 2016 Budget to Congress, we
noted that the Choice Act investments provide the authorities, funding,
and other tools to enhance services to Veterans in the short-term,
while strengthening the underlying VA system to better serve Veterans
in the future. We also noted that more resources in certain areas would
be required to ensure that the VA system can provide timely, high-
quality healthcare into the future.
As we gain more experience with executing the Choice Program, we
continue to learn how the program can be improved to better serve
Veterans. We appreciate Congress passing legislation regarding the
driving distance calculation methodology and the increased flexibility
for the Secretary to grant waivers for Veteran eligibility for the
Choice Program; we hope Congress will consider the other requests we
have made identifying solutions to help operate the Choice Program more
effectively.
We are also focused on looking internally at the business rules and
processes that govern the Veterans Choice Program. When we step back to
revise our own practices and focus on long-term work plans, we are
creating more efficient processes that will not only support providing
better and timelier care to Veterans, but also provide better business
relationships with our VA community care providers.
On May 1, VA sent Congress an Administration legislative proposal
entitled the ``Department of Veterans Affairs Purchased Healthcare
Streamlining and Modernization Act.'' This bill would make critical
improvements to the Department's authorities to use provider agreements
for the purchase of VA community medical care--in order to streamline
and speed the business process for purchasing care for Veterans when
necessary care cannot be purchased through existing contracts or
sharing agreements. This proposal would ensure that VA is able to
provide local care to Veterans in a timely and responsible manner,
while including explicit protections for procurement integrity,
provider qualifications, and price reasonableness. We urge your
consideration of this bill, which will provide VA the right legal
foundation on which to reform its purchased care program-- which
remains critical for Veterans' access to healthcare.

Care in the Community

For years, VA has used various authorities and programs in order to
provide care to Veterans more quickly and closer to home. In FY 2014,
Veterans completed 55 million appointments inside VA and 16.5 million
appointments for Care in the Community. Each month, VA completes over 1
million appointments through doctors and clinics in the community,
which represents over 20 percent of total appointments. We have
succeeded in providing increased access to care by way of Care in the
Community by issuing over 2.9 million authorizations in the last 12
months, which is a 44 percent increase over the same period in the
previous year. This increase in authorizations will result in millions
of additional episodes of care for Veterans should sufficient resources
be available.
This unprecedented increase in Veteran access to care has come at a
cost. VHA now expects to spend $10.1 billion in FY 2015 for Care in the
Community, \1\ an increase of $1.9 billion (24 percent) from the $8.2
billion in FY 2014. Our FY 2015 Medical Services budget includes $7.3
billion for Care in the Community, and VA had expected the Choice
Program to finance a surge in demand for Care in the Community.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Care in the Community includes all inpatient and outpatient
care, as well as community nursing homes, dialysis, and emergency care
(Millennium Bill) by providers outside the VA. It also includes CHAMPVA
and other dependent programs, State Homes, Project ARCH, and Indian
Health Service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the past eight months of implementing the Choice Program, we
accomplished a significant amount in a short period of time: we have
produced and distributed over 8.5 million Veterans Choice Cards,
determined Veterans' eligibility, authorized care, coordinated care and
managed utilization, established new provider agreements, processed
complex claims, and stood up a call center, all with the goal of
providing Veterans with the best possible care-experience, while also
meeting our obligations to be good stewards of the Nation's tax
dollars. We have also been modifying our referral processes to create
efficiencies in the system to ensure Veterans are able to receive care
timely. We are proud of what we have accomplished; and Veterans are as
well, with more of them coming to VA for their healthcare needs.
Unfortunately, the Choice Program has not fully absorbed the
additional Veteran demand for care, both inside and outside of the VA.
We have had challenges redirecting the flow of care from Care in the
Community to the Choice Program. Part of this is due to the fact that,
even prior to passage of the Choice Act, we were leveraging Care in the
Community to ensure that Veterans were not experiencing excessive wait
times. We understand that some of these challenges are also due to
employees not fully understanding how the Choice Program works. We
continue our outreach to VA facility leadership to improve employees'
understanding of the Choice Program and to address any reluctance our
staff may have to send Veteran patients into the community to use the
Choice Program. Our staff are more familiar and comfortable with
assisting Veterans with existing VA community care programs, many of
which are long-standing. We must ensure they are just as adept with the
Choice Program as well.
We also recognize that the number and different types of VA
community care programs and authorities may be confusing to Veterans,
our stakeholders, and our employees. We currently have 7 different
programs that we utilize to provide care to Veterans, including:

1. Agreements with the Indian Health Service, Department of
Defense, Other Federal Agencies, and Academic Affiliates;
2. Veterans Choice Program;
3. Patient Centered Community Care (PC3);
4. Project ARCH;
5. Other national contracts (such as dialysis);
6. Local contracts and local sharing agreements; and
7. Individual authorizations.

Navigating these programs to determine the best fit for a Veteran
may be challenging. Therefore, we are currently working to streamline
channels of care, billing practices, and mechanisms for authorizations,
with the goal of creating a more unified and integrated approach to
community care.
We are making efforts to improve how we are managing our Care in
the Community program while continuing to do the right thing for
Veterans and provide essential access to care. In order to continue
these efforts, we have determined that, at the current rate, expected
demand for Care in the Community in FY 2015 will cost approximately an
additional $2.5 billion. We are currently taking the following actions
to mitigate this need.

First, we have issued guidance to our facilities to
maximize the use of the Veterans Choice Program by, to the
extent possible, directing all eligible care to the Choice
Program. We estimate that this could reduce the requirement by
$500 million, although this estimate is highly uncertain and
depends significantly on Veterans' desires to use the Choice
Program instead of waiting for an appointment within VA.

Second, we have analyzed prior obligations for Care in
the Community to determine whether the services provided were
eligible for and met all of the requirements of the Choice
Program; this analysis revealed approximately $24 million that
could retroactively be recorded against the Choice Program.

Third, we have identified approximately $170 million
in Medical Services resources, such as funds for travel and
training and other areas deemed less critical than paying non-
VA care bills that have been reallocated to the Care in the
Community program without adverse consequences to patient care.

In addition, we plan to request a transfer of unobligated funds
from the Medical Facilities account to the Medical Services account.
This transfer will not have an immediate impact to any VA services
provided to Veterans. To ensure Veterans are receiving their requested
care, we request flexibility through limited authority to use funds
from section 802 of the Choice Act to fund Care in the Community, to
the extent these costs exceed our FY 2015 budget.

Hepatitis C

One example of these evolving Veteran needs can be seen in the
recent advancements in the treatment of the Hepatitis C virus (HCV).
Studies indicate that when these new treatments are used in combination
with existing treatment regimens, there is a higher chance of
successful treatment in patients with HCV. VA is a leader in the U.S.
in HCV care, including screening, treatment, and prevention. We want to
ensure our Veterans are provided with the best treatment options
available to them, so we successfully set up an infrastructure capable
of ensuring treatment can be provided whenever appropriate. However, in
providing this critical care, we are facing a funding shortfall for the
cost of HCV treatment.
As you know, the Veterans healthcare Budget Reform and Transparency
Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-81) established funding for VA's medical care
accounts through an Advance Appropriation (AA). Under this process, VA
must estimate funding needs two years in advance of their execution.
While the AA provides VA with timely and predictable funding, the
process can introduce additional risk of variance between projected and
actual costs. The shortfall for HCV treatment is evidence of this risk
that can be shown by a timeline of events:

In the summer 2012, VHA developed the internal budget
requirements for its FY 2015 AA request.

In April 2013, we submitted our FY 2014 budget, which
included the FY 2015 AA request for VA Medical Care.

In summer 2013, VHA developed its internal budget
requirements for its FY 2015 revised appropriation request, to
be submitted with its FY 2015 budget.

In November and December 2013, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved two antiviral medications for use
as part of combination regimens which offer shorter treatment
durations and decreased side effects in addition to increased
cure rates, but are more expensive than prior treatments.

In January 2014, Congress passed the final FY 2014
appropriations bill (Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2014)
which did not identify a specific amount of funding designated
for HCV treatment as part of the FY 2015 AA.

In March 2014, we submitted our FY 2015 budget, which
included the FY 2015 revised appropriation request for VA
Medical Care.

In April 2014, we added the most recently approved
FDA-approved treatments to our formulary.

In September 2014, we alerted Congress to the
impending FY 2015 shortfall in funding for HCV treatment in a
``Sufficiency Letter'' which provided an evaluation of the
sufficiency of the FY 2015 AA request.

In December 2014, the FDA approved additional HCV
drugs that were proven to be more effective in treating HCV
than the previous treatments. In December 2014, Congress passed
the final FY 2015 appropriations bill (Consolidated and Further
Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015) which did not identify a
specific amount of funding designated for HCV treatment.

In our September 10, 2014, Sufficiency Letter, VA stated that it
had reviewed the capacity and resource requirements to determine if
additional funding was required in FY 2015 for known emergent needs. We
stated that we had ``identified additional resource requirements that
cannot be funded through the resources allocated in Public Law 113-146,
or within existing resources'' and estimated that new drug treatment
for HCV would increase VA's drug costs in FY 2015 by $673 million. The
Sufficiency Letter also noted that, due to the timing of the Food and
Drug Administration's approval for new HCV medications, the
Administration was unable to incorporate their impacts when developing
the 2015 President's Budget.
To be clear, VA is committed to ensuring that patients with HCV
receive the treatment they need. Therefore, to meet the unfunded need
in 2015, VHA reallocated $697 million out of other activities to fund
HCV treatments. However, this funding is not sufficient to ensure we
are providing the best care to HCV-infected Veterans. We now expect the
cost of HCV treatment to be approximately $1.1 billion in 2015. We are
currently addressing the $400 million funding shortfall by referring
Veterans who need HCV treatment to the Choice Program, but we are
concerned that Veterans who would prefer to receive this care within
the VA system are not able to do so. In addition, referring HCV-
infected Veterans to the Choice Program is not the best model to
provide care that meets both Veterans' needs and taxpayers' interests
because of the increased costs, complexities, and requirements for
coordination of care. It is in our Veterans' interest for VA to provide
these life-saving treatments. This is a point where adding flexibility
in the use of funds appropriated for the Choice Program could help
Veterans receive care in timely fashion. For the reasons discussed
above, we would like to continue our discussions with the Committee on
this concept.

Construction

VA acknowledges the challenges we have experienced in building the
Denver Replacement Medical Center facility in Aurora, Colorado. We are
committed to doing what is right for the Veterans in the Colorado
Region and completing this major construction project without further
delay. VA is dedicated to getting the project back on track in the most
effective and cost efficient manner possible.
As I have stated previously, the delays and cost overruns that have
plagued the Denver Replacement Medical Center campus are inexcusable.
In order to prevent a recurrence of the unacceptable mistakes made on
the Denver project, VA is expanding its relationship with the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers (Corps) regarding management of future VA major
construction projects. Out of the 15 major construction projects that
VA anticipates will be in active construction within the next three
years, five are already underway and past the logical transition point
for the Corps to take over. VA expects to designate the Corps as our
construction agent for seven other projects, which total 86 percent of
the value of the 10 active major construction projects. In the future,
VA believes that the Corps should be designated as our construction
agent for all new medical facilities with a cost of $250 million or
greater that have not yet started construction.
In addition, VA has also instituted a number of other specific
reforms based on best practices from the private and public sector,
including:

Integrated master planning to ensure that the planned
acquisition closes the identified gaps in service and corrects
facility deficiencies.

Requiring major medical construction projects to
achieve at least 35 percent design prior to cost and schedule
information being published and construction funds requested.

Implementing a deliberate requirements control
process, where major acquisition milestones have been
identified to review scope and cost changes based on the
approved budget and scope.

Institutionalizing a Project Review Board (PRB) that
is similar to the structure at the Corps District Offices. The
PRB regularly provides management with metrics and insight to
indicate if/when a project requires executive input or
guidance.

Using a Project Management Plan for accomplishing the
acquisition from planning to activation to ensure clear
communication throughout the project.

Establishing a VA Activation Office to ensure the
integration of the facility activation into the construction
process for timely facility openings.

Conducting pre-construction reviews wherein major
construction projects must undergo a ``constructability''
review by a private construction management firm to review
design and engineering factors that facilitate ease of
construction and ensure project value.

Integrating Medical Equipment Planners into the
construction project teams. Each major construction project
will employ medical equipment planners on the project team from
concept design through activation.

We believe that these reforms will allow us to avoid the mistakes
of the past and ensure VA construction projects are executed in a
manner that will better serve Veterans and American taxpayers.
Budget Process Improvements

We fully recognize that there are areas where VA could have managed
our FY 2015 budget more effectively. A continuing challenge is that
historically, VA has not operated as an integrated enterprise and
relies on old or inadequate enterprise-wide systems. For example, our
financial management system is more than 20 years old; we require an
integrated logistics system to provide supplies and services on an as-
needed basis; and we require an integrated human resources system to
fully manage our recruitment, hiring, and staffing processes. VA also
does not have a modern medical claims management system for accurate,
actionable data on obligations for Care in the Community. VHA relies on
staff-intensive transactions to execute its budget for Care in the
Community. Manual processes cannot keep pace with the unprecedented
surge in demand that VHA is experiencing in FY 2015.
In the future, we are taking a close look at our business practices
for the Care in the Community program, with an eye to streamlining and
automating processes. We also are pursuing a different approach to
better identify resource requirements in the future and tie them to
Veteran-centric outcomes.

Closing

Veterans are VA's sole reason for existence and our number one
priority. In today's challenging fiscal and economic environment, we
must be diligent stewards of every dollar and apply them wisely to
ensure that Veterans--our clients--receive timely access to the highest
quality benefits and services we can provide and which they earned
through their sacrifice and service to our Nation. We also acknowledge
the responsibility, accountability, and importance of showing
measurable returns on that investment. You have my pledge that we will
do everything possible to ensure that VA is a responsible steward of
taxpayer resources, and that funds appropriated will continue to be
used to improve the quality of life for Veterans and the efficiency of
our operations. We are proud to be part of this VA team and feel
privileged to be here serving Veterans at this key time in history.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today and for your
steadfast support of Veterans.

[all]
