- BEST PRACTICES IN VETERAN HIRING

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BEST PRACTICES IN VETERAN HIRING

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 19, 2016

FIELD HEARING HELD IN CINCINNATI, OHIO

__________

Serial No. 114-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-102                 WASHINGTON : 2017
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

BRAD WENSTRUP, Ohio, Chairman

LEE ZELDIN, New York                 MARK TAKANO, California, Ranking
AMATA RADEWAGEN, American Samoa          Member
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania          DINA TITUS, Nevada
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  KATHLEEN RICE, New York
JERRY McNERNEY, California

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------

Friday, February 19, 2016

Page

Best Practices In Veteran Hiring.................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Brad Wenstrup, Chairman................................     1
Honorable Mark Takano, Ranking Member............................     2
Honorable Bill Johnson, U.S. House of Representatives, 6th
District; Ohio.................................................     3
Honorable Steve Chabot, U.S. House of Representatives, 1st
District; Ohio.................................................     4

WITNESSES

Sergeant Dominic F. Gulliford, Recruiting & Background,
Cincinnati Police Department...................................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    37
Mr. John Sapp, Executive Director, GE Aviation...................     6
Prepared Statement...........................................    38
Ms. Stephanie Huff, Chief Human Resources Officer, HELP Heating
and Air Conditioning...........................................     8
Prepared Statement...........................................    39
Mr. Jeff Carper, Executive Sales Director, Total Quality
Logistics......................................................     9
Prepared Statement...........................................    39
Mr. Matt Disher, Military Recruiting Program Manager, Cintas.....    20
Prepared Statement...........................................    40
Mr. Dan Knowles, President & CEO, Tristate Veterans Community
Alliance.......................................................    23
Prepared Statement...........................................    42
Mr. Chris Newsome, Director, Strategy Development,
RecruitMilitary................................................    24
Prepared Statement...........................................    49

STATEMENTS FOR THE RECORD

James R. O'Flaherty, JDOG Junk...................................    50
Emily Turner, Ohio Goodwills.....................................    52

BEST PRACTICES IN VETERAN HIRING

----------

Friday, February 19, 2016

Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U. S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., at
the Anderson Township Civic Center, 7850 Five Mile Road,
Cincinnati, Ohio, Hon. Brad Wenstrup [Chairman of the
Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Wenstrup and Takano.
Also present: Representatives Chabot, Johnson, and Messer.

OPENING STATEMENT OF BRAD WENSTRUP, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Wenstrup. Well, good morning, everyone, and the
Subcommittee will come to order. I thank everyone for joining
us for today's field hearing of the Subcommittee on Economic
Opportunity of the House Committee of Veterans' Affairs
entitled ``Best Practices in Veteran Hiring.'' As many of you
know, I am Congressman Brad Wenstrup, and I am proud to serve
the 2nd District of Ohio, and I am also honored to serve as
Chairman of this Subcommittee.
Before we begin the important business that we are all here
for today, I do want to comment on another issue within the
Department of Veterans Affairs that is currently affecting our
community, and something I am sure many of you have heard about
following the VA's vague announcement last Friday before the
long weekend about allegations of misconduct at our local VA
medical center.
Although the announcement was ambiguous and the Department
continues to try to downplay the allegations, news reports have
stated that the situation involves misconduct within higher
leadership at the Cincinnati Medical Center and regional VA
leadership. There are also reports of substandard patient care,
which, if true, should not go unpunished.
The Committee will continue to pursue investigations into
this hospital, and VA's Office of the Medical Inspector and the
independent VA Office of Inspector General have recently also
launched investigations. While at this time I cannot comment on
the investigation, I can promise you that the House Committee
on Veterans' Affairs will remain vigilant. This investigation
and its outcomes will not be swept under the rug, and at the
same time, we will seek to ensure that the whistleblowers are
protected.
We are committed to working diligently in a transparent
manner in ensuring that if wrongdoing occurred, that every
individual involved is held fully accountable. Our veterans and
taxpayers deserve no less.
Before I proceed, I want to thank my colleague and Ranking
Member of this Subcommittee, Mr. Mark Takano of California, for
his help this year as our Subcommittee worked to move important
legislation that will assist our veterans and their families as
well as his partnership as our Subcommittee provided meaningful
oversight of programs at VA and the Department of Labor so that
our veterans and their families are better served.
It is a pleasure to have him here today, and I want to
thank him again for his hospitality when we held a field
hearing in his district last month to examine veteran
homelessness. Thank you for making the trip and being here in
Cincinnati with us today, Mr. Takano.
I also want to extend a special thanks to the Anderson
Township Civic Center who has graciously provided the
facilities for our use today. It is certainly a great location
for our hearing and today's job fair.
We are here this morning to focus on one of the most
important goals of our Subcommittee, helping veterans find
meaningful and gainful employment following their military
careers. While this Subcommittee does focus on this back in
Washington, I want to give our Buckeye State employers the
opportunity to provide their input as to why they employ and
retain veterans.
While veteran unemployment continues to go down and is now
at 4.7 percent nationwide, I feel that more can be done to
inform quality employers of the advantages of bringing veterans
into their workforce. Furthermore, we need to continue to work
both at the Federal and State level to connect veterans to the
jobs that will benefit both the veteran and their families, and
allow them to fully succeed in the civilian sector, as well as
providing employers with quality employees.
As Members of Congress, each of us can introduce bill after
bill and provide as much oversight as we want over Federal job
programs, but I think we can all agree that it is our country's
strong support for our military and the value that our
servicemembers continue to have in their civilian lives that
encourages the strong desire of employers to bring veterans
onto their payrolls.
Every single witness sitting here today has a story to tell
and concrete reasons why hiring veterans is not just beneficial
to the success of a company, but is a commonsense practice. As
a veteran, and Army reservist myself, I look forward to hearing
from each of our witnesses as to how we can better spread the
word not only within the local area, but nationally as to why
employers should always want to bring the men and women who
have sacrificed for our country into their workforce. It is
companies like the ones sitting before us here today that
exhibit the positive reality of recruiting and retaining
servicemembers in our civilian labor force. We all have much to
learn from them.
A few housekeeping items before I recognize the Ranking
Member. I want to remind our audience that today's hearing is
not a town hall, and we will be hearing only from Members and
invited panelists. My staff and I would be happy to speak with
members of the public following the hearing.
Finally, I want to thank my colleagues and good friends,
Representative Steve Chabot from Ohio's 1st District,
Representative Bill Johnson from Ohio's 6th District, and
joining us in just a little bit will be Representative Luke
Messer of Indiana's 6th District.
At this time, I ask unanimous consent that our three
colleagues be allowed to sit at the dais and ask questions.
[No response.]
Mr. Wenstrup. Hearing no objection, so ordered. I now
recognize Mr. Takano for any opening remarks he may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. Takano. Good morning. I want to start off by saying how
happy I am to be in Cincinnati this morning, even though it is
much colder than it is in California. I thank you for inviting
me, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for the wonderful hospitality
you are extending to me and the staff who have accompanied me
here. We had a delicious slab at Montgomery's last night.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Takano. I thought about wearing the bib on the dais,
but I decided to leave it with my staff.
I have to say you have a beautiful downtown, wonderful old
buildings. And we have a magnificent country, a beautiful
country, and one of the great things about being a Member of
Congress is you get to see a lot of it. And I am delighted to
be able to visit the district of my colleague, with whom we
have done so much work on congressional oversight, demanding
more accountability for the VA, and, most importantly, we have
worked together in a bipartisan way to pass some important
legislation.
You hear a lot about the division in Congress, but the
Veterans' Committee is one of the most bipartisan Committees,
if not the most bipartisan Committee, in the Congress. And we
have worked together to accomplish things for our veterans and
the American people. And so, I am very proud to be here, and I
am pleased to have you as a colleague.
I look forward to the testimony of your constituents who
made hiring veterans a top priority, the corporate good
citizens, the public sector employees, recruiters, and others.
We want to know what works so we can grow the ideas we hear
today that have brought success to veterans here in Cincinnati,
and help expand into other parts of the country. So I thank you
for being here and for answering our questions, and I look
forward to your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you. On our first panel we have
Sergeant Dominic Gulliford with the Cincinnati Police
Department, Mr. John Sapp with GE Aviation, Ms. Stephanie Huff
with HELP Heating and Air Conditioning, and Mr. Jeff Carper
with Total Quality Logistics. And I thank you all for being
here.
Before we turn to you, I would like to ask the other
Members if they have any brief comments they would like to
make. Mr. Johnson.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE BILL JOHNSON

Mr. Johnson. Absolutely, and I thank, Mr. Chairman, for
holding this hearing. I am Bill Johnson, and I represent Ohio's
6th Congressional District. And if you are not familiar with it
[inaudible] it sits along the Ohio River about an hour outside
of Cleveland at the top, and an hour outside of Cincinnati,
home to somewhere around 50,000 veterans [inaudible]. We feel
that we are part of [inaudible].
I am also a 26-and-a-half-year veteran of the United States
Air Force [inaudible] veterans is one of my very top
priorities. As I have said many times before, I am grateful,
extremely grateful, to the men and woman who have served our
country and still serve today. And I strongly believe that
veterans are the segment of our society that most deserve our
gratitude and assistance because of the sacrifices that they
make. They put family on hold. They put careers on hold. They
put their lives on hold to support and defend the Constitution,
and to provide security for our way of life. To the veterans
who have joined us today, I would like to thank each of you for
your service to our great country as well.
The role of the Department of Defense and the Veterans
Administration is to ensure that our returning veterans are
made aware of services and the benefits that they are entitled
to. I further believe that we as a Nation have a responsibility
to assist our veterans in transitioning back into the workforce
when they are finished their tours of duty.
I am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses today on
their success in veteran hiring [inaudible]. What you are doing
is commendable, and as I am sure you will agree, by hiring
veterans you are [inaudible] that you are hiring highly
skilled, highly motivated, trained professionals, some of the
best workers that our Nation has to offer.
I would also like to hear from you on what suggestions you
might have to improve the hiring process for both employers and
for veterans, and how Congress, what we can do to assist in
that effort. It is my hope that I can take some of these
suggestions back and share them with [inaudible] Ohio to ensure
that all veterans across my State and our Nation are afforded
opportunities to gain full employment.
So I am looking forward to hearing from our panelists
today, Mr. Chairman. Thanks again for the opportunity and for
holding this hearing, and I yield back.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Johnson. I appreciate you
being here. Mr. Chabot.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HONORABLE STEVE CHABOT

Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank Brad
Wenstrup for inviting me to participate in this hearing today.
I am not actually on the Veterans' Committee. I am the Chairman
of the House Small Business Committee, and I am on the Foreign
Affairs Committee and the Judiciary Committee. But he invited
me to participate, and I did not want to miss this opportunity.
He also told me to keep it real brief, so I will.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Chabot. I also want to thank our colleague from
California, Mr. Takano. I am glad he got an opportunity to
savor some Montgomery Inn Ribs last night, and while he is in
town, I would encourage him to also partake in some of the
other delicacies like Skyline, and Gold Star Chili, and
Graeter's Ice Cream, and I am sure we could all name so many
other things that we probably far too much. But it is great
stuff.
In all seriousness, I want to thank Brad for mentioning the
concerns that have been raised recently about the VA hospital,
and I agree with everything he said. And it is absolutely our
responsibility to make sure that our veterans are getting the
highest quality care possible, and we should leave no stone
unturned in finding that out.
So thank you for inviting me to participate, and I will be
quiet so we can listen to our distinguished panel here.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Thank you. So back to the panel.
Each of you will be recognized for 5 minutes for your opening
statement, and we will begin with Sergeant Gulliford.

STATEMENT OF DOMINIC F. GULLIFORD

Mr. Gulliford. Thanks for having me, everyone. I just
wanted to touch base for the Cincinnati Police Department. Oh,
okay.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Mr. Gulliford. I guess you guys need to hear me. I'm here
on behalf of Chief Isaacs, and he's off doing something else
right now or he would be here himself.
Mr. Wenstrup. Understand.
Mr. Gulliford. Let me start by saying that the Cincinnati
Police Department believes it to be an honor and a privilege to
employ and have as part of its team veterans from the United
States military. We feel that there is no higher reverence to
show towards one's country than to serve in the military with
honor, pride, and dignity. To employ individuals that embody
the spirit of respect for the country and themselves, allows us
to maintain a high level of excellence as a standard in the
honorable calling of policing.
The Department and the city have used several different
approaches--excuse me--to attract veterans to apply. For
example, qualified veterans are awarded 5 bonus points on the
initial exam. If the veteran is disabled, they receive 10
additional points on the initial exam. Our exam is so
competitive that 5 or 10 points may vary significantly and can
propel you from probably 250th to in the top five. Currently
you must be an Ohio resident to receive the additional points
at the time of application.
The department has aggressively looked for any career fair
opportunities on military posts or job fairs anywhere around
that cater to veterans either on a military base or those
hosted off base by military. We have constructed a group of
adjunct recruiters as well to go along with our recruiting
unit, which is six people, who are veterans to assure we always
have enough personnel to attend as many veteran recruiting
functions as possible.
We recognize that the area natives who are in the military
and are returning to this area will be seeking employment
beyond the ETS date. We also realize that there are many
veterans who will be relocating to this area for the first time
after they get out of the military. Knowing that honorable
discharged veterans make for excellent police candidates, the
distance of travel to recruit at a military facility is not an
issue.
Military Guard and reservists are also highly sought after
candidates for our department. Our department and the city
attempts to accommodate Members of the Guard and Reserve as
much as possible through their careers with the department.
Once you are selected to the police academy, the military
provisions start. They will be in accordance of how far along
you are within the academy.
We have had recruits called up for active duty while in the
academy. Upon being released for active duty, if they have
completed a significant portion of the academy training, we
will have assembled the necessary steps to get them started or
reinstated and certified as soon as possible. If they have not
attended the academy for long, they may have to wait until the
next academy class sits, but we will hold their positions
available for them. When called for active duty after the
academy graduation, your position and seniority will stand no
matter how long of a deployment.
As a part of our local recruitment efforts, we have
developed postcard size fliers announcing our application and
recruitment which we distribute throughout normal recruitment
career fairs and place in local businesses and other facilities
with a high volume of pedestrian traffic. A list of local
veterans' addresses within the areas of Hamilton County, Butler
County, Warren County, and Clermont County and also the City of
Dayton was secured through a private company. Those same fliers
were turned into email mailers--I am sorry, not email mailers--
just regular mailers. There we go. And sent to their post
service--let me see if I can get this correct--postal service
addresses. There we go. The list totaled about 5,000 addresses.
Approximately 30 percent, hovering around 30 percent, of the
Cincinnati Police Department sworn personnel, are veterans.
We take great pride in hiring veterans. Again, we recognize
that veterans make great candidates due to their commitment to
duty and their want to serve and assist others. As a part of
the 30 percent, I am actually a veteran of the Marine Corps,
and our chief is a veteran of the National Guard.
We take personal pride in helping veterans establish
themselves in the City of Cincinnati police ranks. We advocate
giving back to well-deserving individuals who have given to our
country. We can also be at peace knowing that we are helping to
keep a high level of professionalism by hiring veterans within
our department that not only helps us stand out as one of the
best departments, but ultimately gives the citizens of
Cincinnati the type of service they deserve, require, and want.

[The prepared statement of Dominic F. Gulliford appears in
the Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Sergeant. I appreciate that. I
also appreciate what I have seen the police department do,
which is allow you to wear your branch of service, whether it
is current or previous, on your uniform. And I think it is nice
to have that recognized.
Mr. Sapp, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN SAPP

Mr. Sapp. Thank you very much. It is a true pleasure to be
here and have the opportunity to speak on behalf of GE
Aviation. My name is John Sapp, and I am the executive director
of sales, operations, and offset at GE Aviation. In addition to
this role and more applicable to this gathering, I also lead GE
Aviation's Veteran Network. GE is honored to have over 10,000
U.S. military veterans continue their career with us.
And building on our strong commitment to military veteran
recruitment and development, we launched GE's Veteran Network
across all of our businesses in November of 2009. The network
is organized within three pillars. Those are to support, hire,
and grow veterans, the local community of veterans, and
veterans that have joined our ranks. Both our own employees who
are veterans and veterans in the local communities we feel
benefit as a result of the Veteran Network itself.
First, let me thank you for the opportunity to speak with
you today. As an 11-year veteran of the U.S. Air Force, it's a
real pleasure to be a part of this testimony, and I look
forward to learning more about the great initiatives that are
underway to support veterans here and their transitions.
GE is passionate about hiring veterans. At GE, we value the
leadership, loyalty, integrity, and commitment to excellence
instilled through the participation in military service. We
believe strongly that this service helps make great leaders
that are disciplined, strategic thinkers with a level of
loyalty that is, frankly, ummatched. This appreciation of
veteran talent as well as GE's desire to give back to those
that have made incredible sacrifices for the betterment of
others, were the primary reasons for the 2012 launching of GE's
initiative to hire 5,000 veterans over a 5-year period.
As of February 12th, just entering our 4th year, we have
already hired 4,889 veterans. Within GE Aviation, we've hired
1,137 veterans in that 4-year period and 2 months, and by year
end, we'll have by far exceeded our overall commitment with a
significant margin.
GE's hiring and transition practices have been successful
in attracting and hiring a wide range of veteran talent from
junior enlisted to general officer. For example, GE's
transition assistance workshops and one-on-one mentoring
sessions are executed in conjunction with the Chamber of
Commerce's Hiring our Heroes initiative by our own GEV
Membership. GE's veteran employees coach with a focus on resume
building as well as interviewing techniques and job search
strategies. These seminars are designed to help military
personnel successfully communicate the skills they have learned
in the military to the corporate world.
Furthermore, GE is also a founding Member of the American
Corporate Partners, a national mentoring program dedicated to
helping veterans transition from the armed forces to private
enterprise through career counseling and networking with
professionals. Internally, the GE Veteran Network and human
resources have worked together to create a much deeper
understanding of veteran talent through our Value of a Vet
campaign, messaging the unique attributes of military talent
that will help GE hiring managers to better understand veteran
backgrounds.
Within GE Aviation, HR has also created a special team
solely focused on connecting veteran talent with job postings.
That team is actually represented here today. That team further
impacts our efficiency in making sure that we align veteran
applicants with the right roles here at GE Aviation.
For mid-career transition, GE offers the Experienced
Leadership Program designed specifically for military officers.
The program is a unique opportunity to work in three 8-month
rotations within a GE business. Qualified candidates with
exceptional military service are selected to start their
careers with GE in this 2-year cross-functional program,
including both on-the-job training and formal classroom
training. I was fortunate enough to have entered the company
through this program just 8 years ago.
Once on board, GE works hard to make sure the veteran has
an effective transition into the company. Our GEV Network's
growth pillar is focused on supporting the development of
veterans, including career development, mentorship, and
coaching, coupled with networking and veteran connection
activities that are just a natural part of the Vet Network
itself. Our military employees find a supportive environment
for growing a great career at GE.
Overall, we're passionate about hiring, supporting, and
growing veterans. We've made strong progress towards our goals
to date, but obviously look forward to continuing to improve
our support of veterans going forward, as well as learning from
the other businesses and government practices in forums such as
this.
Thank you again for allowing me the opportunity to
participate.

[The prepared statement of John Sapp appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much.
Ms. Huff, you are not recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF STEPHANIE HUFF

Ms. Huff. And thank you again for allowing us to
participate as well.
At HELP Plumbing, Heating, Cooling, and Electric, we pride
ourselves on our commitment to activities supporting veterans.
Our support spans many different programs throughout the year.
We are most known for our donation program where we give a
portion of our profits every year to a local veterans support
program. In the last several years, we have donated to the DAV
program. In addition, we have donated free services and
equipment to local wounded veterans as well as widows and the
children of fallen soldiers. We announce our donations at our
annual Veterans Day Appreciation Breakfast, which we host on
site every year on Veterans Day.
We also strongly support hiring veterans. There are several
different ways we focus our efforts on connecting with veterans
for hiring opportunities throughout the year. We actively
participate in sponsored events, including recruit military
hiring fairs and other veteran-targeted career fairs.
In addition, in the spring of 2015, we hosted our own
veterans hiring event on site at our headquarters where we
brought in other military friendly employers with hiring needs,
as well as nonprofit organizations that support veterans for a
daylong event. During this event, we offer on-site interviews,
free lunch, and other veteran-specific support programs and
services. We look forward to bringing this program back again
this May.
Outside of career fairs, we also focus on posting jobs on
our local Ohiomeansjobs.com Web site, and reach out to the
partners with their veteran support system, and have them
assist us in finding qualified talent. We also reach out
through trade-specific sites and take advantage of programs and
marketing materials provided through organizations, such as
troopstotrades.org through the Nexstar Legacy Foundation to
find individuals with a specific interest in learning a skilled
trade.
There are many industries that have the potential to
participate and register apprenticeship programs throughout the
State. Both businesses and job seekers benefit from apprentice
opportunities. Participating and qualifying apprenticeship
programs are offered in health care, construction, utilities,
and many other industries.
While HELP Plumbing, Heating, Cooling, and Electric doesn't
currently participate in State-recognized apprenticeships, HELP
does pay a hundred percent of training expenses for all
training for new hires. This includes anyone with or without
any specific skilled trade experience.
Our program consists of 3 to 5 months of intense training,
including classroom and field training experience, as well as
ongoing training throughout the year to consist of over 200
hours a year to keep our team members on top of all the
necessary industry-specific training needs. We also pay for all
training and certification exams to receive State recognition,
license, and certifications within each trade that we offer.
This is a great opportunity for veterans transitioning to full-
time work where they want to learn a trade from the ground up.
In 2013, HELP Plumbing, Heating, Cooling, and Electric was
present at the DAV National Commanders Award for Outstanding
Small Employer of the Year for Auspicious and Meritorious
Effort in providing employment opportunities for ill and
injured workers.
And thank you again for allowing us to participate today.

[The prepared statement of Stephanie Huff appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you.
Mr. Carper, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JEFF CARPER

Mr. Carper. Hello, and thank you, Representative Wenstrup,
for inviting us. I'm honored to represent Total Quality
Logistics at today's hearing and talk about some of the
company's best practices when it comes to attracting and
retaining military employees.
My name is Jeff Carper. I was a 7-year Army vet myself. Now
I am the executive sales director at TQL. I have three main
points that I want to discuss today. First, how we hire
military employees. TQL is a recruiter exclusively dedicated to
finding military talent for our company. LeeAnn Ryan is with me
today. She's a senior airmen in the United States Air Force
Reserve whose own military experience and understanding of what
it takes to transition into the civilian world makes her well
suited for the role.
LeAnn recruits for both sales and non-sales positions at
TQL. Her familiarity with the military jargon and terms that
often appear on military resumes gives her a good idea of where
an applicant might be best suited. Among other things, LeeAnn
attends career fairs on military bases and will be focusing on
TAP and ACAP, the transition assistance program events for
military leaving the services or going into the Reserves. She
works with the TVCA, who are here today, Hiring our Heroes,
Recruit Military, and other organizations to actively recruit
from all branches of the service with postings on military-
specific Web sites and job boards.
Second, why TQL is a good fit for military servicemembers.
TQL is a freight brokerage firm. We connect shippers who have
freight that needs delivered with carriers who can haul it. We
specialize in truckload transportation although we don't own
any of our own trucks. This isn't a job most people coming out
of school or the military have trained for. The trucking
industry has unique rules, regulations, and a language all its
own.
We train our experts through a 5-month long training
program similar to what servicemembers experience in military.
We hire for the job based on soft skills, the soft skills that
make one successful in brokering freight are similar to those
taught in the military: the ability to learn new skills and
concepts quickly, adopt a mission-driven philosophy, and put
forth core values to exceed expectations.
Some of the comments we've heard from our military
employees as to why they succeeded at TQL, one, ``I work for a
large company, but my team is like a small squad or fire team.
We work well together.'' Another one: ``Being in the military
gives you a base structure. Self-motivation and self-discipline
are expectations here.'' Third: ``The culture and energy we
have here are very similar to the Army. You always have a new
goal in front of you, a new challenge to meet, an opportunity
to be a leader.''
As we continue to grow and expand into new cities around
the country, we need employees with strong leadership
capabilities. More than 90 percent of our sales leadership and
management positions are filled from within the company. And,
again, teaching leadership skills is an area where military
excels.
Third, the TQL culture. TQL is and always has been
committed to being a military friendly company. Multiple
managers at TQL have been recognized with Patriot Awards for
their exemplary support of employees in the National Guard and
Reserve. The company received the Above and Beyond Award from
the ESGR, the Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve, and we
recently received our third military friendly employer
recognition from Victory Media and GI Jobs magazine.
The tone is set from the top. One of our core focus areas
for our company's charitable efforts is military causes. The
company and our employees actively work to raise money and
support military causes. In 2015, we worked with 13 military or
veteran organizations contributing nearly $70,000 in charitable
giving. And it's more than just dollars. It's personal support,
too. This is an excerpt from a letter sent directly to all of
our military employees from CEO Ken Oaks on the day TQL signed
its national statement of support with the ESGR.
``Members of the military are some of the strongest team
members at TQL. What you have learned through your military
service, discipline, hard work, leadership is important. What
you choose to serve reflects integrity, self-sacrifice, and
love for your countrymen is invaluable. Thank you for choosing
to join the TQL team, but, even more importantly, thank you for
your service to our country.'' Thank you.

[The statement of Jeff Carper appears in the Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you very much. I want to thank you all
for your testimonies here today. And now we will go into
questioning, and I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
You know, we are always trying, on this Subcommittee
especially and throughout the VA Committee, to do more to
prepare our military members for that transition out of the
military and into the private sector, trying to do more on the
front end, if you will, before they transition from actually
being in uniform and going to the VA side of the equation.
And so, what are some of the challenges that each of you
see for that transition for the employees? There has got to be
some, right? They are going from a different way of life, a
different way of employment. So what kind of challenges do you
face, and how do you deal with those? And we can start with
you, Mr. Carper.
Mr. Carper. Sure. You know, I remember back to 2001 when I,
leaving the military, and how difficult a transition it was. I
knew what my skill level was. At least I felt like I knew what
it was. I knew what my experience was, and I also thought that
I knew how that would transition into the civilian world. What
I found was, is that a lot of the companies that I was
interviewing with did not understand, because they did not have
a background in the military, how easily to take my experience
and transition it over to something that would correlate with
what they were doing inside their company.
So I think the more education that we can get to employers,
you know. A lot of us here on the panel have military folks
that can spend time reviewing resumes and making sure that we
are involved with veterans that are interviewing so we can help
explain some of the subtle intricacies that go along with
somebody's resume and background. But for companies that do not
have that inside their organization, it is, you know, maybe
partnering up with the local veterans organization or, you
know, one of the organizations like we have represented here to
be able to explain those things to the individuals that are
doing the hiring. I think that is real important.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. We also try to encourage the
education of our troops as they are coming out that, as they
are filling out resumes and someone asks their qualifications,
they do not just put ``sniper.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wenstrup. They put, I show up for work on time, I am
disciplined, I pay attention to detail, those type of things
that I think parlay well into employment. Ms. Huff?
Ms. Huff. Very similar to what Mr. Carper said, I do not
come from a military background myself, so having some
individuals within the organization that I support and that
support me when we are doing the interview process. We will
have them actually participate in the interview process so that
veterans that are coming in feel comfortable as part of the
interview process and interviewing with somebody that maybe
they can connect with.
When they come on board, we have quite a few veterans that
work for us, so we try to make sure that we, you know, can gear
them toward the individuals maybe within the military so that
they can feel that connection and help them go through that
process.
Mr. Wenstrup. Mr. Sapp.
Mr. Sapp. Yeah, I would definitely echo how the veterans
describe their experience as being a challenge that I think I
certainly faced and other veterans that we continue to see, you
know, applying for roles directly within GE. That was really
the energy behind us launching our Value of a Vet campaign,
which was primarily initially started internally in terms of
raising awareness of what veteran experiences meant and being
able to, you know, translate veteran resumes. But that can be
done externally as well, so as to support the veterans as they
draft their resumes.
The other part that I talk to also is, you know, a lot of
veteran transitions are actually happening in a two-step
process, which is, they go to further their education before
they then make the jump into the corporate world. This is an
area that within southwest Ohio we have been very focused on,
and not just GE Aviation, but also a number of the other
companies represented here. Partners with schools, like Xavier
and University of Cincinnati, to try and make sure that we
support them, you know, the veterans in their transition. And
we do things like mentorship programs.
So at GE Aviation, we have 29 mentor pairings that are
being set up at Xavier as an example to help support them
making decisions in terms of majors and, you know, job
interviews, internships, and things to that effect. We think
that is a critical part of supporting that transition, and I
think a message that should make its way into those folks that
are making the transition.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Sergeant?
Mr. Gulliford. Yes, sir. Fortunately, in the field of law
enforcement, there is always a lot of people existing the
military, that would like to be police officers. Most dream of
being police officers, but I do not know of anywhere where you
can be one until you reach 21 years of age.
So we do not have a lot of the same issues as some of the
corporate companies. Our main issue is being able to reach out
to the veterans and let them know that we are actually hiring.
And then our police department as an individual department, we
are in competition with all the other ones because the process
is so long. Right now, we are in the throes of trying to scale
down some of our processes, but we obviously need to vet our
people very well.
But we are always looking for honorably discharged
veterans, and we do not necessarily have a problem with getting
them if we get to them to let them know that we are available
and we are hiring.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you for being here today, and
hopefully you will get one or two of them if not more, so I
appreciate that.
Mr. Takano, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, I understand
that a lot of corporations use technology to review resumes,
and they often search for key words in that resume. Is that a
practice that you employ, and does it help to train the
veterans to be aware of that so not only do they not put
``sniper'' down on the resume, but they actually are attuned to
tailoring a resume very specifically toward an objective and
using key words on the resume. It could be any one of you who
could answer that question.
Ms. Huff. Yes, I would say I do a lot of resume database
searching, so I am always looking for very specific words,
whether it be specific skills, you know, looking for customer
service, or looking for sales, or looking for anything that
could help them in their job. So definitely listing their
skills specifically could definitely help them tailor employers
to be able to find them more successfully on the internet.
Mr. Takano. So having people very specifically trained on
how to teach the veteran, how to tailor their resumes to really
think about their military service, and how it transfers, what
skills they have, and to do the research on how to match with
the employer is really an important part of them being able to
make a successful match in application.
Ms. Huff. Yeah, absolutely, and if they are wanting to go
towards a specific industry, making sure that anything that
they received from the military or any experience that they
have had, make sure that they are listing those things that
could cater towards specifically.
Mr. Takano. Now, you know, I believe that our military has
America's finest. They step forward to serve their country. But
a lot of them, you know, the transition is not so smooth from
the military into the workforce. Some of them get into trouble
in that process, and some have actually go afoul of the law. Do
you have something like a veterans court here that allows a
veteran to be assigned sort of an alternative track to the
justice system? Mr. Gulliford, do you know anything about that?
Mr. Gulliford. We do not have an alternative practice
inside the court system, but what we do have is, we have a
group of veterans that are police officers that become involved
with a veteran through a call, a law breakage, or whatever it
might be, that those individuals can be called and moved into
other services to help them out.
Mr. Takano. Where I am going with this line of questioning
is that one of the areas of bipartisan interest is criminal
justice reform. And I think, especially that our veterans
deserve that second chance when they make a mistake, because
their military service history might be a contributing factor
to the troubles they are having.
Mr. Wenstrup. Will the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Takano. Sure.
Mr. Wenstrup. In Hamilton County, we do have a veterans
court, and that does not specifically involve the police
department. It's as they get into the court system, we have a
court for them. And it has been very successful, and a lot of
our veterans who have found themselves in trouble get a mentor.
They have to go through a rigorous course and they graduate,
and then they get back on their path to success.
Mr. Wenstrup. Sure.
Mr. Takano. I appreciate that. Do your business
organizations have any way to take account of someone who might
have been incarcerated in the hiring process so that they are
summarily excluded? That we especially reach out to our
veterans who might have gone through the veterans court, find
ways to get them employed and in an appropriate situation. But,
I think if we make this investment in our veterans, it could
have an impact on how we think about criminal justice issues.
Mr. Sapp. For GE Aviation, I am not sure of the policy. I
would have to speak with HR relative to what they do with
background checks and, you know, impact of an incarceration in
a veteran applicant.
Ms. Huff. We do not have anything as of today specifically
that targets that.
Mr. Takano. And I do not bring it as a criticism. We are
struggling with this in my area, and as well as a whole big
issue of that transitioning of former incarcerated people back
into civilian life. I am specifically interested in how we look
at our veterans, especially looking at it from the homeless
point of view or also just ways in which we can fully welcome
them back. You know, when we say ``welcome home,'' I think we
have got to really mean that.
And some of our veterans, you know, are coming back with a
lot of issues. Most of them are just incredible assets to any
organization. We have got to get them ways to match up. Anyway,
I will have more questions for the second panel. I yield back.
Mr. Wenstrup. In that vein, if I may interject, we also
have an agency here called Cincinnati Works, and it works with
not only veterans, but anyone who has had a record that wants
to turn to their life around. We have certain employers that
are willing to engage, and it has been a great opportunity for
people to get a second chance.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I want to learn more about that
because I think this is an issue all around the country.
Mr. Wenstrup. Mr. Chabot, you are now recognized for 5
minutes. And I would like to welcome my colleague, Mr. Messer
from Indiana. Thank you for joining us here today as well. Mr.
Chabot.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Carper,
I will start with you if I can. I had a nephew that worked at
TQL for a number of years, and you are discussing family
things, and how is work, and that. And he discussed it as a
very challenge, very competitive environment, very
invigorating, but tough. And you already note some of the
qualities that are necessary to be successful at TQL. Could you
expound upon that a little bit, the relationship between the
experiences that one has in the military and then in the
private sector, especially at a company like TQL that has been
very successful?
Mr. Carper. Absolutely. You know, first, I will start off
by saying it was a nice experience to be able to hire for a
company like TQL because I was not put in a box. I was not told
that I had to hire somebody with a college degree. I was not
told that I had to bring somebody in with a specific, you know,
background or skill set.
So much of the job is, you know, and I hate to make
civilian comparisons to military jumps. But when you are in the
military, there are so many last-minute decisions that you have
to make, so many changes, so many late night, you know, job
assignments that you have. And that translates well into what
TQL does because our reps are 24/7, 365 a year.
The very first Thanksgiving I worked for TQL, I spent 3
hours in the afternoon upstairs on the computer with my cell
phone attached to my ear because we had a truck in the middle
of the country, you know, that broke down, and the refrigerated
unit had stopped running. And those kind of things are not
unique. Those are the kind of things that happen on a daily
basis with our reps.
So the ability to be able to think quickly, to deal with
really stressful situations. Being a third party logistics
company puts in an interesting spot in the fact that we do not
own the trucks. The drivers are not employees of ours. So we
are stuck in the middle of, you know, a challenging situation
where it might not have anything to do with what we did. The
customer does not care, and, you know, in a lot of cases they
rain down a lot of stress on the individuals.
And, you know, the ability to compartmentalize that, you
know, and come back in the next day reinvigorated with the
ability to, you know, to try and pick up new clients and new
freight is real important.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Speaking of trucks and trucking, we
have had recently some representatives of the trucking industry
in our office, and we are talking about them. One of the things
that they mentioned is that now and into the foreseeable
future, they mentioned about 100,000 positions are either
available now or will be available for truck drivers all across
the country. And with the economy that is to some degree coming
back, we would like to see it be much stronger, but it is
coming back to some degree.
So you need to haul freight all over the country, and we
have a lot of young men and women that served in Iraq and
Afghanistan that were driving, you know, huge rigs under very
stressful and challenging circumstances. And it seems like a
pretty good fit. I am not suggesting everybody that comes back
should become truck drivers, but the jobs are there. Are you
hearing that? Could you--
Mr. Carper. We are hearing that, yeah. We have thousands of
carrier relationships, carriers that run for each and every
week. And we are hearing consistently from them that they are
keeping the doors wide open for new drivers. They have
equipment that is sitting in their yard not being used because
they do not have drivers to fill them right now. So, yes, we
are hearing that.
Mr. Chabot. We had heard one of the problems that they
mentioned was that, you know, to get the license that you need
to drive a big rig, you need to be 21 years old, and some of
our folks coming out of the service are not 21 yet.
Mr. Carper. Correct.
Mr. Chabot. And so, perhaps we need to legislatively at the
State level or whatever to work on it. Have you heard that as
an issue?
Mr. Carper. Not as much that. You know, my own opinion is,
I think it is a bit of a generational thing. It does not seem
like a whole lot of the younger generation is looking forward
to being a long haul truck driver, which is not an easy life.
You spend days on the road. You are sleeping in your cab. You
are eating at truck stops. It is not the most glamorous job in
the world. So I think that is probably a bigger problem.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. I have only got a little time left.
Sergeant, I will turn to you if I can, and thanks for your
service to all the veterans, and, in fact, the veterans that
are here today. We appreciate what you have done for us.
I had the pleasure of having our new FOP president, Dan
Hill, in my office just yesterday, and when Chief Isaacs took
over, we met with him. I am on the Crime Subcommittee in
Judiciary, so we have been involved in a lot of the crime
issues at the Federal level, but we work locally with the local
police department.
And you already touched on it, and I have only got a short
time. But could you briefly talk about the experience that one
has in the military and to be a successful police officer, what
is the overlap there?
Mr. Gulliford. Well, to be successful as a police officer,
you have to be a leader and a follower. We look for those
traits, those characteristics in individuals. And when people
come out of the military, when they are discharged honorably,
they usually embody everything we are looking for in an
individual as far as [inaudible] and being able to make the
right decisions as far as correction services. So it is a very
easy transition.
And as far as their success in the police department, it
depends on the individual and what they mean as success. If
they want to go up the ranks or if they are looking for a
certain job assignment inside the police department. Some just
love being patrol officers, and that is all they want to do is
to be out there with the individuals and serving at that level.
So they do not look to go further, which is fine. That is
absolutely fine.
So all we need is people who are willing to lead when
necessary and follow when necessary.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Wenstrup. Mr. Johnson, you are now recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I wanted to
comment just briefly on, you know, the comments about resumes
that might have ``sniper'' listed in skills. If I were an
employer I would not totally discount that.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. I mean, if you have got a job that requires a
lot of poise and calm under pressure, you might want to
consider that. And look at manufacturing, a material manager or
handler, because a sniper is very skilled at putting the exact
right product in the exact right spot every time.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Johnson. So there are some advantages to that. Mr.
Sapp, you know, I retired in 1999 and went into the private
sector, and worked in corporate America as well. One of the
things that I experienced, and I would just like your
perspective on it, oftentimes I think, especially in leadership
positions within corporate America, there tends to be a little
bit of intimidation with military officers that come out and
get into leadership or get on the leadership track, because
corporate America is not always efficient, not always
effective. And things move kind of slow.
But you take a young platoon captain or a pilot out of the
Air Force or whatever, they are used to getting the job done.
They are mission focused. So there is some intimidation because
they tend to make people around them either perform better or
fall by the wayside. Do you see that at all in big companies
like GE that there might be some reluctance on the part of not
the hiring folks, but part of the executive team?
Mr. Sapp. So this is a real area of focus for us at GE
right now. Actually, just 2 days ago, we spent the better of a
day talking about how we are growing military careers. And
actually, this included David Joyce as part of the discussion.
He is the CEO for GE Aviation.
And so, what you are touching on right there is, I think, a
very important issue that we recognize that hiring veteran
talent, because of their leadership and management dealing with
crisis management, how they can work through difficult
situations is, you know, clearly exceptional, but it is
different. And a large part of our discussion is how do we help
folks make that transition because, you know, those skills that
you talked about as being a must-have within the police
department are a must-have at GE, but they take a different
style and approach typically. And I would expect it is similar
to other corporations here where it can be more collaborative
in terms of how the leadership and, you know, skill works.
My feeling as a veteran is collaboration is a very active
part of what I did in my career, you know, as a Member of the
Air Force. But how we went about it in the community, it is
something that was a bit different. Personally, what we look at
in terms of the numbers, they suggest that, you know, within
GE, that we see very strong representation of military leaders
continuing to go up the ranks. And so, I feel people are making
that adjustment, but it takes good, you know, coaching, you
know, to get there.
Clearly our senior leadership recognizes, you know, the
need to bring those folks up. In fact, we just hired our first
3-star in GE Aviation, and I think it is a direct reflection of
that.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Well, thanks. Have any of you across the
panel, have any of you had any experience working with the VA's
Veteran Employment Center or the VEC? And if so, what is your
opinion of the tool, and how can it be improved? Sergeant
Gulliford?
Mr. Sapp. I just sat down with Lisa a couple of days ago
from the VEC. I think the tool has a potential to be
outstanding in the fact that it can be a repository for veteran
applicants. So if we want to hire 250 veterans within aviation
this year, I am not sure what the exact number is going to be.
This is a great place for us to go in and start the matching
process to find veterans applicants and where we have openings.
So that part of it alone, I think, is a big value.
Mr. Johnson. Anybody else use the VEC?
Mr. Carper. I have not personally, no.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. One final question with the little
remaining time that I have. One of the biggest issues that we
have in our military today is the number of deployments. And a
lot of our Guard and Reserve folks are going on multiple
deployments over and over and over again. How does your company
support members of the Guard or the Reserve both during and
after deployment? And we will start with Sergeant Guilford?
Mr. Gulliford. Right now, it is in our contract that just
for being in there, we make sure they have enough time with the
weekend deployments, just a regular deployment being in the
National Guard or whatever Reserves that they are. And then
when they get deployed, all they have to do is provide us with
the orders that they received, and they can stay gone as long
as they need to. The individual even gets to make the decision
if they want their military paycheck or their city paycheck,
and they usually pick whichever one is higher.
So they get that, and then once they come back they have, I
believe, it is 90 days to reclaim their position with the
police department before they voluntarily vacate.
Mr. Sapp. We currently have 57 GE employees across the
company that are deployed right now. We have a similar process
in terms of making sure that pay, et cetera, is squared away.
And we have a team of folks within the Vet Network that reach
out to their families as well as them, send care packages, help
with the lawn, things like that, while they are deployed.
Mr. Johnson. I do not want to abuse my time, but Ms. Huff,
Mr. Carper, do either of you have a comment?
Mr. Carper. Yeah. On top of the things that have been said,
the pay differential, 12 weeks, and all that, each individual
at QTL has a book of business, a customer base that they talk
to every day. When they deploy, that is handed off to team
members on their team to take care of the business like it is
their own. So when they come back off of deployment, they are
able to get debriefed about what is going on with those
accounts and resume the activities like they were never gone.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Well, thank you. Mr. Chairman, thanks
for indulging my time. I yield time.
Mr. Wenstrup. Ms. Huff, did you want to comment as well on
what you are doing?
Ms. Huff. I was just going to say we are a smaller
business, so we do not have any physical policies. But we do
have one that is getting ready to deploy, so we are working
with him to make sure that we ensure he works up until he
leaves. And then another one that is looking to come back that
is in Kuwait that we are helping to make sure we prepare to
have his job ready for him when he comes back.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you all very much. Mr. Messer,
you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Messer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all
the veterans in this room for your service, all the employers
for your service in trying to make sure we take care of our
veterans. Thank the rest of the Members of the panel. Mr.
Takano came all the way from California. It is great to have
him here. I am sorry I was late. I came from the far distant
land of Indiana on my trip over.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Messer. I actually started the morning over in Dearborn
County. This is an important hearing, and obviously the job
fair today is important as well. I think we have to rethink as
a country are we doing everything we can to serve our veterans.
You know, in the world of veteran benefits, it is now coming to
light that as many as 25 percent of our veterans are not aware
of the benefits that they are entitled to. And I think we have
to think about as a Nation what can we do to make sure that at
least every one who served knows the benefits that they can
obtain.
And I think there is a lesson in that really, in the
conversation today about jobs for veterans as well. I can tell
you that at least in my district, I talk to employers, and this
is not so much a question of demand. I mean, I think employers
by and large understand the benefits that our veterans bring to
the table. They have got training and skills that add value in
the marketplace. They understand values of discipline and
teamwork. As Mr. Carper was mentioning, these are folks that
are decision-makers. You know, if you are a young person out
serving in the military, you are making decisions every day.
And so, they have the skills that employers are looking for.
But I talk to my employers in my district that when they
want to go out and hire veterans, they frankly struggle to make
that connection, to find folks with the skills that they are
looking for and find them in the marketplace to bring. And I
guess I really have sort of, and I would just open it up to the
panel, a question on sort of both halves of that.
Is that an experience that you share, that you struggle to
connect with the veterans you are seeking? And then secondly,
what can we do systemically? Bill mentioned the VEC. What we
can do systematically to try to deal with that? How could we
better help you connect with veterans is what I am trying to
say?
Ms. Huff. I think for our industry, it is a little bit more
beneficial just because we have the ability to teach them from
the ground up. So they can come to us with having the teamwork,
having the discipline, and those are the major things that we
are looking for. We can teach them the skill. They just have to
have the will. So we are very fortunate that we have the
ability to start them in a program where they just take it and
run with it, and they are actually very successful and the
hardest workers that we have in the trades.
Mr. Messer. Yeah.
Mr. Sapp. I would say a few things. First, you have to be
able to reach and connect to the population that is
transitioning, which is, you know, events like today from noon
to 2:00.
Mr. Messer. Yeah.
Mr. Sapp. How do we find those applicants? The next, really
is around best practice sharing. Frankly, I think from the
corporations, I mean, what Dan Knowles and his team is doing
here to connect all the corporations within southwest Ohio is a
great example so that we can share best practices. GE has been
focused on this hire piece for, you know, many years, but
really over the last 3 to 4, what is the process to get them on
board. And anything we can do to share that is going to help,
you know, southwest Ohio and the rest, you know, if that goes
outside our region obviously to help them as well.
Mr. Messer. Yeah. Go ahead.
Mr. Carper. Not every organization is of the size that they
can have one individual or multiple individuals that work on
this full-time. But even if you are not of that size, you can
still be deliberate in your hiring practices of veterans,
partnering up with the companies, like a lot of them that are
represented here today, to assist with, you know, sending
candidate flow in your direction.
In my experience, you know, when dealing with companies
that are responsible for helping veterans to find employment,
they are overly excited when an employer comes to them and says
``I need help.'' In most cases, I think all you have to do is
ask.
Mr. Messer. Yeah. Sergeant.
Mr. Gulliford. Well, it is nice for us because a lot of the
things we have been doing so far, going to different military
bases and veterans career fairs. I get phone calls. I am in
charge of our recruiting unit right now, so I get phone calls
and emails on a regular basis asking us to advertise in
military magazines. I am dealing with one right now. I was
dealing with it today before I got here actually.
And I get emails from different bases asking us to come to
their career fairs, and so we do that. We have four right now
scheduled for this year alone that were scheduled 8 months ago,
so we try to reach out. And because we have done that, other
military bases hear about it, so they actually reach out to us.
So we do that.
We have actually received a Best for Vets Award, which not
a lot of police departments receive at all throughout the
country. So we do pretty well in that regard. It is just a
matter of selling us to them.
Mr. Messer. Well, thank you all again for your service. I
mean, to me, this is the ultimate win-win. I mean, not only are
we doing right by our veterans, but these business entities get
people with the skills and values they need to be successful,
too. Thanks.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well, I want to thank this first panel for
your testimony and answering all our questions, and your
willingness to serve. You are now excused, and I now invite the
second and final panel to the witness table.
On our second panel, we have Mr. Matt Disher with Cintas,
Mr. Dan Knowles with Veterans Community Alliance, and Mr. Chris
Newsome with RecruitMilitary.
I want to thank each of you for being here today, and if we
can get right into it. Mr. Disher, you are recognized first for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MATT DISHER

Mr. Disher. Thank you. Good morning, Dr. Wenstrup,
Representative Takano, Members of the Subcommittee, panel
Members, and guests. Thank you all for your time and dedication
to this important topic.
I'm humbled and honored by my invitation to testify at this
hearing discussing best practices surrounding engagement and
employment of military veterans in the workforce. I am
confident that some of my shared strategies within Cintas will
act as guidelines and best practices for any organization with
the same desire of successfully employing veterans.
My name is Matt Disher, and I lead the 26-year-old national
military recruiting program at the Cintas Corporation
headquartered here in Cincinnati, Ohio. I'm also a veteran of
the Marine Corps, having obtained the rank of sergeant upon my
honorable discharge.
The Cintas Corporation is a national leader in uniform
rental, uniform sales, facility services, first aid and safety,
and fire protection. We service over 1 million businesses from
our approximately 400 locations nationwide. At Cintas, we pride
ourselves on ethics, professionalism, and positive discontent,
all traits that we commonly share with the ranks of the U.S.
military. Cintas has been proudly recognized for over a decade
and by numerous sources as a top employer of armed forces
servicemembers.
I would like to start with a few anecdotal statements to
address what Cintas values in military experience. Today's U.S.
armed forces are feasibly the most advanced and best educated
in history. The relative education level is higher in the
military compared to the public that they serve. Virtually all
servicemembers endure countless condensed hours of valuable
training in leadership, communication, history, planning, and
skill specific or technical trades. This training is frequently
put to use in practical application and real world scenarios,
and often without traditional college education.
It is not uncommon in all generations of military service
to find a 20- to 25-year-old leading a number of troops in
complex tasks or dynamic missions, sometimes with little
guidance, oversight, or situational information. To add these
young men and women who are regularly operating some of the
most advanced technologies in a no-frill setting, making them
literally the topic of which books are written, movies filmed,
and legends made.
Because of their scope of duty, servicemembers become well
traveled, exposed to various cultures, and physically and
emotionally equipped to handle virtually any situation placed
before them. These are commonly misinterpreted traits in
corporate America, but arguably desired by all. At Cintas,
these traits are necessary, needed, and expressly sought.
Within Cintas and likely in other organizations that
successfully operate such military programs, one element is
generally agreed upon as a starting point and launch pad for
success. That is executive support and sponsorship. These
blueprints must be presented and supported from the top tier of
an organization, written into policy or practice, and
correlated with performance goals and participation; thus,
becoming a fixture in a company's culture. Without the
appropriate culture-based orientation, the organization will
wholly struggle to find value, and the public, particularly the
military population, will have trouble recognizing it.
The proven supplement for this corporate cultural
implementation and a long practice staple at Cintas is an
internal resource that consists of a dedicated team, budget,
and resources meant to engage the current servicemembers,
veterans-related entities, and service organizations. At
Cintas, my team is well versed on military backgrounds, common
struggles, and frequent pain points for the job seeker and
hiring manager alike.
We also stay connected through current military-related
events, political compliance happenings, and charitable
organizations to aid us with future processes and involvement.
Concurrently, the military and veteran population,
respectively, consists of complex and well-connected
associations, and should be regarded as the fraternal
institutions they are, which is particularly useful in terms of
outreach.
Most importantly, this team acts as a direct conduit
between the military veteran applicant and the career
opportunity's hiring managers and leadership within Cintas.
This minimizes the chance of the applicant being overlooked in
a misinterpretation of military experience, and from the
candidate becoming lost in an application process that may
involve hundreds of thousands of other traditional applicants.
At Cintas, we have an established medium of communication
which allows the military applicant to directly contact the
military recruiting team during their application process via
email or professional media, by which method we are able to
track application and interview progress and advocate for the
applicant via screening.
Following the recruitment or application process, we also
implement educational collateral for managers and prospective
leaders of military staff. Our team is the primary facilitator
of such education and acts as the champion for these dedicated
efforts. The education familiarization of leaders to military
experience is imperative to the hiring, onboarding, and long-
term success of the current or former servicemember. Similarly,
setting expectations and creating mentorship opportunities
among the veteran staff is inherently valuable. It is also our
intention to continue to cultivate and improve these efforts
which will lead to greater improvement in hiring and retention
numbers among veterans.
To summarize, much of our success in this topic comes from
the true embodiment, adoption, and education of these efforts
on a national level. Similar to a military unit, in the absence
of ongoing guidance from the military program at Cintas, local
managers will carry out these effort autonomously. It is this
type of self-initiation and execution that Cintas exemplifies
and that a successful program should strive for.
We proudly share best practices, solid resources, and even
talent with other organizations should they wish to establish
their own similar efforts. And I am happy to answer any
questions. Thank you.

[The prepared statement of Matt Disher appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you very much.
Mr. Knowles, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAN KNOWLES

Mr. Knowles. Mr. Chairman and distinguished gentlemen of
the panel, thank you for inviting me to be here today on behalf
of the Tristate Veterans Community Alliance and the veterans,
and the families that we seek to serve in our region. As a 7-
year Army veteran and the son of a career and Vietnam veteran,
I am honored and humbled by the opportunity to offer some
perspective on some of the employment issues that veterans
face, issues important to them and to the strength and the
health of our community.
I would like to start by recognizing the extraordinary
strength and resiliency of the young men and women who are
serving today or have served our country in the military. We
also must recognize the sacrifice of the families: the parents
who have raised and seen their sons and daughters, and the
spouses who are asked to follow their loved ones to bases and
posts throughout the world. In many cases they have put their
education and careers on hold and simply find what work they
can after each move. They have raised young children along for
long periods of time when their servicemember is deployed. And
these families deserve our respect as well and our help.
Many of our soldiers, sailors, marines, and airmen have
returned from duty, put down their weapons, and turned in their
uniforms for the opportunity to benefit from the freedoms for
which they fought. But they find that the fight, a different
fight for sure, but a fight nevertheless, must still be fought.
And that is the struggle to transition and successfully compete
for jobs, for jobs, for education, for the health care benefits
that they deserve.
Why do they struggle? How can we honor them for the service
that they have so faithfully given us? They do not want a
handout. They simply want to have their knowledge, their
skills, their maturity, their willingness to work hard and
achieve worthy goals acknowledged and be considered as
qualifications for the chance to serve again in the workforce.
Why do they struggle? They struggle not for lack of
empathy, respect, or support of the communities, but because
many of the systems that have been created to help them have
become nightmares of bureaucracy and inefficiency.
Organizations and programs that have been created specifically
to serve them have become bloated and are often redundant,
managed by civil servants from afar.
The services they offer shout for and compete with other
services of other organizations equally as inefficient and
distant from the actual needs of those they try to serve. And
this is not just the large Federal- and State-run service
agencies. This extends to the plethora of often well-meaning,
but poorly informed and scarcely resourced local agencies,
programs, and initiatives that each community offers. This is
the well-named sea of good will that is gratifying from a
distance, but confusing and overwhelming when you are actually
trying to wade through it.
How can we best help them? I would suggest that it is not
in trying to do more, but perhaps in doing less, but more
effectively. There is no shortage of resources available to
help our veterans. As any battlefield strategist will tell you,
success comes from being able to apply overwhelming force and
firepower at the decisive place and point in time to break
through the enemy's defenses and achieve the given objective.
This must also apply to the battle we face in getting veterans
hired, trained, and retained in the civilian workforce.
This Nation has the resources. That is, it has the will and
it has the money to succeed. But it is failing in application
of those resources. By trying to channel them through Federal
and State bureaucracies instead of getting them into the
communities, the communities that, let's face it, have the most
to gain by successfully employing the veterans, and the most to
lose in having to manage the consequences of veteran
unemployment through local health care, homelessness, substance
abuse, law enforcement, and emergency service agencies. It's
the communities that are bearing that burden to a large extent.
Today's system of employment support, through the
government and military services, is confusing for veterans, it
is frustrating for employers, and it is confounding for the
service providers on the ground between the two trying to
facilitate and support those connections. Our system must be
streamlined to get it to work. There must be less programming
and oversight from the top, more quality communication and
interaction with employers directly, and better coordination
between the service providers within a given community.
This will be helpful in four critical areas. Number one,
better preparation of those leaving the military via more
effective training conducted in collaboration with those from
the community that have the current real world experience to
know what is important. Better preparation of employers who
have to find, hire, onboard, and retain those veteran
employees. More realistic expectations of servicemembers who
will be competing for jobs, and of companies who want to offer
them jobs, and the HR professionals who have to match those
two. And finally, more effective interaction and support from
the community agencies to keep veterans gainfully and happily
employed and contributing to the broader health of their
communities.
This is possible. It can be done. And it must be done if we
are going to get more of our veterans and their skills to work,
and increase our collective competiveness.
Thank you for your continued service to our country and
this community, and in being here to listen and hopefully act
on what you've learned.
[Applause.]

[The prepared statement of Dan Knowles appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you, and I could not agree with you
more when you talk about the bureaucracy that ends up being
involved and making it more and more challenging. And we will
talk more about that when we go to the questions.
Mr. Newsome, you are now recognized.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS NEWSOME

Mr. Newsome. Thank you, Congressman Wenstrup. Members of
the Committee, Representatives, and respective guests, first of
all, I thank you for bringing this panel and this collective
group together to address an issue that is of the utmost
importance on a national scale.
Best practices in veteran hiring not only affects the
veteran and their family, but also the bottom-line success of
any organization that's engaged in such an endeavor. Beyond
being an inherently good thing to incorporate in any HR
process, veteran hiring simply makes good business sense. Those
who recognize this and are equally willing to invest dedicated
efforts, personnel, and resources to this initiative, stand to
great augment, and enhance their workforce while naturally
strengthening their company.
I'm here today as a veteran myself. I served with the 82nd
Airborne as an infantry paratrooper, serving multiple tour of
duty. I've been that job-seeking military veteran. I'm here
today representing RecruitMilitary. We are a veteran-owned and
operated full-service military to civilian recruiting firm that
has been championing the veteran community and helping to
bridge the gap between transitioning personnel, the veteran
population, and corporate American since 1998.
We're headquartered right here in Loveland, Ohio. We offer
companies the ability and the associated resources necessary to
effectively connect with the veteran population. We've
conducted over 800 veteran career fairs across the country
since 2006, connecting over 430,000 job-seeking military men
and women with over 24,000 organizations.
Beyond the scope of our career fairs, we offer our
corporate partners the ability to access the Nation's largest
sole-purpose job-seeking veteran database just shy of a million
candidates, as well as capturing the attention of transitioning
population through our on-based magazine available to our
partners who wish to augment their branding efforts. While
working with a majority of the Fortune 500 and thousands of
organizations throughout the country, we have a unique
perspective on what works best for companies, and the needed
tools to build these strategies from the ground up.
Success is driven by acknowledging and effectively
leveraging the immense talent and value stemming from our armed
services. However, to understand best practices in veteran
hiring within the veteran community, it's imperative that we
understand what the veteran is. We are yesterday's, today's,
and tomorrow's leaders. The Department of Defense has invested
millions of dollars into each of us to ensure that we are
experts within the realm of which we serve. We are proud,
hardworking patriots who seek to take the bountiful skills and
virtues taught to us in the service, and apply them in the
civilian sector to enhance ourselves and the organizations that
we represent. We are the top tier candidate pool outperforming
our peers.
Each organization must engage in this effort in their own
meaningful way. There is no one-size-fits-all, no all-
encompassing solution to attaining a successful veteran hiring
initiative. However, there are general guidelines that can be
universally applied to ensure a successful starting point is
established.
Each organization brings unique appeal to the job seeker,
and each organization has a unique personnel need. In some
cases, understanding certain military occupational specialties
and MOS code, a servicemember's job is an appropriate fit due
to the synonymous job descriptions. In other cases, their
leadership experience and intangible strengths are going to be
more important.
A majority of the veteran population also has comprehensive
civilian work experience and many have obtained a formal
education upon departing the service. It's a very fluid dynamic
that requires non-passive techniques that put a company's name
and brand on the forefront of the veteran hiring discussion.
An organization has to ask a series of questions. Why do I
value the veteran population? Why is my company a good company
to work for? Why do I consider my company to be a great place
for a veteran to explore a career path? What are my company's
greatest needs? What are a veteran's greatest strengths? And
where do I have an immediate need for self-driven leadership
oriented employees? Once these answers are clear, a dedicated
veteran hiring initiative can be incorporated into the overall
organizational talent and acquisition process. One may require
a branding strategy on top of a proactive engagement to include
career fairs, social media, and community outreach to ensure
that a company is synonymous with veteran hiring.
It's important to conduct an inventory of your existing
veteran workforce, take a special interest in their experience
and their notion as to why your company is a great fit for he
or she personally, use this information in your language and
overall approach to the job-seeking veteran population.
The organizations who tend to have a higher success rate
are those who can speak to this and even incorporate current
veteran employees into their recruiting process. Having a
veteran on your recruiting team is essentially a veteran
endorsement. It's one veteran telling another veteran that this
is a good company to work for.
Proactive engagement is key. Tapping into the veteran
population is not as easy as saying we're veteran friendly. We
see that far too often. You can never be passive. And the days
of checking off the blocks and strictly relying on job postings
is past. It's too passive. Understanding this population's true
value and potential will drive a company's ability to express
their desire to hire them.
This topic requires more time and words than I'm allotted
for this particular segment, so I hope my statement will
generate a meaningful dialogue.

[The prepared statement of Chris Newsome appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you very much, and I want to
thank each of you not only for your service, but for the
tremendous insight that you brought forward just in your brief
testimonies today. And I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
You know, I think you touched on some things we find too
often in the system, that when you get out of the military,
there is lack of access and lack of choice, and it is
frustrating and very difficult. And I know there are people in
this room here, I know firsthand that they have had to endure
some of those challenges that come with that.
There are many changes that will take place within the VA.
There is a culture that needs to be changed because we are
there, they are there, to serve the veteran. And while there
are many good people in that system that want to do all that
they can on behalf of the veteran, I am afraid that we find,
too often, that we have people there that are self-serving,
which goes directly against the life of those that serve in the
military who are there to serve for others.
You mentioned something, and I want to talk about
transition and preparedness when you leave the military. For
example, when I finished my surgical residency, nobody told me
how to run a business and start a practice, you know. You knew
how to do your medicine. You knew how to do that, but you did
not know really what you had to do next, and it took some
education on that.
We have the Transition Assistance Program out there, and we
have tried to make it better. You guys know what it is like
when you are getting out. You often just want to get out. So
how do you successfully really reach people and say, this is
what you can do? It is an open book test because you want to
make sure they have the information. And that is one of the
things that we are trying desperately to do to make that
transition, not just, hey, here is your service record, your
DD-214, good luck, see you later. We have got to make that
transition meaningful.
So my question to each of you is, what is the one thing
that you might suggest that our troops do or have before
leaving military service to ensure that they have an increased
chance of success in the civilian sector?
Mr. Newsome. I will go ahead and start. Thank you for the
question. I would say one of the biggest shortcomings could be,
and this is biased because it is from my own personal
experience having gone through ACAP not more than 10 years ago.
When an individual, especially somebody in their early to
mid-20s, is going through the transition having gotten off of
active duty, possibly getting home from multiple deployments,
you are not in the proper mindset to actually focus and drink
in the information that is being provided to you. I know it is
very easy to blame the TAP and ACAP classes as, you know,
having nothing but shortcomings as far as the information that
they are disseminating. There is work that needs to be done in
that regard because while there are SOPs, it is not united.
So what I went through with the ACAP process at Fort Bragg,
North Carolina is going to be different from what one of my
counterparts went through at Fort Irwin, California. The
classes and the resources are not always the same, so bringing
that together under one umbrella and making it more unanimous
and congruent is going to be incredibly helpful.
The military has started allowing servicemen and women to
start the transition process a lot earlier now so they can
start to go to ACAP classes as far out as a year in advance in
some cases. And being able to start that process that early,
can help to start winding down the mind, if you will.
Again, myself, I was interested in just coming home. I was
23 years old. I had gotten back from my 3rd deployment. I could
not focus. So while I was being given nothing but valuable
information, I could not hear it. So I would say we need to
focus a little bit more on making sure that dissemination of
information is being listened to by the individual.
Mr. Wenstrup. And maybe start it sooner when you are not
thinking about--
Mr. Newsome. Absolutely, as soon as possible.
Mr. Wenstrup [continued].--I want to get on that plane and
get home.
Mr. Newsome. Exactly.
Mr. Wenstrup. Mr. Knowles?
Mr. Knowles. Thank you. I totally agree with most
everything Chris has said. The one thing that I add to that is
that I think there needs to be an injection of realism, what
the real world outside the military culture looks like as they
transition. What we are finding is, many veterans come out of
the military with either very inflated expectations about the
type of job and position they are going to have or a lot of
hesitancy because they do not know how in the world they are
going to translate the things they have been asked to do for
the last 4 or 5, 10 years into something that is going to be
meaningful to an employer.
And I think connecting them with somebody who has recently
transitioned and been through that success in finding a job and
finding a new career in the military is going to be one of the
most important things that they can listen to and gain a more
realistic expectation of what has to happen.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Mr. Disher?
Mr. Disher. All good information. I think that we are all
on the same plane here. The three of us talk quite frequently
about best practices as well. Something I might like to add,
and I will use myself as an example of this. I was a combat
engineer in the Marines. We were talking about the sniper
before. Mr. Johnson made his comments as well about how that
would be excellent for the employer to engage that person if
they would understand what that sniper has been through.
In my experience, I left the Marine Corps at 23 years old,
give or take. I was a combat engineer. My job was to blow
things up and shoot guns. And so, naturally I figured I would
come out and put my application in somewhere, and somebody
would hire me. Well apparently, nobody wants a person that can
blow things up and shoot guns out here in corporate America.
So one of the things I lacked, but this is probably
happening with today's generation of young professionals
leaving the military, is the network. Our college-aged peers
during their college time, for example, are educated. They are
brought up to speed on how to have these conversations and may
be what to expect when they leave college.
In the military, you are taught for 4 years how to be in
the military, and then there is maybe a 1-week process, a
couple of weeks of a process that teaches you how to get out of
the military, and not much of that process is really based
around how to have these conversations, and how I can with you,
or you, or anybody else outside of the military.
I equate it to kind of being in a box with all of your
friends for a number of years. You are in that box, and you can
see people on the outside, but you largely do not communicate
with them. And then, one day they open that box and say go
ahead and figure out the rest of your life.
So I think the biggest thing is engaging that network or
teaching or educating servicemembers on how to engage that
network, how to connect with the outside world prior to getting
out instead of waiting until they get home as I think some of
us do quite frequently.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well, thank you very much. I now recognize
Mr. Takano for 5 minutes.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, and I appreciate the Chairman's
interest in starting this process earlier in a soldier's life
cycle. I, too, agree that that is a focus we should have. But
it often comes in conflict with the Department of Defense's
emphasis on the mission, and the commander's readiness to take
on another aspect of that command. And we are kind of separated
from the Veterans Department and DoD in trying to align, I
think, this interest.
Actually, TAP is a huge improvement from what there used to
be. There used to be no TAP at all. And so, now that we are
having discussions about how we make TAP effective, that we
need to go beyond that. I think this is a very interesting
conversation, a very interesting line of inquiry.
I want to ask a quick question. Mr. Newsome, Mr.
Knowledges, Mr. Disher, what percentage would you say of our
military servicemembers when they transition out have issues
with, say, remediation, where they want to seek more education
when they have to go back and bone up on their math, or bone up
on their English skills or writing skills. Is this a
significant issues, do you think?
Mr. Newsome. I think that is going to be very dependent on
the individual and what their background is. Are they getting--
Mr. Takano. I realize that, but in general, do our
transitioning soldiers, especially our younger ones, do they
encounter this as maybe a barrier in terms of being able to get
more training or, say, be able to get a higher education? We
market our volunteer forces with educational benefits. That is
one of our prime recruiting tools. Would you agree with me on
that? And that I am just wondering how many of them are
actually coming out of the military ready to engage higher ed.
Mr. Newsome. A good portion. The education benefits that
are available to your everyday serviceman and woman are as good
as they have been since World War II. You know, having
personally used it, I did have to brush up. I had been out of
the classroom environment for over 4 years, so I started at
Cincinnati State, worked my way up to the curriculum at UC, and
then transferred over to UC. So I would not necessarily call it
a barrier, though, but it is something that we have to endure.
Mr. Takano. Some of our former military servicemen may be
from lower income backgrounds, many from foster care. My
understanding is that military benefits are not available for
those who want to get remediation, of the housing benefits, for
example. You have got to be enrolled in full-time credits. So I
am wondering, I mean, it might not have been your issue, but I
am just trying to get a handle on how many this is an issue
for.
Mr. Disher. I cannot reference an exact percentage, but to
talk about the transitioning population in the military, the
vast majority are enlisted. And I would also say that the vast
majority of those people getting out on an annual basis are
without higher education in many cases. Traditional higher
education, I might note. They have the military education.
I think one of the hardest parts of the transition, and I
do not know if this is going to answer your question. I hope
that it alludes to it, is that we typically come out of the
military, let us say, after 4, 6, 8, 10 years, and we have
families in some cases. We have to put our lives back together,
and we are trying to go to school while trying to raise a
family and pay the bills. And for anybody trying to attend
school full-time, the GI bill, the post-9/11 GI bill is
exceptional compared to what it used to be, but it still does
not cover all the aspects of--
Mr. Takano. So the flexibility involved. I mean, many of
our soldiers and many of our servicemembers as consumers of
higher ed may not be as discerning as they ought to be, and are
marketed to based on convenience. And traditional higher ed is
not necessarily adapted them, but they are often getting
themselves into programs which may not truly have advantageous
for them. They are using up their benefits, and then find out
that they cannot really get employment with the certificate
they thought would help. I just recently authored a bill that
unanimously went through that would require that programs lead
to a certification, a State certification.
But there has been, you know, concern on my part that we
have generous benefits, but often not wisely used. And the
issue of people not even knowing about it, but if you know
about it, the issue of trying to use them, well I think is an
issue.
Mr. Disher. I think just to add to your point there that
the educational process in higher education, it does cater to
largely the traditional student. And so, then the person who
has other priorities who has a family or has a full-time job
because they have to pay said bills.
Mr. Takano. So we have got to look at higher education,
especially the State schools, as looking at adjusting as well,
becoming more flexible.
Mr. Disher. Absolutely.
Mr. Takano. Not just looking at just higher ed, traditional
higher ed. I also believe in training and entrepreneurship, and
that is a whole other topic.
But my time has run out, and I yield back.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. Mr. Johnson, you are recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You talked a little
bit about, you know, the perception of veterans within a
company. Mr. Disher, can you expand a little bit on how you
believe hiring veterans and understanding members of the
military better, how they are trained, the discipline, the
commitment, how that must be ingrained in a company's culture?
And how did Cintas achieve that?
Mr. Disher. I would say to start, I will kind of work
backwards on your question here. Cintas achieved this long
before I was in my current seat. So our founder, Richard
Farmer, was actually a Marine officer as well. The culture of
our company and the actual operations of our company require
people at the highest levels even to jump in and get their
hands dirty. And I think that we could argue, especially those
of us who have a military background, we know that that is
exactly what the military embodies, is that, when something
needs to be done, when a decision needs to be made, or, you
know, in battle if somebody needs to jump into the fight,
everybody becomes a combatant.
I would say at Cintas and the other companies that fully
embrace this, it goes beyond the feel good measure of hiring
military because it is the right thing to do, and it moves into
the process of having the right people on the line to do the
job, which becomes profitable. Again, to use those cliches, we
have people that show up to work on time, who understand how to
handle tough situations, who understand how to manage people.
And so, I think that we fully embody that. I think any
company that would like to engage, that fully understands the
value of somebody who has a military background would like to
engage them, they are going to have to embody these traits as
well, and fully understand what the veteran has done in order
to make those different traits profitable within their
organizations.
Mr. Johnson. When your founder is a marine, that is pretty
easy to get to.
Mr. Disher. It is. It makes things a lot easier.
Mr. Johnson. Absolutely. Absolutely. Was he a sniper?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Disher. Not that I am aware of, sir.
Mr. Johnson. I bet he could shoot.
Mr. Disher. Probably.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Knowles, can you go a little bit more into
detail about the training you provide to HR supervisors and
first line recruiters about hiring veterans?
Mr. Knowles. Certainly. Thank you for asking. We have a
program--we call it our Veteran Employment Transition
Assistance Program--that we have developed specifically to
address what we saw as a gap in the hiring process. There are
many, many opportunities and initiatives to train veterans on
how to write resumes, and interview, and go through that
process. There are relatively few, if any, community-based
training programs for people and the employers.
The struggle that we find when we talk to employers is
that, first of all, I do not understand the darn resume. There
are way too many acronyms. There is a lot of jargon. And, you
know, I do not really know what to do with that. What questions
do I ask? So we talk about that. We train them on that. We talk
about how to conduct an interview in a way that asks questions
that they need to have answered for their interview process,
but using the right terminology and the understanding of what
the veteran has been through.
For example, rather than the standard question of asking,
tell me about a time when you helped your department improve a
difficult goal, we say change that word ``department'' to
``unit,'' change that word ``goal'' to ``mission.'' And you are
going to get the same information you need, but in a more
contextually relevant way. So those are two of the things that
we do, and we actually practice that and train that.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. Mr. Newsome, what is the number one
thing you tell employers to do when they come to you and want
to set up a veterans hiring program? And before you answer, let
me encourage you to put close to the top of your list, do not
discount snipers.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Newsome. It is very important to have an open mind when
you are looking at a military servicemember. When you are
looking at a resume, as Dan mentioned, there is a lot of jargon
out there. Corporate America has a tendency to get tunnel
vision and stigmatize what a veteran is or what a veteran is
capable of, and essentially pigeonholing or limiting that
individual to, you know, to having to access to a whole slew of
job categories.
So a company really has to break down and understand that
the veteran community is just as fluid, flexible, and dynamic
as their civilian counterparts, and are just as capable of
anything else. There are thousands of MOSs, so literally any
job that exists within the civilian sector, there is a
counterpart to that within the military.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I would submit that, too, and
something I think all of our employers could go to school on.
You know, military members are experts in multitasking, you
know. You might have an MOS of this, but you do a lot of
different things especially as you work your way up into
leadership roles within the military. So pigeonholing a veteran
and saying, well, you know, all you knew how to do was drive a
truck, that is totally inaccurate.
Mr. Wenstrup. I agree.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. And for those who do not know,
``MOS'' is your military occupational specialty, and that is
what we are referring to. And I would agree--
Mr. Johnson. Sniper is an ``MOA.''
Mr. Wenstrup. That is right. That is right.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wenstrup. And I want to apologize to my most senior
colleague here as I inadvertently broke rank and went to Mr.
Jonson first. So I now recognize Mr. Chabot.
Mr. Johnson. Air Force has its privileges, Mr. Chairman.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Chabot. Thank you very much. Well, I realize I had not
used the term ``sniper'' yet, so there, ``sniper.''
[Laughter.]
Mr. Chabot. I feel a little left out, so it does not have
anything to do with what I am going to talk about, but I
thought I should at least mention it.
Most of the emphasis thus far has been, and I think
appropriately so, linking up our veterans with a good company,
a good job, at some point and how do we do that. As Chairman of
the House Small Business Committee, there is one other area
that I probably should mention here. Some folks I think coming
out want to create their own job, and they are entrepreneurs,
and they want to start up their own company.
For example, Cintas, I think the current CEO, Scott
Farmer's great grandfather started the company literally going
from factory to factory and collecting old rags, soiled rags,
taking them home, washing them, and then turned that into a
company, and hire a lot of folks. And then it was towels, and
then it was uniforms. And they are one of our most prominent
companies not only in this area, but nationally now. And Apple,
for example, literally started in Steve Jobs' parents' garage,
you know. And until I think recently, they were the largest
profit-making company I think in the world. I think they are
number two after Exxon maybe. But nonetheless, they started out
as entrepreneurs.
And so, for those veterans that might like to start their
own company, and probably, Mr. Newsome and Mr. Knowles, you
could probably be the best ones about this, what should we be
thinking about? Do you hear this from folks that you associate
with who perhaps rather than want to work for somebody else,
want to start up their own company? Is there more we ought to
be doing? Is there more we can do? Either one of you or both.
Mr. Knowles. Sure, I will go. That is a great question, and
unfortunately I do not have the specific statistics on how many
veterans as they get out want to start their own business. But
I would say that they have some significant advantages and some
disadvantages. Having started up my own business and run it, I
can speak to that from that perspective.
The advantage they is, just as Mr. Johnson recognized, they
are tremendous multitaskers. They are willing to jump in and
get what needs to be done regardless of the task. They do not
niche themselves and I am the strategist, or I am the, you
know, the product expert. And that is a huge advantage. They
also are willing to put as much time as it takes to get the
mission done. That is what they are trained to do. That is part
of their culture.
The disadvantage is there are specific skills when it comes
to financial acumen and business skills that they most likely
have not been exposed to in the military. And I think that is
the area where we can provide help to them by linking them up
with perhaps other veteran entrepreneurs who have been down
that path, and find a way within the community to give them a
mentor group or perhaps an advisory board that helps them move
forward with their dream, and make sure that they are actually
working on something that is not big on passion, but short on
generating a living, but can do both.
And there are several great organizations within the
Cincinnati community specifically that helps entrepreneurs
validate their ideas, and set up, and get the initial funding
they need on that. I am not aware of any that specifically
focus that effort on veterans trying to make that transition,
so perhaps that is--
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Mr. Newsome, would you want to
comment?
Mr. Newsome. I think Dan is on point, and just to echo some
of the things that he said. Some of these resources do exist.
As with many things related to resources and military veterans,
it is a matter of making sure that that information is being
disseminated to them, and they are taking that information and
processing it. So making that readily available for them is
going to be key in that regard.
We need to identify what form of entrepreneurial mindset
does this individual have? Do they have an idea that they want
to start from scratch, like a Cintas, or do they want to look
into a franchise? RecruitMilitary works with a handful of
franchises that finds immense value in the entrepreneurial
mindset that the military is naturally producing. These are
self-driven leaders, so they are entrepreneurial by nature.
Some of them just do not know it.
Having local business mentors, business leader mentors, I
think would be key in that regard because that is firsthand
experience, handholding that can be conducted. As far as how to
implement that on a governmental level, I do not know. I do not
even know that we even necessarily have to cross that bridge.
If we can just encourage local organizations, you know,
corporate America throughout the Nation to buy into something
like that, I think that would be a pretty easy solution to that
issue.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, if I could just
mention one final thing. We did pass some legislation that I
have introduced in the Small Business Committee recently. It is
called the Veterans Entrepreneurship Act. And what it does if
you are trying to get a loan through the SBA, the Small
Business Administration, to start up a company or to expand a
company and create jobs and that sort of thing, there is a
filing fee. It is generally around $1,500 to try to get the
loan. We waived it for veterans, and it was bipartisan, so we
had both Republicans and Democrats working together. It passed,
and the President signed it into law last year. So veterans get
a break if they want to start up a business. And they can
contact our offices about that, and we could get you the
information if you are interested.
And then finally, ``snipers.'' Thank you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Wenstrup. Mr. Messer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Messer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
all again for your service to your country, and I want to thank
you for your service now, which is equally important to the
veterans that you help transition into the workplace.
You know, as we think about the conversation today, it
strikes me that our challenges that we face are less challenges
of intention and more challenges of results. As Mr. Knowles
mentioned, we have a sea of goodwill demonstrating our
intentions, and yet when you talk to employers, they feel they
cannot connect with the veterans that they seek. When you talk
to veterans, they feel like they cannot find the opportunities
that they know if they could just find it, they would be a
great fit for.
I was very struck, Mr. Knowles, by your comment about we
have got to try to focus and figure out how we do less better,
how we do less and get potentially better results. I think we
have got to think outside the box. I appreciated Mr. Takano's
comments earlier about one of the things we can do is provide
better flexibility to veterans in the education benefits they
receive. I think, by the way, that is a challenge we face
throughout our Federal education policies. How can we better
match those programs to real opportunities in the workplace?
And for everybody, that is not, you know, going to four
homecomings, carrying a backpack around for 4 years and going
to a college. I think that is one approach hopefully we can
work on.
But I want to start with Mr. Knowles. You sort of
challenged us with the point that we need to rethink these
programs. And you have suggested a couple, but I just want to
give you a little time to talk about what is one or two things
that we can do, take the resources we have, and better utilize
them to match employees with those veterans out in the
workforce?
Mr. Knowles. Well, thank you for the opportunity and for
asking that question. There are many, many more opportunities
than we certainly have the time to discuss at this hearing. But
I think that several of them stem from everybody trying to do
good, but not really knowing how to do it. And it is incredibly
difficult, as I am sure you can attest to much more easily than
I can, to sit up on the mountain and look down in the valley
and say, I want to help that person, I want to help this group,
and try to get that help channeled to the right person at the
right time to make a difference to matters in their lives.
And, you know, I think because that is difficult to do, it
leads many organizations to try and say, well, you know, I do
not know if that specific program is going to work the way I
want it to, but I am going to bracket it with these other
programs that, you know, if the collective impact of all these
different four, five, or six different initiatives can help,
then, gosh, I have got to be doing something right, and
understand that logic.
The problem is, you have got all these other people down in
the mountain and down in the valley that are trying to work on
the ground with the people that are struggling through that
effort. And every time they turn around, the person they are
trying to help is starting to say, oh, wait a minute, I got
this shiny thing over here that somebody just told me about, or
I got this new program over here that somebody said they could
give me the money to make my rent payment this month, so I will
go running over there.
And what happens is sometimes it works, sometimes it does
not. But you are disenfranchising a lot of those people that
are really in a much better position to help, you know. I mean,
I have heard several comments this morning about the VA, and I
know they are struggling. I have to say personally, I know many
people in our local VA who are just unbelievably passionate and
focused, and they are trying to do the right thing every single
time. It is not all of them unfortunately.
But I think that is an organization that perhaps suffers a
little bit from this in trying to deviate or wrap the things
that they need to do in their three core missions around
providing great medical support and providing benefits. And
instead, they are bracketing those into education and different
programs.
Mr. Messer. Yes. Well, I appreciate that. I would just make
the observation, it seems to me one of the challenges is when
we try to create a one-size-fits-all program, I think providing
more flexibility to the veteran, and using existing resources
in a way that they see best meets their needs, and then,
frankly, trying to provide appropriate incentives for employers
so that it is in their best interest to try to seek these folks
out and let the market in the middle meet the two between,
seems to be an approach that makes the most sense to me.
It is important that we get it right. I think we have a
moral obligation to stand by our veterans, and not only
appreciate them while they are serving, but help them
transition into civilian life. And I appreciate the opportunity
to work on those issues today. Thank you.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you. I want to thank you, and I want to
thank all the panel Members today for your testimony, and
taking the questions, and sharing your insights. And I also
want to thank those here at Anderson Township Civic Center for
their hospitality and hosting us today. Thank you for taking
time from your busy schedules not only to be here today, but
what you are doing each and every day. And I thank all of you
in the gallery as well for taking the time to be here, to be
part of this process.
I think that we do it best at the local level when people
like these gentlemen are face to face with a veteran trying to
help them proceed in life, and to advance, and get themselves
going in so many ways because they bring so much to the table.
But I do thank all of you for being here.
Directly following this hearing, we will be holding a medal
ceremony where I have the honor to present Mr. Harry Fryer, a
World War II veteran, with several medals that he earned from
his service to our Nation. So if anyone would like to stay for
that ceremony and thank him for his service, you are more than
welcome.
And as you all know very well, a job fair will be conducted
once we adjourned where over 40 employers will be present. And
I encourage you all to go and meet with the employers following
this hearing as it is a great opportunity to interact.
Finally, I ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5
legislative days in which to revise and extend their remarks
and include any extraneous material on today's hearing.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Mr. Wenstrup. This hearing is adjourned. Thank you.

[Whereupon, at 11:56 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Prepared Statement of Sergeant Dominic F. Gulliford
To the honorable Congressman Brad Wenstrup and Congressman Mark
Takano

Let me start by saying the Cincinnati Police Department believes it
to be an honor and a privilege to employ, and have as a part of its
team, veterans from the United States Military. We feel there is no
higher reverence to show towards ones country than to serve in the
military with honor, pride and dignity. To employ individuals that
embody the spirit of respect for the Country and themselves, allows us
to maintain a high level of excellence as the standard in the honorable
calling of policing.
The Department and the City have used several different approaches
to attract veterans to apply. For example, qualified veterans are
awarded five bonus points on the initial exam. If the veteran is
disabled they receive ten additional points on the exam. Our exam is so
competitive that five or ten points are very significant and can propel
you from a very average score to the top of the list. Currently, you
must be an Ohio resident at the time of application to receive the
bonus points.
The department has aggressively looked for any career fairs or post
military job fairs that cater to veterans either on a military base or
those hosted off base by the military. We have constructed a group of
Adjunct Recruiters who are veterans to assure we always have enough
personnel to attend as many veteran recruiting functions as possible.
We recognize that area natives who are in the military and are
returning to this area and will be seeking employment beyond the ETS
date. We also realize that there are many veterans who will be
relocating to this area for the first time after exiting the military.
Knowing that honorably discharged veterans make for excellent police
candidates, the distance of travel to recruit at military facilities is
not an issue.
Military Guard and Reservists are also highly sought after
candidates for our Department. Our Department and the City, attempts to
accommodate Members of the Guard and Reserves as much possible,
throughout their career with the Department. Once you are selected to
the Police academy, the military provisions start. They will be in
accordance of how far along you are within the Academy. We have had
recruits called up for active duty while in the Academy. Upon being
released from active duty, if they have completed a significant portion
of Academy training we have assembled the necessary steps to get them
State certified as soon as possible. If they have not attended the
Academy for long, they may have to wait until the next class sits, but
their position will still be available to them. When called for active
duty after the Academy graduation your position and seniority will
stand no matter how long the deployment.
As a part of our local recruitment efforts we have developed
postcard size flyers, announcing our application and recruitment, which
are distributed through normal recruitment career fairs and placed in
local businesses and other facilities with a high volume of pedestrian
traffic. A list of local veteran's home addresses within the areas of
Hamilton, Butler, Warren and Clermont counties and also the City of
Dayton was secured through a private company. Those same flyers were
turned into mailers and sent through the postal service to each listed
address. The list totaled about five thousand addresses.
Approximately thirty percent of the Cincinnati Police Department's
sworn personnel are veterans. We take great pride in hiring veterans.
We recognize that veterans make great candidates due to their
commitment to duty and their want to serve and assist others. As a part
of the thirty percent (I am a veteran of the Marine Corps and the
previous Recruiting and Background Supervisor as well as Chief of
Police, Colonel Eliot Isaac, being veterans of the Army National Guard)
we take personal pride in helping veterans establish themselves as
Cincinnati Police Officers. We advocate giving back to well deserving
individuals who have given to our country. We can also be at peace
knowing that we are helping to keep a high level of professionalism
within our Department that not only helps us stand out as one of the
best Departments, but ultimately gives the citizens of Cincinnati the
type of service they deserve, require and want.

Sergeant Dominic F. Gulliford
Cincinnati Police Department
Recruiting & Background
513-352-2971

Prepared Statement of John Sapp
My name is John Sapp and I am the Executive Director of Sales
Operations and Offset at General Electric (GE) Aviation. In addition to
this role, and more applicable to this gathering, I also lead GE
Aviation's Veteran's Network (GEVN). GE is honored to have over 10,000
U.S. military veterans continue their career with us. Building on our
strong commitment to military veteran recruitment and development, we
launched the GE Veterans Network across all our businesses in November
2009. The Network is organized around 3 pillars- Support, Hire, and
Grow. both our own employees who are veterans and the veterans in our
local communities
First let me thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today.
As an 11-year veteran of the US Air Force it is a true pleasure to be a
part of this testimony, and I look forward to learning more about all
of the other great initiatives underway to support Veteran transitions.
GE is passionate about hiring Veteran's. At GE, we value the
leadership, loyalty, integrity, and commitment to excellence instilled
through participation in military service. We believe strongly that
this service helps make great leaders that are disciplined, strategic
thinkers with a level of loyalty that is unmatched. This appreciation
for Veteran talent, as well as GE's desire to ``give-back'' to those
that have made incredible sacrifices for the betterment of others, were
the primary reasons for the 2012 launching of GE's initiative to hire
5000 Veteran's in 5 years. As of Feb 12, 2016 we have already hired
4,889 Veterans (1,137 within Aviation), and by year-end we will have
exceeded our commitment by a significant margin.
GE's hiring and transition practices have been successful in
attracting and hiring a wide-range of Veteran talent from junior
enlisted to General Officer. For example, GE's transition assistance
workshops and one-on-one mentoring sessions are executed in conjunction
with the Chamber of Commerce's Hiring our Heroes initiative, by our own
GEVN Membership. GE's veteran employees coach with a focus on resume
building, as well as interviewing techniques and job search strategies.
These seminars are designed to help military personnel successfully
communicate the skills they learned in the military to the corporate
world. Furthermore, GE is also a founding Member of American Corporate
Partners (ACP), a national mentoring program dedicated to helping
veterans transition from the armed services to private enterprise
through career counseling and networking with professionals.
Internally, the GEVN and Human Resources have worked together to create
a much deeper understanding of Veteran Talent through our ``value of a
vet'' campaign, messaging the unique attributes of military talent that
will help GE hiring managers to better understand Veteran backgrounds.
Within GE Aviation, HR has also created a special team solely focused
on connecting Veteran talent with open job postings, further impacting
our efficiency in adding Veteran talent.
For mid-career transitions, GE offers an experienced leadership
program, designed specifically for military officers. The program is a
unique opportunity to work in three 8-month rotations within a GE
business. Qualified candidates, with exceptional military service, are
selected to start their careers with GE in this two-year cross-
functional program, including both on-the-job and formal classroom
training. I was fortunate enough to have entered the company through
this program 8-years ago.
Once on board, GE works hard to make sure the Veteran has an
effective transition into the company. Our GEVN Grow pillar is focused
on supporting the development of Veterans, including career
development, mentorship and coaching. Coupled with the networking and
Veteran connection activities that are a natural part of the GEVN, our
former military employees find a supportive environment for growing a
great career.
Overall, GE is passionate about hiring, supporting and growing
Veterans. We've made strong progress towards our goals to-date, but
look forward to improving our support of Veteran's going forward, as
well as learning from other business and government practices at forums
such as this. Thank you again for allowing us to participate.

Prepared Statement of Stephanie Huff
At HELP Plumbing, Heating, Cooling and Electric, we pride ourselves
on our commitment to activities supporting veterans. Our support spans
many different programs throughout the year. We are most known for our
donation program where we give a portion of our profits every year to a
local Veteran Support Program. The past several years we have donated
to DAV. In addition, we have donated free services and equipment to
local wounded veterans as well as widows and the children of fallen
soldiers. We announce our donations at our annual Veterans Day
appreciation breakfast which we host onsite at our office every year on
Veteran's Day.
We also strongly support hiring veterans. There are several
different ways we focus our efforts on connecting with veterans for
hiring opportunities throughout the year. We actively participate in
sponsored events including Recruit Military Hiring Fairs, and other
veteran targeted career fairs. In addition, in the spring of 2015 we
hosted our own veterans hiring event on site at our headquarters where
we brought in other military friendly employers with hiring needs, as
well as non-profit organizations that support veterans for a daylong
event. During this event we offered on site interviews, free lunch and
other veteran specific support programs and services. We look forward
to bringing this event back again this May.
Outside of career fairs, we also focus on posting jobs on our local
OhioMeansJobs.com website and reach out to partner with their Veterans
Support team to have them assist us in finding qualified talent. We
also reach out through trade specific sites and take advantage of
programs and marketing materials provided through organizations such as
www.troopstotrades.org through the Nexstar Legacy Foundation, to find
individuals with specific interest in learning a skilled trade.
There are many industries that have the potential to participate in
registered apprenticeship programs through the state. Both businesses
and job seekers benefit from apprenticeship opportunities.
Participating and qualifying apprenticeship programs are offered in
healthcare, construction, utilities and other industries.
While HELP Plumbing, Heating and Cooling does not currently
participate in the state recognized apprenticeship programs, HELP does
pay for 100% of all training expenses for all new hires, this includes
those with or without any industry specific skills or experience . Our
program consists of 3-5 months of intense training to include classroom
and field training experience as well as ongoing training throughout
the year to consist of over 200 hours a year to keep our team Members
on top of all necessary industry specific training needs. We also pay
for all training and certification exams to receive state recognized
license and certifications within each trade. This is a great
opportunity for veterans transitioning to full time work where they
want to learn a trade from the ground up.
In 2013 HELP Plumbing, Heating, Cooling & Electric was presented
the DAV National Commanders Award for Outstanding Small Employer of the
Year for conspicuous and meritorious effort in providing employment
opportunities for ill and injured veterans.

Prepared Statement of Jeff Carper

Total Quality Logistics / Best Practices in Veteran Hiring

Hello, and thank you Representative Wenstrup for inviting us. We
are honored to represent Total Quality Logistics at today's hearing and
talk about some of our company's best practices when it comes to
attracting and retaining military employees.
Representative Takano, welcome to Cincinnati; we hope you enjoy
your visit and can take some good ideas for military hiring back to
your home district in California and to the House Veterans Affairs
Committee in D.C.
My name is Jeff Carper and I am a veteran who attained the rank of
Sergeant in the U.S. Army, having served seven years from 1994 to 2001.
Now I am an executive sales director at TQL. I have three main points
I'd like to present today.

First: how we hire military employees.

TQL has a recruiter exclusively dedicated to finding military
talent for our company. LeeAnn Ryan is with me today. She's a Senior
Airman in the United States Air Force Reserve whose own military
experience and understanding of what it takes to transition into the
civilian world makes her well suited for the role.
LeeAnn recruits for both sales and non-sales positions at TQL. Her
familiarity with the military jargon and terms that often appear on
military resumes gives her a good idea of where an applicant might be
best suited.
Among other things, LeeAnn attends career fairs on military bases,
and will be focusing on TAP/ACAP (transitioning assistance programs)
events for military leaving the service or going into the reserve. She
works with the TVCA - who are here today - Hiring Our Heroes, Recruit
Military and other organizations to actively recruit from all branches
of the service with postings on military-specific websites and job
boards.

Second: why TQL is a good fit for military service Members.

TQL is a freight brokerage firm. We connect shippers who have
freight that needs delivered with carriers who can haul it. We
specialize in truckload transportation although we don't own any trucks
ourselves.
This isn't a job most people coming out of school or the military
have trained for. The trucking industry has unique rules, regulations
and a language all its own. We train our own experts through a five-
month long training program, similar to what service Members experience
in the military.
We hire for the job based on soft skills. The soft skills that make
one successful in brokering freight are similar to those taught in the
military--the ability to learn new skills and concepts quickly, adopt a
mission-driven philosophy and put forth core values to exceed
expectations.
Some of the comments we have heard from our military employees as
to why they have succeeded at TQL:

``I work for a large company, but my team is like a small squad or
fire team. We work well together.''

``Being in the military gives you a base structure. Self-motivation
and self-discipline are expectations.''

``The culture and energy we have here is very similar to the Army.
You always have a new goal in front of you, a new challenge to meet, an
opportunity to be a leader.''

As we continue to grow and expand into new cities around the
country, we need employees with strong leadership capabilities. More
than 90 percent of our sales leadership and management positions are
filled from within the company. And again, teaching leadership skills
is an area where the military excels.

Third: the TQL culture

TQL is and has always been committed to being a military friendly
company. Multiple managers at TQL have been recognized with Patriot
Awards for their exemplary support of employees in the National Guard
and Reserve. The company received the Above & Beyond Award from the
ESGR (Employer Support of the Guard and Reserves) and we recently
received our third Military Friendly Employerr recognition from Victory
Media and G.I. Jobs magazine.
The tone is set from the top. One of our core focus areas for our
company's charitable efforts is military causes. The company and our
employees actively work to raise money and support military causes. In
2015, we worked with 13 military/veteran organizations contributing
nearly $70,000 in charitable giving. And it's more than just dollars.
It's personal support too. This is an excerpt from a letter sent
directly to all of our military employees from CEO Ken Oaks on the day
TQL signed its national statement of support with the ESGR.

``Members of the military are some of our strongest team Members at
TQL. What you have learned through your military service -discipline,
hard work, leadership - is important. What your choice to serve
reflects - integrity, self-sacrifice, and love for your countrymen - is
invaluable.
Thank you for choosing to join the TQL team, but even more
importantly, thank you for your service to our country.''

Prepared Statement of Matt Disher
Good morning. Dr. Wenstrup, Representative Takano, Members of the
sub-committee, panel Members and guests, thank you all for your time
and dedication to this important topic.
I am humbled and honored by my invitation to testify at this
hearing, discussing best practices surrounding engagement and
employment of military veterans in the workforce. I am confident that
some of my shared strategies within Cintas will act as guidelines and
best practices for any organization with the same desire of
successfully employing veterans.
My name is Matt Disher and I lead the 26 year old national military
recruitment program at Cintas Corporation, headquartered here in the
Cincinnati, Ohio area. I am also a veteran of the Marine Corps, having
attained the rank of Sergeant upon my honorable discharge.
The Cintas Corporation is a national leader in uniform rental,
uniform sales, facility services, first aid and safety and fire
protection. We service over 1 Million businesses from our approximately
400 locations nationwide. At Cintas we pride ourselves on our ethics,
professionalism, and positive discontent; all traits that we commonly
share with the ranks of the US military. Cintas has been proudly
recognized for over a decade and by numerous sources as a top employer
of armed forces service Members.
I'd like to start with a few anecdotal statements to address what
Cintas values in military experience. Today's US armed forces are
feasibly the most advanced and best-educated in history. The relative
education level is higher in the military compared to the public they
serve. Virtually all service Members endure countless condensed hours
of valuable training in leadership, communication, history, planning
and skill-specific or technical trades. This training is frequently put
to use in practical application and real-world scenarios, and often
without a traditional college education. It is not uncommon, in all
generations of military service, to find a 20 to 25 year old leading a
number of troops in complex tasks or dynamic missions sometimes with
little guidance, oversight or situational information. To add, these
young men and women are regularly operating some of the most advanced
technologies in the world, in a no-fail setting; making them literally
the topic of which books are written, movies filmed, and legends made.
Because of their scope of duties, service Members become well-
traveled, exposed to various cultures, and physically and emotionally
equipped to handle virtually any situation placed before them. These
are commonly overlooked or misinterpreted traits in Corporate America,
but arguably desired by all. At Cintas, these traits are necessary,
needed and expressly sought.
Within Cintas, and likely in other organizations that successfully
operate such military programs, one element is generally agreed upon as
a starting point and launch pad for success - executive support and
sponsorship. The blueprints must be presented and supported from the
top tier of an organization, written into policy or practice, and
correlated with performance goals and participation; thus becoming a
fixture in the company's culture. Without the appropriate culture-based
orientation, the organization will wholly struggle to find value and
the public -particularly the military population- will have trouble
recognizing it.
A proven supplement to this corporate cultural implementation, and
a long-practiced staple at Cintas, is an internal resource that
consists of a dedicated team, budget and resources meant to engage
current service Members, veterans, related entities and service
organizations. At Cintas, my team is well-versed on military
backgrounds, common struggles and frequent pain points for the job
seeker and the hiring manager alike. We also stay connected through
current military-related events, political and compliance happenings,
and charitable organizations, to aid us with future processes and
involvement. Concurrently, the military and veteran population
respectively consists of complex and well-connected associations, and
should be regarded as the fraternal institutions they are, which is
particularly useful in terms of outreach.
Most importantly, this team acts as a direct conduit between the
military/veteran applicant and the career opportunities, hiring
managers and leadership within Cintas. This minimizes the chance of the
applicant being overlooked in a mis-interpretation of military
experience; and from the candidate becoming lost in an application
process that may involve hundreds or thousands of other traditional
applicants. At Cintas, we have an established medium of communication
which allows the military applicant to directly contact the military
recruiting team during their application process via email or
professional media; by which method we are able to track application
and interview progress and advocate for the applicant via screening.
Following the recruitment or application process, we also implement
educational collateral for managers or prospective leaders of military
staff. Our team is the primary facilitator of such education, and acts
as the champion for these dedicated efforts. The education and
familiarization of leaders to military-experience is imperative to the
hiring, onboarding and long term success of the current or former
service Member. Similarly, setting expectations and creating mentorship
opportunities among veteran-staff is inherently valuable.
Finally, it is also our intention to continue to cultivate and
improve these efforts which will lead to greater improvement in hiring
and retention numbers among veterans.
To summarize, much of our success on this topic comes from the true
embodiment, adoption and education of these efforts on a national
level. Similar to a military unit, in the absence of ongoing guidance
from the military program at Cintas, local managers will carry out
these efforts autonomously. It is this type of self-initiation and
execution that Cintas exemplifies, and that a successful program should
strive for.
We proudly share best-practices, solid resources and even talent
with other organizations should they wish to establish their own
similar efforts. I am happy to answer any questions. Thank you.

Prepared Statement of Dan Knowles
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:

Thank you for inviting the TVCA (Tristate Veterans Community
Alliance) to testify today at this important hearing of the Committee
of Veteran Affairs, Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity. As an
independent, veteran-led, non-profit organization focused on improving
the access to, and the quality of, services offered to veterans and
their families in the local community, we appreciate the opportunity to
share our perspective and provide recommendations to address the
challenges we see to successfully employing and retaining veterans in
our region.
As a new and somewhat unique organization, let me start by
explaining why we exist and what we do.

TVCA Purpose

The purpose of the TVCA is to make the Greater Cincinnati region a
preferred destination for veterans and their families. We do this by
emphasizing strong veteran employment opportunities in the region and
by ensuring an aligned and collaborative environment among tristate
employers, service agencies, and educational institutions - our
partners in serving those veterans.
We work closely with existing backbone organizations, such as the
United Way, the Regional Chamber of Commerce and Interact for Change,
to operate efficiently and to extend our efforts broadly within the
community. We work transparently with community influencers in the for-
profit, non-profit, public and private sectors to achieve our goals.
With our partner organizations, we are improving access to the services
most needed by veterans and families while improving both the quality
and efficiency of the service framework within the community.
Where there are gaps in service, we seek to fill them directly or
work with our service agency partners to do so. We believe that by
doing this, we will be able to better attract and retain veterans that
bring the strong leadership, discipline, personal accountability and
advanced problem-solving skills required to fuel the continued growth
of our community in the decades to come.

Brief TVCA History

The TVCA was founded in July of 2014 in response to a community-
based assessment to document the size and nature of problems facing our
region's veterans and to begin to evaluate the state of community
readiness to welcome and support returning veterans and military
families. This effort was coordinated by the Easter Seals Tristate
organization, who published their findings in May 2014, in the Tristate
Veteran Community Report: Needs Assessment and Initial Recommendations.
The first recommendation in the report summary was to ``create a
tristate (sic) Veteran Community Alliance . to coordinate, educate and
align the veteran support systems..'' across the region to better
support transitioning veterans and families.
The TVCA began planning and organizing activities as an
unincorporated association on July 9, 2014, when its organizers met
formally for the first time for that purpose. It was incorporated on
November 14, 2014. Until the TVCA received its 501(c)(3) confirmation
from the IRS on June 19, 2015, the programs and activities of the
Organization were funded through donations made for that purpose to
Interact for Change (an exempt public charity) that had agreed to act
as ``Sponsor''.
Initial funding was provided by several local, private foundations
and supplemented in January 2015 by a grant from Major League Baseball
(MLB) to create a Veteran In-Processing (VIP) & Welcome Center. In
March 2015, construction began on the VIP Center and the TVCA held its
first public meeting to formalize partner relationships with over 40
community service organizations supporting veterans. In late-May 2015,
the TVCA began reaching out to veterans and families and, in July, the
TVCA launched a self-guided Veteran & Family Resource Portal and
officially opened the VIP Center. The TVCA has since served over 170
veterans at the VIP Center and estimates that at least twice that
number have been served through the resource portal. The TVCA now works
with over 80 community partner organizations, including major
employers, colleges, and service agencies.

TVCA Operations

The TVCA operates exclusively to support veterans and families
residing in the 15-county Greater Cincinnati area, in SW Ohio, N
Kentucky and SE Indiana. It does this largely by working through its
network of partner organizations.
The TVCA operates with a small paid staff and has a volunteer board
comprised of Executive Committee Members and Members-at-large. The
board meets each month and is chaired by US Air Force Major General
(retired) Leonard Randolph, Jr. MD., former USAF Deputy Surgeon General
and Chief Medical Officer of Mercy Health. Other Executive Committee
Members include retired military leaders, business and service
organization executives from Interact for Health, the law firm KMK, the
United Way, the local Veterans Administration, and the USO.
Members-at-large include the chairpersons from 5 community-based
workgroups in the areas of Employment, Education, Health/Wellness and
Family Services, Collaborative Impact, and Peer Mentorship. These
workgroups meet independently every 4-6 weeks with recognized partner
organizations in those sectors to share best practices. They work
collaboratively to address common sector issues, all for the betterment
of veterans and their families.
One of the well-documented challenges that service Members face as
they leave the service is the overwhelming `sea of goodwill' that
exists in many communities - including ours. This refers to the
plethora of mostly well-meaning organizations that reach out to help
veterans. While the intent is genuine, the lack of coordination,
service fragmentation and the siloed nature of the service sectors
often results in confusion, frustration and disengagement. This, in
turn, often leads many veterans to seek emergency services for chronic
debt, depression, substance abuse, and / or homelessness.
The TVCA's veteran leadership, staff and peer mentor network allows
us to provide a knowledgeable and culturally familiar environment to
intercept and assist veterans earlier in their transition. Two-thirds
of board Members and staff are veterans or spouses of veterans. This
experience and empathy allows the TVCA to gain the trust of veterans,
enabling them build and follow a reintegration path personalized for
their goals and needs, and avoid the requirement for costly emergency
services paid for by individual taxpayers and the community.

TVCA Support of Veteran Employment

The TVCA provides employment support to veterans and family
Members, primarily in the low-moderate income range, within the Greater
Cincinnati tristate region. It does this by more efficiently connecting
transitioning veterans who are either unemployed or underemployed with
the job readiness services, counseling, and educational support that
exists in the community. It also ensures that employers in the
community understand the significant benefits that those who have
served in the military can contribute and helps them identify, hire,
on-board and retain those veterans that best fit their job
requirements. The TVCA does this by

bringing employers and employment service providers
together to share best practices and collaborate in veteran hiring
initiatives;

conducting training programs for employer leaders, first-
line supervisors and HR recruiters;

ensuring that current and soon-to-be veterans have the
resume, networking and interviewing skills required; and

facilitating direct connections between veterans and
employers or via support of partner job fairs.

Additionally, the TVCA works directly, and through our local
service partners, with veterans requiring affordable housing, financial
and debt management, and medical and disability assistance to help them
achieve a more self-sustainable lifestyle that permits stable
employment. The TVCA's goal is to ensure these highly trained and
capable former military service Members and their families find the
right career path and become contributing Members of our community.

Key Veteran Employment Challenges

Of the 99,000 veterans in our 15-county tristate area,
approximately 25,000 have transitioned out of the military since 1990
and are thus more likely to be either employed or seeking employment.
Over 9,000 of these veterans have left the military since 2001.
Unemployment is higher in this group than in older veteran cohorts and
among non-veterans of the same age. The size of this younger, higher
risk group is projected to double within 5 years.
There are a number of challenges that contribute to the difficulty
that veterans experience as they transition to civilian employment.
Described below are 10 key challenges that that tend to impede the
hiring and retention of veteran talent prior to, and during, the first
2 years of employment. Each challenge is followed by best practices and
recommendations based on input of TVCA partners.

Challenge 1: Misaligned Expectations in the Hiring Process

Many veterans don't know what to expect when it comes to finding
employment after they leave the service. The military may have been
their first real job after high school and that `hiring' experience was
very different than that of their non-military peers. For many veterans
in transition it is their first time having to create a resume,
research potential employers, submit on-line applications, network to
gain access / referrals, and to go through job interviews. Compounding
this lack of experience in the hiring process are the unique cultural
norms of military service which, for example, eschew taking personal
credit for accomplishments, emphasize communicating only what is
essential to answer the question, and downplaying challenges in
achieving difficult objectives.
Not recognizing these drawbacks beforehand, many new veterans have
heard and believe that civilian organizations are both anxious to hire
and willing to pay a premium, for those with military experience. They
are thus less motivated to take advantage of transition training
required by the military prior to out-processing and often approach
their initial job search with an inflated sense of confidence that it
won't take them long to land a high-paying and respected position. The
reality of how difficult the job search is can becomes a source of
frustration, anger and depression for many.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1. Provide a more realistic perspective of the job search process
and challenges when service Members are preparing to leave the
military. This can best be done by those local organizations that
provide workforce development services (e.g. United Way's Partners for
a Competitive Workforce) and by recently transitioned veterans.
2. Provide departing service Members a list of local contacts for
organizations that can help transitioning veterans build a transition
plan and connect them with local employers and service agencies.

Challenge 2: Attracting Veterans for Employment

From an employer standpoint, many in leadership positions believe
that 1) veterans should be hired for all the positive attributes they
bring to an organization, and 2) there are lots of veterans to choose
from due to the well-publicized reductions in force. They support
posting jobs on military and veteran job boards and encourage company
representation at military career fairs and events. They will often
promote their company or organization as being `military- or veteran-
friendly' places to work. Leadership expectations are therefore quite
high.
However, for the employees that actually have to attend the career
fairs, screen the applications, interpret the resumes, and conduct the
interviews, they are frequently not familiar with military descriptions
/ experience, and don't understand how to elicit the information needed
from their interviews with veteran applicants. Many HR recruiters, as
well as hiring managers, don't understand the scope of responsibility
and training that veterans may have already mastered and frequently
don't even know what questions about their service are okay to ask and
which are not. Many of the attributes promoted as evidence of being a
`veteran-friendly' employer, can seem very shallow to the very
prospects they are trying to attract. Clearly there is a need for
additional employer education.
Veterans typically look at on-line job postings on dozens of
websites and portals. They will often see positions described in terms
of what the ideal candidate would bring and will `self-select' out of
applying because they either don't understand the language used to
describe the position requirements or don't feel they have the specific
experience the organization is looking for. They underestimate the
value to employers of the strong, basic employability (`soft') skills
they do have.
At the career and job fairs they attend, most of the employers will
have HR representatives there - many of which lack military experience
- to provide an overview of the company, collect the resumes, and
perhaps do a very preliminary screening interview. To the veteran
unfamiliar with the job search and selection process, they often expect
to leave the job fair with a job offer, or at least confidence that one
is quickly forthcoming. That is often not the way employment
organizations work. Veterans get frustrated when they don't hear back
promptly. Employers will often take weeks or months before they are
prepared to make a decision and are thus often frustrated when the
veterans they wished to offer or bring in for additional interviews are
either no longer available or interested. At each level of the
attraction and hiring process, there are misaligned expectations.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1. Educate and provide consulting to employers on what benefits and
programs are truly `friendly' to the military / veterans they seek to
hire. Provide both oversight and positive incentives to ensure
authenticity in promoting this to veterans.

2. Make military background and culture training available to the
hiring managers, HR recruiters and supervisors of employers that seek
to hire veterans. Consider financial incentives to companies who
routinely provide this training to their HR employers.

3. Provide on-site peer mentors at career and job fairs to help
coach veterans seeking employment and set appropriate expectations
regarding follow-up with exhibiting employers and prospects.

Challenge 3: Resume Preparation

Although DoD now mandates training on how to prepare a resume
during out-processing, most veterans beginning transition have only a
perfunctory understanding of how to translate in writing their goals,
experience, training and skills in a compelling way. Most initial
resumes are poorly formatted, full of military acronyms and jargon,
packed with training courses completed, certificates received and
awards presented. The military work experience is primarily described
in terms of scope of responsibility and is very short on measurable
accomplishments.
From an employer standpoint, veteran resumes are difficult for non-
veterans to understand, take longer to process and are `intimidating'
to many HR professionals. Unless HR recruiters or managers are trained
on how to interpret military resumes, or there is a separate process in
place to have them screened by someone familiar with the military, the
resumes are often bypassed or rejected.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1. Upgrade the resume preparation training in DoD transition
programs. Provide examples of well written resumes for specific
industries as models for departing service Members to follow.

2. Establish within employer HR departments a separate military /
veteran track for resume review and follow-up. Include current veteran
employees - either in HR or as volunteers - in this process.

Challenge 4: Networking

A key part of the job search process is meeting others in the
community that might be able to provide an introduction or forward your
resume to an influential person at a prospective employer. Being able
to plan and take full advantage of networking opportunities is one of
the most effective ways to find employment. Unfortunately, this is one
of the least understood strategies for veterans looking for work. There
are certain skills and specific preparation required to network
effectively that veterans in transition must take advantage of. It
requires being willing to ask new acquaintances for specific help and
being willing to follow-up with networking contacts. Education of
veterans on the importance of networking in the job search process and
the skills required is not yet widely available.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1. Include training on the importance of networking as part of the
job search process. Include skill development workshops as appropriate.

2. Leverage networking training as a topic for connecting student
veterans with local employers.

Challenge 5: Interviewing

Once through the application and screening process, the job
interview is next hurdle. Veterans often have great difficulty
presenting themselves and their experience in the most compelling way
to the interviewers. The interviewers generally aren't familiar with
military experience and training and frequently misinterpret or fail to
explore responses beyond the standard questions and templates that are
used for all job interviews. The wording and context of those questions
may seem `basic' to civilian job applicants but are often confusing or
seem irrelevant to new veterans. For example, questions about `working
in a diverse environment' or `describing a time when you personally had
to accomplish something under stress' seem out of context to those with
military experience (e.g. what is meant by `diversity') or are
antithetical to the values of military leaders (e.g. taking personal
credit for a team accomplishment). Training of both veteran applicants
and civilian interviewers can help.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1. Include veteran employees in the interview panel for all veteran
applicants. Knowledge of military training and experience will allow
adaptation of questions and further development of responses that
indicate lack of contextual understanding by the applicant.

2. Adapt behavioral interview templates to enable those with
military experience to respond in a way that highlights the skills or
traits that the employer seeks to identify.

Understanding Cultural Differences

Many difficulties originate with the differences in culture between
military and civilian organizations. These differences are not only
reflected in the hiring process, but in retaining veteran talent once
hired. Awareness of the differences and small interventions during on-
boarding and early career discussions can easily address many of these.
There are 4 key areas that tend to be problematic - Organizational
Dynamics, Interpersonal Skills, Management & Leadership Norms, and
Giving and Receiving Feedback.

Challenge 6: Adjusting to the Organizational Dynamics

While the type of work may be similar, the alignment between
mission, structure and motivation is one of the most problematic
differences that can lead to veteran dissatisfaction and loss.
Mission First vs. Mission .huh? In the military, there is a near
constant reinforcement of knowing, training for, and accomplishing
specific and tangible missions. In civilian employment, the
organization's mission, if known at all, is likely to be stated in very
general or vague terms - often posted somewhere on a wall in the
hallway, but infrequently referred to. Its lack of prominence by itself
is, at best, confusing and, at worst, the source of blame and
frustration when things go awry.
When mission statements are found or referred to in management
meetings, it is often strikingly complex to the point of being
meaningless. A company's mission statement that refers to, ``serving
customers'', ``generating favorable returns'', and / or ``meeting
stakeholder expectations'', can feel very bureaucratic and somewhat
less than inspiring. This is particularly true when compared to the
specificity of a unit or branch mission, e.g. the Marine infantryman's
mission is ``to close with and destroy the enemy in close combat''.
Even among employers that prominently express their mission, there
is often a lack of alignment between the mission, how the organization
operates and how its employees behave. In the military, the unit
mission generally is reflected in the organizational structure and
drives individual behaviors. A combat unit will often be built to
accomplish a specific mission, with sub-units attached or detached as
required, and a clear chain-of-command established to govern the whole
for the duration of that mission. The role of each organic unit or
attached sub-unit is clearly defined everyone is briefed and often
rehearsed on their role in the accomplishment of a given task.
In the civilian workplace, group reorganization and shifts in
leadership responsibilities around specific missions are seldom seen.
More often found is the usually confusing reference to operating within
a `matrixed' organizational structure with `solid-line' or `dotted-
line' reporting expectations to functional leaders. For a veteran, this
can be disorienting and creates situation in which they question the
authentic motivation of the people they are working with on specific
projects or teams.
Employee motivation in general is a source of frustration for many
veterans. In the military, where accomplishing the mission or task at
hand comes first in personal priorities, it is often difficult to
understand how civilian employees can leave when their shift or normal
work day is complete and the mission or task is not.
Equally or perhaps more frustrating is the difference in drivers of
motivation. People willingly join the military and conduct
extraordinary difficult, often dangerous, tasks for little pay and less
recognition. The motivation drivers for most of those joining the
military include a sense of service, patriotism, and a belief in
protecting our freedoms. The more prevalent motivation for civilian
peers in the workforce are personal compensation, benefits, and career
progression. This abrupt juxtaposition of personal, largely extrinsic,
motivation vs. the shared, largely, intrinsic motivation more prevalent
in the military can be very demotivating to veterans early in their
careers.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1.More clearly spell out the company and / or hiring organization
mission in terms that are concise, meaningful and measurable. Be
prepared to discuss why profit is important - this is not a generally
understood concept in the military lexicon.

2.Explain how the organizational structure supports that mission
and how it has adapted in the past in response to new threats or
opportunities. This makes it seem more flexible and familiar.

3.Clarify expectations of a typical work day. Discuss behavior
expectations, to include the concept of work / life balance and the
need to maintain motivation in an `at will' employment environment.

4.Assign a veteran mentor who has been with the company as a
resource for questions.

Challenge 7: Developing New Interpersonal Skills

In the military, accomplishing difficult missions requires working
closely in situations of great stress with others from diverse
backgrounds and experience. Individually, service Members must be able
to recall and communicate specific details rapidly and succinctly to
others. There is great value attached to being concise, precise, and
`on task'. To facilitate this, one quickly learn short cuts in how to
communicate and try to strip out nuance or emotion not seen as critical
to transmitting what is required for the mission. In training to be a
military leader, you frequently hear the adage `they don't need to like
you, they only need to respect you'. When working in the civilian
sector, these same practices and traits are frequently cited as
evidence of below average interpersonal skills.
This is aggravating to many veterans who believe they are
communicating what is required and feel their co-workers are being too
sensitive. They must pay attention to being less abrupt and concise in
providing direction and must consider the tone of what is said -
something that was much less important in the military. These skills,
by themselves, seldom rise to the level of frustration that cause a
veteran to seek other employment, but they are a daily reminder of big
gap that exists between their success in the military and what is
considered important in the civilian employment.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1.Explain communication norms: How to address others - leaders
especially; Need to solicit input and ask questions to gain alignment
vs. being directive.

2.Make veteran new hires aware of tonality and non-verbal behavior
in communicating with others.

3.Provide training and / or examples of effective written
communication.

Challenge 8: Understanding that `Teamwork' Means Something Different

In the military, you are taught to work in teams, ensuring everyone
on the team is aligned on what the mission is and understands their
role. Collaboration with, and support of, your teammates is the highest
priority because - as reinforced from the first day of training - you
succeed or fail as a team. When assigned to teams in the civilian
workplace, the team is frequently comprised of representatives of
different departments, each with different objectives relating to their
function. For example, someone from legal is assigned to ensure the
team doesn't increase company liability, someone from finance is there
to make sure the team considers profitability as well as revenue,
marketing is there to make sure brand standards are upheld, project
management participates to hold the team accountable for meeting
process deadlines, etc. Each is responsible for representing the
interests of their functions first and the team mission is frequently
of secondary concern.
There also tends to be less formality in how teams work in the
civilian workplace than in the military. In the latter, there is
generally a recognized protocol in terms of who speaks and when. This
is not always the case in civilian team meetings. Newly hired veterans
will refrain from participating in discussions and become frustrated
when talked over or interrupted by others with less experience and
knowledge. In civilian workplace meetings, the individual who speaks at
will is recognized for `adding value' - in the military, the same
behavior might be criticized as `insubordination'.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1.Discuss veteran expectations about teamwork and clarify specific
roles of team Members upfront. Encourage flexibility. Offer training on
conflict resolution and alternative team-building techniques.

2.Reinforce the role and importance of informal meetings to making
things happen.

Challenge 9: Learning a Different Leadership Style

Another area of frequent frustration and disillusionment that leads
to retention issues is how management and leadership are practiced
outside the military. In the military, the principles and practice of
leading others is reinforced in nearly every aspect of the job. There
is a consistent, authoritative style that emphasizes top-down decision-
making. While seeking input from those with more experience is
encouraged, the concept of `consensus' leadership is seldom, if ever,
discussed. Consequently, service Members become extremely comfortable
and skilled in one particular style of leading and responding to others
- a style very appropriate given their mission. Once out of the
military however, an authoritative style of leadership is seldom the
best choice. Without a discussion about leadership norms in the
civilian workplace, veterans quickly become cynical about what they
perceive as a `lack of leadership' in their organization or frustrated
when they are cautioned about being too hard-nosed and directive with
their subordinates. This can lead them to either begin searching for
other employment on their own or being asked to do so by the employer.
One aspect of this new leadership environment that is particularly
confusing for young veterans is simply understanding who the leader of
the group is and why. In the military, a person's experience and
position are obvious - they wear their name, rank, unit designation,
training accomplishments and commendations on their uniform.
Additionally, progression in rank and responsibility is fairly uniform
within the different branches and so leadership in a given situation
can be quickly determined. Not so in the non-military environment.
There are seldom uniform designations on display and leaders may be of
any age and level based on a number of individual accomplishments.
Coming from an environment in which one is expected to defer to leaders
based on rank and obvious experience, it can be difficult for a new
veteran employee to identify how to respond and to whom.
Two other aspects of leadership that can create retention issues
are how tightly defined the scope of responsibility is and the
flexibility of operation allowed. In the military, leaders are trained
to understand how their particular role or mission fits within the
context of the `big picture' or higher level strategy. They are also
expected to be able to think through the detailed management of how to
execute the operational plan they or their unit are required to
perform, as well as plan for contingencies if the parameters of the
plan change. This requires a much broader level of strategic thinking
and higher attention to detail than most positions in the civilian
workplace expect, particularly in entry level positions. While it seems
like these would be skills that an employer would value, it frequently
causes supervisors and mid-level managers problems of constantly having
to answer questions they aren't prepared to address or `reign in' young
veterans who seem to lack focus on the specific tasks they've been
assigned. Frustration for both the veteran employee and veteran's
managers can result in dissatisfaction and loss of employment.
The role of flexibility and authority can also be a point of
contention. In the military, one is taught to `adapt and overcome',
whether it is lack of administrative resources in a headquarters or an
unexpected barrier on the battlefield. Initiative is recognized and
rewarded as long as the mission is accomplished and others are not
unnecessarily put in harm's way. Outside the military however, there
are rules and protocols that are not always well understood and
initiative is permitted inside certain boundaries that are not always
well defined. Veteran employees will often chafe at seeing
organizational inefficiency or work with colleagues who seem resistant
to step outside a defined process to get things done - choosing to
dismiss it as `not my job' or `too risky' to them personally.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1.Provide backgrounds and photos of key leaders in the
organization. Emphasize their diversity of experience and clarify how
to best interact with them.

2.Explain leadership norms within the company. Recognize the
veteran's leadership experience and explain the opportunity for them to
expand their leadership proficiency with different styles.

3.Explain company decision-making process and discuss value of
taking initiative vs. needing permission.

Challenge 10: Giving and Receiving Feedback

This area can also be a major adjustment for those transitioning
from military to civilian employment. In the military, feedback is
continuous, concise and deliberate. It tends to focus less on what went
well and more on the shortfalls vs. specific standards, responsibility
for who should have done what, when, and expectations for improvement.
The intent is less personal than it is to ensure individuals are clear
on what went wrong and can learn how to improve as quickly as possible.
It is thus expected and valued by those in the military. Veterans in a
civilian workplace often find that there is relatively little feedback
compared to what they are used to. Additionally, what feedback they get
often feels `sanitized' and less than direct which leads to a lack of
trust in those they are working for. Particularly important is
understanding the organization's `code words' for types of feedback -
e.g. does `good' mean well-done or barely passing? Is `excellent' the
same as `outstanding' - or not quite?
When it comes to giving feedback, veterans understand the value of
direct and detailed feedback but have predominantly been trained on
only one way to provide it, regardless of the situation. That feedback
style, instead of being seen as helpful, is often felt to be abrupt and
lacking `balance' in recognizing all the positives before highlighting
specific areas for improvement. Those not used to being critiqued in
this fashion may feel it as a personal attack and complain about the
veteran leader's insensitivity to the situation.

Best Practices and Recommendations:

1.Recognize the importance of providing feedback to show
consistency with value in military.

2.Explain how feedback is normally provided, both informally and
formally; Explain what `code words' are common and what they mean

3.May need to coach veterans on how to provide feedback to
subordinates and peers.

Summary

Hiring and retaining today's veterans is important - not only in
recognition of their valor and their service to our country, but more
pragmatically to help ensure the competitiveness and disciplined
leadership that our companies and organizations will need in the coming
decades. Collectively, the Department of Defense, Congress and our
State governments need to support the initiatives in local communities
within which our veterans and their families will be hired and
supported. It is the local community who has the most at stake - and
the most to gain - by ensuring the welfare and continued success of
today's and tomorrow's veterans.

Respectfully submitted on behalf of the Tristate Veterans Community
Alliance - February 19, 2016.

Prepared Statement of Chris Newsome
Members of the committee, representatives, and respective guests,

I thank you for bringing this panel, and this collective group
together to address and discuss an issue that is of the utmost
importance on a national scale. Best practices in veteran hiring not
only affects the veteran and their family, but also the bottom line
success of any organization engaged in such an endeavor. Beyond being
an inherently good thing to incorporate in HR processes, veteran hiring
simply makes good business sense. Those who recognize this, and are
equally willing to invest dedicated efforts, personnel, and resources
to this initiative, stand to greatly augment and enhance their
workforce, while naturally strengthening their company.
I am here today, representing RecruitMilitary. We are a Veteran
Owned and Operated, full service military-to-civilian recruiting firm
that has been championing the veteran community, and helping to bridge
the gap between transitioning personnel, the veteran population, and
Corporate America since 1998. We are Head-quartered out of Loveland,
OH. We offer companies the ability (and associated resources needed) to
effectively connect with the veteran population. We have conducted over
800 veteran career fairs across the country since 2006, connecting over
430,000 job-seeking veterans with over 24,000 organizations. Beyond the
scope of our career fairs, we offer our corporate partners the ability
to access the nation's largest sole- purpose job-seeking veteran
database (820,000 veteran profiles), as well as capturing the attention
of the transitioning population through our on-base magazine available
to our partners who wish to augment their branding efforts. While
working with a majority of the Fortune 500, and thousands of
organizations throughout the country, we have a unique perspective on
what works best for companies, and the needed tools to build these
strategies from the ground up.
Success is driven by acknowledging and effectively leveraging the
immense talent and value stemming from our armed services. However, to
understand best practices in hiring from the veteran community, it is
imperative that we understand what a veteran is. We are yesterday's,
today's, and tomorrow's leaders. The Department of Defense has invested
millions of dollars into each of us, to ensure we are experts within
the realm of which we serve. We are proud, hardworking, patriots who
seek to take the bountiful skills and virtues taught to us in the
service, and apply them in the civilian sector to enhance ourselves and
the organizations we represent. We are the top tier candidate pool,
outperforming our peers.
Each organization must engage in this effort in their own
meaningful way. There is no one-all- encompassing solution to attaining
a successful veteran hiring initiative. However, there are general
guidelines that can universally be applied to ensure a successful
starting point is established.
Each organization brings unique appeal to the job seeker, and each
organization has a unique personnel need. In some cases, understanding
certain military occupational specialties (a service Member's job) is
an appropriate fit, due to the synonymous job descriptions. In other
cases,
their leadership experience and intangible strengths are going to
be more important. A majority of the veteran population also has
comprehensive civilian work experience and many have obtained a formal
education upon departing the service. It is a fluid dynamic, that
requires non- passive techniques that put a company's name/brand at the
forefront of the veteran hiring discussion.
An organization must ask: ``Why do I value the veteran
population?'', ``Why is my company a good company to work for?'', ``Why
do I consider my company to be a great place for a veteran to explore a
career path?'', ``What are my company's greatest needs?'', ``What are a
veteran's greatest strengths?'', ``Where do I have an immediate need
for self-driven/leadership-oriented employees?''. Once these answers
are clear, a dedicated veteran hiring initiative can be incorporated
into the overall organizational Talent Acquisition process. One may
require a branding strategy, on top of a proactive engagement (career
fairs, social media, and community outreach) to ensure their company is
synonymous with veteran hiring.
It is important to conduct an inventory on your existing veteran-
workforce. Take a special interest in their experience and their notion
of why your company is a great fit for he or she personally. Use this
information in your language and overall approach to the job-seeking
veteran population. The organizations who tend to have a higher success
rate are those who can speak to this, and even incorporate current
veteran employees in the recruiting process. Having veterans on your
recruiting team essentially stands as a veteran endorsement.
Proactive engagement is key. Tapping into the veteran population is
not as easy as saying ``we're veteran friendly''. Never be passive.
And, the days of checking off the blocks and relying strictly on job
postings has passed. Understanding this population's true value and
potential, will drive a company's ability to express their desire to
hire them.
This topic requires more time and words than I am allotted in this
particular segment, so I hope my statement will generate further dialog
and questions from you all.
Again, thank you for your time and for asking me to speak on this
panel.

Statements For The Record

James R. O'Flaherty,
JDOG JUNK REMOVAL AND HAULING HEADQUARTERS
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee:

Thank you for inviting JDog Junk Removal and Hauling to submit
written testimony for the record at this hearing focused on best
practices associated with hiring military veterans. JDog was
established by Jerry Flanagan, a US Army veteran, and is our Nation's
only brand that franchises exclusively to military veterans and their
families. I will focus this statement on the important lessons we have
learned during this process at both the franchisor and franchisee
levels, and the resulting best practices we have adopted. JDog
currently has expanded to over 50 territories in 16 states, and our
rapid growth has not been without valuable lessons learned in the
process. Our mission's ultimate goal is to put veterans to work and
ensure their ongoing success as they pursue the American Dream.
In 2011, Jerry and Tracy Flanagan started JDog Junk Removal and
Hauling in Berwyn, PA. They ran the company on the principles of
respect, integrity, and trust, which quickly became the slogan of JDog.
In 2013, Jerry began to franchise this business model, requiring
potential franchisees to be military veterans or immediate family
Members. We established this barrier to entry to ensure exclusivity and
bolster the initiative of creating as many veteran small business
owners as possible since military veterans are twice as likely to own a
business as the general population \1\. Additionally, we encourage
these franchisees to hire other veterans in their respective
territories with the goal of helping reduce the veteran unemployment
rate as a whole.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Hudson, M. (2014, November 5). Startup Success: Veteran-Owned
Businesses Are Gaining Traction With Investors. Forbes. Retrieved
February 17, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/mariannehudson/
2014/11/05/the-right-stuff-veterans-are-building-great-companies/
#5a3ce61ce772
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have noticed that a best practice for attracting, hiring, and
retaining Members of the veteran community is to establish an
environment that fosters growth, camaraderie, and mutual support. The
structure of our business model inherently sets the franchisee up for
success and promotes continued growth. We have established a scaled
flat-rate royalty system to ensure the franchisee retains more of their
hard-earned money, and currently waive fees commonly found in a
franchise system such as technology, marketing, and call center fees.
This has directly translated to the franchisee having the means to
expand and hire more veterans to their team. Since we have the only
brand exclusively for veterans and their family Members, we have a
sustainable competitive advantage that not only sets our franchisees
apart from the competition, but also promotes the ``ethos of
brotherhood'' that our military veteran community desires.
Hudson, M. (2014, November 5). Startup Success: Veteran-Owned
Businesses Are Gaining Traction With Investors. Forbes. Retrieved
February 17, 2016, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/mariannehudson/
2014/11/05/the-right-stuff-veterans-are-building-great-companies/
#5a3ce61ce772
As a franchisor, JDog has instituted a vetting process to ensure
the potential franchisee is a good match for us, and more importantly
that JDog is the right match for them. We evaluate the candidate based
on the ``Whole Soldier Concept''. The desired personality traits are
someone who is motivated, outgoing, resourceful, detail oriented, and
persistent. Additionally, support entities such as family, business
associates, and professional networks are key to the success of the
franchisee's effort. During the development of this vetting process,
we've noticed that those who possess the aforementioned qualities and
support bring invaluable skills, interests, and experience to the table
- leading to success both personally and for the franchise. As a
result, we at the franchisor level have enjoyed the benefit of constant
feedback and ``bottom-up refinement'' from our franchisees. Also, this
vetting process increases the likelihood of success for the veteran
operating the franchise.
Another best practice for hiring veterans resides in fostering an
environment that encourages groupthink and sharing of ideas. We
understand the value of individual input, regardless of position,
billet, or location. Many employers underestimate the value a Member of
the military veteran community brings to their team, and we have
realized that one of the most appealing aspects of our company is our
standard of encouraging feedback and critiques. This not only benefits
the franchisor immensely, but also helps the brand grow as a
collective.
To further bolster the franchisor/franchisee relationship at JDog,
we've put several ongoing support mechanisms in place. Once we award a
franchise to a veteran or family Member, the franchisee attends a four
day training session at our headquarters to learn the details of how
the system works. The training includes daily operating procedures,
marketing and advertising strategies, scheduling, instruction on
several available revenue streams, and practical application. After
training, our Quality Assurance, Marketing and Operations sections
provide ongoing support. This support includes, but is not limited to,
establishing relationships with companies contracting our junk removal
and hauling services, ongoing advertising assistance and training,
developing both web-based and tangible marketing strategies, and
providing crucial one-on-one mentoring and advising on any issues
associated with establishing and growing a small business. In many
ways, these support mechanisms and training mirrors what the vet
experienced while serving in the military, thus easing the transition
for them to be successful operators of a franchise.
In addition to the franchisor establishing several mechanisms to
attract Members of the military veteran community, the individual
franchisees have taken the standard of hiring veterans to another
level. For example, our franchisee in Brunswick, OH utilized the
Department of Veterans Affairs' Compensated Work Therapy Program (VA
CWT) to fulfill his requirement for daily hired help. As a result of
his efforts and the open lines of communication with the JDog
franchisor, our company is in the process of establishing a national
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the VA CWT that will enable all
franchisees to leverage this program. Additionally, JDog is looking to
work with veteran organizations at both the franchisee and franchisor
levels such as the Veterans of Foreign Wars, American Legion, Marine
Corps League, etc. in order to expand our outreach and have lasting
partnerships. This approach developed as a result of arguably the most
important best practice in hiring veterans: create an atmosphere where
the veterans can take care of each other.
The underlying spirit of JDog lies not in junk removal and hauling.
It lies in the commitment veterans and their families have to each
other. This sense of brotherhood that was imbued in all veterans and
their families lay dormant for many. We at JDog have revived the sense
of responsibility to each other and have all grown, both personally and
professionally, as a result. The veteran community has the willingness
and capability to excel on a personal and team level, and if one
fosters an environment that encourages growth, brotherhood, mutual
support, groupthink, and critiques, military veterans will not only
gravitate toward the concept, but they will also take the business
model much further than expected.

Emily Turner,
OHIO ASSOCIATION OF GOODWILL INDUSTRIES
Members of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs:

My name is Emily Turner and I am the Executive Director of the Ohio
Association of Goodwill Industries. When people think of Goodwill
Industries, they usually think of our retail stores. Our retail stores
are very important as the revenue generated by those stores support our
mission.

Our mission, however, is to improve the quality of life for people
with disabilities and other barriers through the power of work.

Our association's 16 autonomous Goodwill organizations provide
employment services throughout Ohio's 88 Counties. Last year, Goodwills
in Ohio helped over 4200 people secure employment and provided almost
200,000 instances of employment related services. Many of the
individuals we work with have served in the military and we are proud
to be able to assist veterans as they seek and secure jobs.
Several of the Goodwills in Ohio have specific services tailored
for veterans. I would like to give you a brief overview of one of
those.
Goodwill Easter Seals Miami Valley serves 23 counties in western
Ohio, including Wright Patterson Air Force Base. In 2014, Goodwill
Easter Seals Miami Valley led a network of 14 employers, community
agencies, and service agencies to create the Veterans & Employers
Connection. The goal of the Connection is to reduce veteran
unemployment in the state of Ohio. Goodwill's goal is to help 5,000
veterans secure employment by 2020.
By working with veterans from all branches of the service, active
duty, Guard and Reserves, they capitalized on the talents and unique
skills forged by service. Western Ohio is a magnet for veterans to
settle and work, and Goodwill Industries has a commitment to help them
find success. The Connection's holistic approach to working with
veterans and assisting them to overcome a variety of barriers has
already had an impact on the reduction of veteran unemployment in the
23-county greater Miami Valley region. Since the program went live two
years ago:

- 649 veterans have found employment which includes 176 placed
through Goodwill Easter Seals Miami Valley's placement specialists
- 72 organizations have joined the Connection including 64
employers committed to hiring veterans

The director of Veterans Employment Services for Goodwill Easter
Seals was unable to attend today's hearing, so thank you for allowing
me to tell you a little bit about their success and about the mission
of Goodwill Industries.

My contact information is:
Emily Turner, Executive Director
Ohio Association of Goodwill Industries
1331 Edgehill Road
Columbus, Ohio 43212
(614) 583-0319

[emailprotected]

Question: What is the Veterans & Employers Connection?

Answer: The Veterans and Employers Connection (``the Connection'') is a
community alliance led by Goodwill Easter Seals Miami Valley
dedicated to the meaningful, long-term employment of veterans. The
Connection was created to address three primary issues:

High unemployment and under-employment among veterans,
especially for those from the post 9/11 era and women veterans

The lack of a single, streamlined support system that
ties in the large number of support services available for veterans to
obtain and maintain employment and

The high percentage of employers who want to employ
veterans, but don't know how to either reach or successfully employ
them

Question: What types of organizations participate in the Connection?

Answer: The Connection Membership consists of employers and a wide
variety of service providers including government entities,
community associations, academia and non-profit organizations. See
the ``Members'' page on the Connection's website for the Member
list and information about each company.

Question: Is there a cost to join the Connection?

Answer: There is no cost for employers and support organizations to
join the Connection. Employers and other organization can
voluntarily contribute financially or in-kind to the Connection
which is operated under the auspices of Goodwill Easter Seals Miami
Valley, a 501(c)3 non-profit organization with headquarters in
Dayton, Ohio.

Question: How does my company find out more about becoming a Member?

Answer: Please let us know about your interest to find out more about
becoming a Member of the Connection by completing and submitting
the Membership information form under the ``Contact Us'' section of
this website. This action starts the dialogue but doesn't commit
your company or the Connection to Membership.

Question: What is the Connection's definition of a ``veteran?

Answer: Our definition of a veteran is anyone who has worn the uniform
of the United States military including current or former
Reservists or Guard Members, or who is currently transitioning or
preparing to transition from service.

Question: How can the Connection help me if I am a veteran or am
preparing to transition from active military service?

Answer: You are the reason the Connection exists so everything we do is
geared to support you in your efforts to find and keep a job that
interests you. We realize that each person's situation is unique,
so we've developed programs and established relationships in the
community that allow us to support a broad range of needs in a
coordinated, holistic manner.
Since the Veterans & Employers Connection is a Member-based entity,
you have access to information about employers who are committed to
employing veterans - they are ``veteran friendly''. There is
information about each of our Members on the website, including links
to the Members' websites. You also have the opportunity to upload your
resume and to provide pertinent information about you that Connection
Members will be able to review. Connection staff will also work with
you and Connection employers to ``connect the dots'' to make the
process for everyone involved as effective and efficient as possible.

Question: If I am a veteran and would like more information about the
Connection, what do I do?

Answer: You have two options to start the process. You can submit your
contact information on the Veterans page of this website to let us
know you would like to contact you. The second option is to submit
your resume and related information through this website. This will
give us more information than the first option and will allow us to
have a more informed initial conversation with you. Our commitment
to you is to get in touch with you within two work days regardless
of the option you choose.

Question: Does the Veterans & Employers Connection website collect
information from me when I visit the site, and if so, how is it
used?

Answer: The Veterans & Employers Connection understands the importance
of protecting the privacy of visitors to its Website. Since there
are a number of factors related to this issue, we have created a
Privacy Policy to provide helpful information to you about our
policies and procedures regarding the collection, use and
disclosure of personal information we receive when you visit and
use the Website. Please see the link to the Privacy Policy at the
bottom of this and other pages on the website.
