- BUILDING A BETTER VA: ASSESSING ONGOING MAJOR CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT PROBLEMS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING A BETTER VA: ASSESSING ONGOING MAJOR CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT
PROBLEMS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 21, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-01

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-992                          WASHINGTON : 2016

_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHELEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American
Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, January 21, 2015

Page

Building a Better VA: Assessing Ongoing Major Construction
Management Problems Within the Department......................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Jeff Miller, Chairman............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    48
Corrine Brown, Ranking Member....................................     2
Prepared Statement...........................................    48

WITNESSES

Hon. Sloan D. Gibson, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    49

Accompanied by:

Mr. Dennis Milsten, Associate Executive Director, Office
of Programs and Plans, Office of Construction and
Facilities Management, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs

Mr. Lloyd C. Caldwell, P.E., Director of Military Programs, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers........................................     6
Prepared Statement...........................................    52
Mr. David Wise...................................................    33
Prepared Statement...........................................    60
Mr. Roscoe Butler, Deputy Director for Healthcare, Veterans
Affairs and Rehabilitation Division, The American Legion.......    35
Prepared Statement...........................................    75
Mr. Ray Kelley, Director, National Legislative Service, Veterans
of Foreign Wars................................................    36
Prepared Statement...........................................    79

FOR THE RECORD

Michael Gelber, Deputy Commissioner, U.S. General Services
Administration.................................................    81
Mr. Sam Carter, Carter Concrete Structures.......................    85

BUILDING A BETTER VA: ASSESSING ONGOING MAJOR CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT
PROBLEMS WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT

----------

Wednesday, January 21, 2015

Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:42 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present:  Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Bilirakis, Roe,
Benishek, Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Walorski, Abraham,
Zeldin, Costello, Radewagen, Bost, Brown, Takano, Brownley,
Titus, Ruiz, McLane Kuster, and O'Rourke.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN JEFF MILLER

The Chairman. Ladies and gentlemen, the hearing will come
to order.
I would like to welcome everybody to today's hearing
entitled Building a Better VA: Assessing Ongoing Major
Construction Management Problems Within the Department.
The purpose of this hearing is to address continued
problems occurring in VA's persistent construction delays and
cost overruns involving its construction of the replacement
Aurora, Colorado VA Medical Center.
VA has been found by the Civilian Board of Contract Appeals
to have breached its contract with its prime contractor on this
project and the facility could eventually cost over a billion
dollars to complete.
This committee has held numerous hearings in the last few
years involving VA's inadequate management of its construction
projects, each of those hearings being based on considerable
evidence.
Quote, ``We have come to a point in VA's major construction
program where the administrative structure is an obstacle that
is not effective supporting the mission. As a result, our
veterans are the ones who are left without services and our
taxpayers are the ones who are left holding the check or
writing a new one,'' end quote.
Members, this was part of an opening statement that I made
March 27th of 2012 at a hearing on VA major construction, but
it seems that nothing has changed nearly three years later.
Despite warnings and corrective suggestions being presented
from inside and outside of the department, very little has
changed.
Based on the lengthy committee investigations that gave
rise to these hearings, the committee asked the GAO to audit VA
major construction projects. Their report issued in April of
2013 found that on average, the hospital construction projects
reviewed were about three years late and $360 million over
budget.
Every time we have asked VA about those results, it has
argued that it is not delayed or over budget based on its own
accounting.
Further, when we held a hearing on the Aurora VAMC
construction project in April of 2014, the tenor of VA
responses was that it was the contractor's fault that the
project was not completed and that it was still operating
within its budget.
I have a feeling that the VA will not be able to cling to
those illusions any longer because December 9th of 2014, the
CBCA found that the VA materially breached its contract with
its prime contractor on the Aurora construction project,
Kiewit-Turner.
It found that VA did not provide a design that could be
built within the stated budget and it was also the VA's fault
to the point that CBCA said KT would be well within its rights
to simply walk off the job. And that is exactly what was done.
Now VA is left scrambling to make KT whole enough to get
back to work. VA may even have to come back to Congress to ask
for perhaps 500 million or more dollars to fix the problems
that the committee has brought to light year after year only to
be ignored by the VA.
I visited the Aurora construction site on Monday with
Congressman Coffman and Congressman Lamborn to see again in
person what is taking so long and why this project has been a
veritable money pit for the last several years.
Once completed, this facility will be well equipped to
provide the best possible care available which is exactly what
the veterans served by every VA facility deserve. It is long
past time for these projects marred by bureaucratic ineptitude
to be complete.
And I look forward to hearing from the VA and other
witnesses here today on how we can correct the abysmal state
that VA's major construction program has been in for years.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Jeff Miller appears in
the Appendix]

With that, I yield to the ranking member, Ms. Brown, for
any opening statement she may have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CORRINE BROWN, RANKING MEMBER

Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like my complete statement to be entered into
the record.
Ms. Brown. As I said from the beginning, I am very excited
about being the ranking member on this committee. And having
been on this committee for over almost 23 years, I realize that
for 20 years the VA has not built any VA facilities.
The VA has lost a lot of the expertise that has been there
in the past. I think the role of this committee is to find out
how we are going to move forward in making sure that the VA is
able to provide the facilities that we need. Many of the
facilities we are discussing Las Vegas, Orlando, Denver, New
Orleans, were authorized years plus years ago.
These facilities have had major problems. There's enough
fault and blame to be shared between the VA and the
contractors. It is not just one issue it's a multiplicity of
issues.
I look forward to hearing what VA and others have to say
about how we should move forward.
I am going to yield back my time.

[The prepared statement of Corrine Brown appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Brown.
Members, I would ask that you waive your opening
statements. They will be entered into the record as custom in
our committee. Without objection, so ordered.
Our first panel today, we are going to hear from the
Honorable Sloan Gibson, Deputy Secretary for the Department of
Veterans Affairs. He is accompanied by Mr. Dennis Milsten,
Associate Executive Director of the Office for Programs and
Plans within VA's Office of Construction and Facilities
Management. And we are also going to hear from Mr. Lloyd
Caldwell, Director of Military Programs for the Army Corps of
Engineers.
Your complete written statements will be made a part of the
record. And I want to say for the record thank you for meeting
with me on Monday in Aurora. It is good to see you again.
And, Deputy Secretary Gibson, you are recognized for your
opening statement for five minutes.

STATEMENTS OF SLOAN D. GIBSON, DEPUTY SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS, ACCOMPANIED BY DENNIS MILSTEN,
ASSOCIATE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF PROGRAMS AND PLANS,
OFFICE OF CONSTRUCTION AND FACILITIES MANAGEMENT, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS;

STATEMENT OF SLOAN D. GIBSON

Mr. Gibson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, distinguished
Members of the committee, thank you for this opportunity to
update the committee on construction of the Denver VA Medical
Center in Aurora and the actions that we are taking in light of
the situation.
Let me introduce Dennis Milsten to the committee. Dennis is
Director of VA's Construction and Facilities Management, Office
of Operations.
In the wake of the board's decision on Denver, I asked
Dennis to serve as senior leader on that project. He brings
over three decades of construction experience in both the
public sector and private sector including 19 years with the
Corps of Engineers on projects like the Pentagon renovation.
Chairman Miller, Representative Coffman, and Representative
Lamborn, thank all three of you for joining us at the site.
Thanks for taking the time to be there. I don't think anything
can take the place of actually being on the ground and seeing
the facility and gaining an appreciation for the scale and for
you can imagine what that facility will be like for veterans
once it is completed.
I want to acknowledge some important partners. We have a
long history of collaboration with the Corps of Engineers and
we are grateful for their advice and support role in the
interim agreement with Kiewit-Turner. And we are pleased that
they are going to serve as our agent to manage this project to
completion.
Yesterday I met again with leaders of Kiewit-Turner. KT is
justifiably proud of the work they have done in Denver and they
are looking forward to see the medical center complete and
serving Colorado's veterans.
And we appreciate the good work of the Government
Accountability Office including their recommendations in 2013
that we have integrated into our current construction
practices.
We will continue to collaborate with these and other
partners as well as this committee as we move forward.
To be clear, the situation in Denver is unacceptable and I
apologize for that. It is not acceptable to veterans. It is not
acceptable to taxpayers. It is certainly not acceptable to
Secretary McDonald or me.
Veterans and taxpayers are right to expect more and they
deserve much better from their VA. We have two priorities in
Denver, complete the facility without further delay and deliver
under the circumstances the best value that we can for
taxpayers.
I understand that everyone is anxious to know what it will
cost to complete the project. Right now we don't know. The
Corps doesn't know and Kiewit-Turner doesn't know. That will be
determined over the course of the next several months and we
will work closely with Congress to develop the best options for
funding completion.
Most immediately to settle claims and continue operations
under the interim agreement, we are going to request
reprogramming on some selected projects taking care to minimize
the impact on other projects while we are working to get Denver
back on track.
I think it is a very fair question to ask what went wrong
in Denver. And I think as we explore the history of the
project, it will be clear that there were many things. Among
them, we did not have in place the benefit of a 35 percent
design before we requested funding. We did not have in place a
clear, structured, effective process to manage change. We
didn't benefit from rigorous constructability reviews. And
perhaps most fundamentally, our choice, timing, and management
of the integrated design and contract vehicle resulted in a
design that was never reconciled with the firm target price in
the construction contract.
While we work to complete the project without further delay
and deliver the best value we can, we have an obligation to
ensure that this never happens again. That means learning all
we can from past mistakes and putting in place corrective
actions to improve future performance.
Veterans and taxpayers also expect that a thorough review
be completed and those responsible be held accountable. There
are several steps we are taking with these objectives in mind.
We have asked the Corps to complete a detailed review of
the Denver project, to review VA's other largest projects, and
in general to review the department's management of major
projects.
I have directed that an administrative investigation board
be convened to examine all aspects of the Denver project to
determine the facts that led to the current situation and
gather evidence of any mismanagement that contributed to this
unacceptable outcome.
And effective immediately, the department's Construction
and Facilities Management organization will report to me
through the VA's Office of Management.
Stepping back for a moment from this immediate situation, I
recall that in the months prior to my confirmation, I spent a
lot of time reviewing hearing testimony, media clips, and IG
and GAO reports. Coming in from the private sector, I had
serious doubts about VA's construction management capability.
But what I found when I got to VA were many important
changes already implemented. In some instances, changes that
would improve projects that were already underway, but in every
instance that would improve newly started projects.
For example, we were already committed to designs that
emphasized functionality and good value. We were already
requiring a 35 percent design before publishing costs and
schedule information and requesting funding.
We were already using private construction management firms
for constructability reviews at each major design phase. We
were already using project management plans to improve
communication among all participants. We were already
integrating medical equipment planners into construction
project teams.
We had already put in place thorough risk management
practices to mitigate challenges. We had already set up project
review boards modeled on the Corps of Engineers' district
office design. And we had already added key talent from the
outside of the department to strengthen training and require
project management certification for our project leaders.
That does not excuse our failure to have these measures in
place years ago, but it does mean that as they are relevant to
particular phases of projects and construction, these and other
measures are being applied now to our 53 ongoing major
projects.
Notwithstanding all these changes already in place, I am
confident that our current construction management practices
can be further improved. My commitment is that we will learn
all we can from the mistakes in Denver as revealed by the
Corps' examination and our internal review. And we will
implement changes with two fundamental criteria in mind, doing
the right thing for veterans and getting the best value for
taxpayers.
Finally, I don't want to lose sight of the fact that while
we resolve the situation in Denver, the employees of the VA
Eastern Colorado Healthcare System have continued to provide
quality care to our veterans nonstop regardless of any issues
with the construction of the new medical center.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and we look
forward to answering your questions.

[The prepared statement of Sloan D. Gibson appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Gibson.
Mr. Caldwell, thank you for being here. Again, thank you
for meeting with us on Monday. You are recognized for five
minutes.

STATEMENT OF LLOYD C. CALDWELL

Mr. Caldwell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman and distinguished Members of the committee, I
am pleased to be with you today representing the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and Lieutenant General Thomas Bostick, the
Chief of Engineers.
I provide leadership for execution of the Corps'
engineering and construction programs worldwide to include our
support to other agencies.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is one of the Department
of Defense construction agents who execute infrastructure
projects for the Department of Defense. Interagency
collaboration is an important element of the Corps' work as a
part of our service to the Nation.
My testimony will address the Corps' assistance to the
Department of Veterans Affairs', project acquisition process
and our experience in medical facility construction.
The Corps has an established relationship with the VA from
the national headquarters levels to our regional offices
working with the 21 Veterans Integrated Service Network offices
as well as with the National Cemetery Administration.
We have supported a broad range of construction and
maintenance projects totaling almost $1.6 billion with the VA
since 2007. Authority for the Corps' work with the Veterans
Administration is based on the Economy Act which provides both
parties with sufficient authorities to work collaboratively on
VA projects.
In December of 2014, the VA requested our assistance to
complete the Aurora, Colorado replacement VA medical center
project and we have agreed to do so. We are assessing the
requirements of the project and are developing a new
interagency agreement that would transition construction agent
authority and responsibility for this project to the Corps of
Engineers.
We are also advising the VA on the management of their
interim construction contract with the contractor, Kiewit-
Turner, to allow continued progress on the project.
The Corps has developed processes and capabilities for
design and construction which have been refined over the many
years. Our project management process brings together teams of
diverse professionals that are necessary for the project life
cycle to deliver a successful project and that includes our
construction, our acquisition, our design professionals as well
as project management professionals. These teams work
collaboratively to account for project delivery, methods,
scope, schedule, and cost.
The Aurora project is unique in that we are entering the
project at an advanced stage of the work, but with an
assessment by our experts and with collaboration with the VA,
we are confident that we can bring the project to successful
completion.
Budget and schedule risk is inherent in executing any
construction projects and medical facilities are among the most
complex facilities that we construct and deliver. They require
exacting technical design and construction standards which must
be carefully managed and are subject to changing requirements
due to evolving medical technology even during construction.
To ensure the standards and criteria of the defense health
system within which we most often operate, we have established
a medical center of expertise which applies a full range of
specialized knowledge to address demanding healthcare facility
requirements. They help to integrate the clinician and other
medical staff requirements to architectural and engineering
standards.
The Corps has a long history of executing some of the
Nation's most challenging construction programs. In the past 13
years, the Corps has physically completed 2,499 military
construction projects to include for other agencies with a
combined program amount of $52 billion.
The Corps has delivered or is in the process of designing
and constructing a full range of medical facilities for the
Department of Defense to include hospitals valued near a
billion dollars that are capable of delivering world-class
medical services for the members of our Armed Forces and their
families.
Our relationship with VA is strong and we look forward to
working with the VA as construction agent to complete the
Aurora hospital project and, in doing so, to serve the Nation's
veterans.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for inviting the Corps to testify
to address its assistance to the Department of Veterans
Affairs. I welcome your questions.

[The prepared statement of Lloyd C. Caldwell appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Caldwell. We
appreciate you being here to testify and also accept questions
from Members of the full committee.
At this point, I want to yield my time for questions to the
gentleman that represents the facility that we are here to talk
about today, the subcommittee chair for Oversight and
Investigations, Mr. Coffman.
Mr. Coffman, you are recognized.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Milsten, in its February 2014 fact sheet, VA had the
total completion of the Aurora facility at 42 percent. On
Monday, Deputy Secretary Gibson confirmed that the total
completion of the project is now 50 percent. KT, however,
maintains that the project is only 40 percent complete.
Either way, how has this project only progressed at best by
eight percent in nearly a year?
Mr. Milsten. One of the things that goes into this process
of determining percentage is we were basing our percentages of
completion on an artificial budget and so we have lost some
perspective on what the actual construction completion date is
or percentages.
We have had some discussions that it is somewhere between
50 and 40. My experience from looking at this, we have the
steel completed. We have the precast completed. We have roofs
on facilities. We have curtain walls going up. We are about 50
percent complete with this construction.
Mr. Coffman. Deputy Secretary Gibson, VA is convening an
administrative investigation board to investigate the Aurora
project because VA central office officials have no idea what
happened, again despite years of warnings from inside and
outside the department.
Who at VA's central office was tasked with providing
oversight for the Aurora construction project?
Mr. Gibson. I think you would look to the chain of command
within Construction and Facilities Management which would
include Stella Fiotes who is a relatively more recent addition
to VA. It would include Glen Haggstrom. It would include the
former deputy secretary and the secretary.
Mr. Coffman. Who is in charge of overseeing Glen Haggstrom?
Mr. Gibson. The person in that position reports to the
deputy secretary.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. So that would be your----
Mr. Gibson. That would be me now, yes.
Mr. Coffman [continuing]. Position? Okay. And also, Deputy
Secretary Gibson, why was the department's standard operating
procedure opposed to involving the Army Corps for so long in
Aurora despite repeated warnings of VA mismanagement?
Mr. Gibson. Having not been a part of that discussion
process over the years, I don't know that I have a good answer
for you.
I think as I looked at the situation following the board's
decision, it was very clear to me with the priorities to
complete the project without further delay and with the best
value for taxpayers that engaging the Corps was the right
course of action on this project.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Mr. Milsten, what is the estimated total
cost of the Aurora project and what is now the estimated date
for completion?
Mr. Milsten. First of all, the estimated date of
completion, we are looking for a date in 2017 based on where we
are today. And as far as the cost to complete, that is
something that the Corps of Engineers is going through to
determine what the cost to complete this project is.
As Deputy Secretary Gibson said, we will spend the next
couple of months trying to figure that out because between the
contractor, us, and the Corps of Engineers, we don't have that
number today.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. And I think, Secretary Gibson, I think
in our discussions on Monday, I think you discussed when the
project may run out of money. And I think it kind of sort of
corresponds in with the interim agreement.
Do you think with your programming capabilities, you think
about June, sometime in June if there is not some type of
supplemental appropriation by Congress that work could stop
again on this project?
Mr. Gibson. The idea here is for us to be able to go
through some steps. We funded the interim contract. We are
actually doing some internal reprogramming with the notice of
Congress of some small additional amount. We will need to come
to Congress for approval to reprogram some more substantial
amount to carry us on the interim contract all the way through
until June.
Our hope is and our expectation is we sync this up with the
Corps of Engineers is that we are going to be able to provide
the funding. The expectation is we will provide the funding to
bridge the period from where we are right now until when the
Corps is able to negotiate a contract to complete the project.
Mr. Coffman. My final question. Mr. Caldwell, as bad as the
cost overruns are right now--we are hundreds of millions of
dollars over budget. We are years behind schedule.
But if, in fact, this project were moth-balled, if, in
fact, Congress didn't appropriate more money and the
construction stopped in June and the whole project was
demobilized, moth-balled, wouldn't that really greatly
aggravate the cost when the project would be restarted?
Mr. Caldwell. Yes, sir. In fact, it would cause a worse
situation because you can't-- to begin with, you have to take
certain actions to close up a project, so you are using funds
that otherwise would be used for construction to ensure that
you are not creating a different hazard for the public and so
forth and that the facility that is constructed doesn't
degrade. So there are some caretaker requirements associated
with that and then to restart it, it would be an additional
cost as well.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Before I yield to Ms. Brown, Deputy
Secretary, in your reprogramming, do you anticipate the dollars
that you reprogram to exceed the cap of 800 or 880 with your
ability to go above that?
Mr. Gibson. I do expect that would be the case and we would
need help and support from this committee and from Congress to
raise that cap.
The Chairman. Yeah. The cap will have to be raised.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. I mean, we cannot go around it. It is a
firm----
Mr. Gibson. Right.
The Chairman [continuing]. Firm cap. So at what point do
you think you will know what number that will be, I mean,
because surely it will be before June? Are you going to try and
do it all at one time and just have one----
Mr. Gibson. No. We will need that support prior to June.
Congressman Coffman and I have been having a series of
conversations about that. We think raising the cap to $1.1
billion from the current $800 million would be able to carry us
during that interim period of time.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would have loved to have joined you in Denver, however,
it was Martin Luther King's birthday and I had other
commitments in my district. Hopefully I'll be able to join the
delegation in the future.
Mr. Gibson. We would love to host you out there.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
The VA facilities are having problems in Denver, Orlando
and New Orleans.
This Committee has authorized, and Congress has
appropriated, billion of dollars for VA construction programs
over the past decade. The question we must asks ourselves is
are we getting what we paid for, and has access improved for
our veterans.
We must ask ourselves what must be done to make the VA
construction program function as we intend it to. What must we
do to make sure that the facilities we are building today do
not come in over budget and late. If we do not do this we run
the risk of building facilities that may already be obsolete
when the doors are open and are merely expensive memorials and
little else.
For nearly two decades the VA was out of the major facility
business. By not building any major medical centers in the 20
years preceding authorization of the Las Vegas, Orlando, Denver
and New Orleans Medical Centers, has the VA lost the ability to
manage a construction portfolio?
And I am going to say that I think a lot of the expertise,
20 years not building a facility is part of the problem.
Please give us not just an update on these projects, but
tell us what we as Congress need to do to help you move
forward.
The Army Corp of Engineers do great work with the ports. VA
did great work with Katrina.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am. First of all, as it relates to
Orlando, the current schedule would call for construction to be
complete the end of February.
Ms. Brown. Then we do the punch?
Mr. Gibson. We are working through the punch list. As you
know, some portions of the facility have already been turned
over. In fact, we are already seeing patients.
The progress really accelerated in Orlando as we got
different leadership teams, both parties on the ground, and a
series of meetings that I held directly with Brassfield &
Gorrie over the previous seven or eight months. And I think we
have moved that very expeditiously and Brassfield & Gorrie has
performed really very well on that project.
I would say more broadly, and Congressman Coffman and I
have had conversations about the expanded role for the Corps,
Turning everything over to the Corps would be a very big
decision and it would be a decision that we would want to make
on a very well-informed basis.
I think some of the work that the Corps is doing for us
right now to review Denver and other major construction
activity will inform that process.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, what we are after is
quite simply doing the right thing for veterans and being a
good steward of taxpayer dollars. And those are really the only
two parameters.
If a more expansive role for the Corps is the best route to
get there, then we are all for it. And, frankly, I would be
surprised if we don't find ourselves working more closely with
the Corps in the future.
Ms. Brown. Right. Like the Jacksonville, I think it is very
important to have the physicians and others in the planning
stages. As you design more facilities to build, its important
to have employees (i.e. doctors) inputs.
Mr. Gibson. I think one of the lessons learned is the need
to impose more discipline throughout the entire process. That
includes a very rigorous requirements definition period and
then the requirements get locked down. That also includes more
robust communication with various stakeholders including
Members of Congress.
I think what we have done habitually is conducted a fair
amount of this behind the curtain. Sometimes because we are
engaged in procurement sensitive activity, sort of been the
excuse, we have got to find ways to work around that so that we
are able to engage with various stakeholders on these projects
on the front end and we have got good consensus and awareness.
And where there is not a hundred percent agreement, which there
oftentimes may not be, at least there is an awareness in place
of where we are going and why we are going there.
Ms. Brown. Give us the status of the Denver project now? Is
it moving forward and how much additional funds will you need
for this facility?
Mr. Gibson. The construction is back underway at Denver.
Kiewit-Turner is ramping up the number of trade on the site
literally every single day. We expect to be up to about a
thousand on the site by, I believe they told us by the end of
March, if I am not mistaken, which is close to where they were
prior to the shutdown.
We are operating under the interim contract. We will need
some additional funds through a reprogramming action to extend
that period of time and then bridge us to the period of when
the Corps is able to negotiate a contract to complete.
Ms. Brown. Just one quick question for Mr. Caldwell. The
Army Corps' involvement in this project, and you mentioned that
you all have been involved in building many hospitals all over
the world and, of course, I am aware of that, how is the
partnership working?
Mr. Caldwell. The reports I have received have been very
positive. We have sent a team of about 17 people to the project
beginning in January. We actually had a couple of people there
in mid December. And we have had a couple of our senior
executives attend meetings there.
And all reports that I am receiving from them have been
very positive that the Veterans Administration team that is on
site has been very open and cooperative. And so we believe it
will be a collaborative relationship as we go forward.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Brown.
Mr. Lamborn, you were also in the meeting on Monday. You
are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And thank you, Mr. Chair, for being
there coming from Florida.
And I want to first of all recognize Representative Coffman
and his foresight and leadership. When he was first saying the
Army Corps of Engineers need to be brought in, a lot of people
didn't believe him. And, yet, here they are now literally
sitting at the table. So I appreciate that.
Secretary Gibson, we are all very concerned about the cost
overruns and the time delays with the Denver hospital.
Can you reassure veterans in Colorado that the time delays
will not prevent veterans from receiving the healthcare that
they need in the meantime?
Mr. Gibson. As I mentioned during my opening remarks, the
Eastern Colorado VA Healthcare System continues to provide
great care to veterans. You know, most recent number, probably
the month of December, November, December, 64,000 outpatient
appointments completed during that month, 92 percent of those
appointments completed within 30 days of when the veteran
wanted to be seen.
Still not good enough, but it tells me that there is an
awful lot of great care being delivered there. We are also
ramping up both choice and also referrals to care in the
community under VA's traditional non-VA care. So we are
committed to delivering to veterans right now and for the
interim period of time the best possible care.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you.
And for either one of you, and we have touched briefly on
this, but when specifically will we know the final and best
estimate of the cost overrun so we on this committee can begin
the difficult work of identifying funds needs to bring the
hospital to completion?
Mr. Gibson. I will try to answer that and then defer to the
two experts here.
The process that we are going to have to go through here,
and this was a topic of robust discussion just yesterday with
the senior leaders at KT, in a contract negotiation, typically
price is the last thing that falls out of the process. And so
we are applying a lot of pressure to our teams together
collaboratively to provide as much information as early as we
possibly can.
But I think the general time frame, some clarity, several
months from now is going to be about the earliest I think we
can hope to have a good idea.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Several months from now.
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Lamborn. And that is as specific as we can be right
now?
Mr. Gibson. That is as specific as I would want to be, yes,
sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. And I know you don't want to get ahead
where wrong figures are thrown out there creating false
expectations.
Mr. Gibson. You know, I think one of the biggest problems
we ran into in this project is we tried to push to a firm
target price before we had everything locked down. We rushed to
get there. We were anxious. We were impatient. I think a lot of
that probably had to do with the fact that it had taken forever
to get to that point anyway and so everybody wanted to get on
with it. And I think that is why we find ourselves sitting here
today.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay.
Mr. Gibson. I want to do this right.
Mr. Lamborn. Exactly. And I understand that. I mean, we are
eager to move forward, but we want to do it right.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. And lastly, for either one of you, has the VA
considered developing a standard hospital design template in
light of all the current major construction overruns that could
be used throughout the country with only minor local
modifications which would, I believe, potentially save tens of
millions of dollars on each project?
Mr. Milsten. Sir, I am happy to say that we have begun that
program. We looked at our clinics, our leased clinics. We have
developed some standards to go forward. One of the things that
each one of our medical centers has is a unique program of
services that they provide to the veterans.
So what we are looking to do is develop templates that we
can then say if we have got a 1A hospital with ten operating
rooms is the workload, this is the configuration or template
that we would use. And then by adjusting the adjacencies,
looking at the physical constraints of the site, we can then
build the building blocks that cut down on the design effort,
cut down on the customization, if you will, and develop that
better value for the taxpayers.
And this is experience that we have learned from the Army
Corps of Engineers. They have done it with barracks, dining
halls. They are doing it with some of their facilities. We work
hand in hand with them on our space and equipment planning
programs so that when we program out a hospital, we are using
the same kind of background information that they use also.
So this is something we are also looking at our other
partners within the federal space and within the other medical
communities to make sure we get hospital templates that can be
delivered, that we can cut down the design effort because one
of the things that cuts down on the change orders on the back
end is something that is important drivers, speed to delivery.
If I can cut down the distance between when a project gets
visualized and doctors come up with their requirements and
delivery of it, we cut down on the amount of change and turmoil
that goes on in a project.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you for being here today. Thank
you for being in Denver on Monday.
The Chairman. Mr. Takano, you are recognized.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibson, I understand that the VA is reprogramming funds
to the short-term contract with KT until a long-term contract
can be completed.
Can you tell me where the funds are coming from that are
being reprogrammed?
Mr. Gibson. We have not identified the projects yet. The
analysis that we are going through is we are trying to identify
projects where we can reprogram funds with the least possible
adverse impact on that project from a time table standpoint.
And the intention certainly is going to be that we replenish
those reprogrammed funds as quickly as we possibly can.
Mr. Takano. Okay. On January 19th, the Veterans
Administration announced it was convening an administrative
investigation board.
Can you please walk this committee through the time line
and what you will accomplish by convening this board, the steps
that are going to be taken, and who will preside over this
board and who will serve on the board and any other details
that you can tell us?
Mr. Gibson. Sure. I will tell you what I can. An
administrative investigative board is a formal investigative
process that we use inside the department to investigate and
gather evidence to support any misconduct, any wrongdoing, any
management negligence, or the like.
It is a fairly routine measure, routine mechanism that is
applied at various levels across the department. This would be
one that would be--it is being established at my direction. And
Office of Accountability Review is working to constitute that
AIB, typically formed of three. In this case, it will be three
senior executives.
Part of our challenge here on this particular AIB is having
people with the right expertise. And so we are working, I
suspect over the next several weeks, to identify individuals
likely from outside the department, from other federal
departments who will come and serve on this AIB because they
bring that particular expertise with them.
The investigative process will last, you know, my guess is
in this particular case many weeks if not several months at
least as they work through to gather evidence. These projects
have been in various degrees, various stages for a decade.
I think the challenge will be to focus on specific episodes
and the history of these projects, do a much deeper dive
exploring exactly what happened, who the involved parties were,
what their responsibilities were, and was there any negligence
or any mismanagement that happened and where that happened to
gather the evidence that then becomes the basis for an
administrative action.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Caldwell, you are with the Corps of
Engineers, correct?
Mr. Caldwell. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr. Takano. Can you tell me, you know, what is it going to
cost the VA for the transfer authority to the Army Corps?
Mr. Caldwell. Sir, as we determine what the scope of the
effort is, part of that will be to determine what our cost is
to execute that scope. For our initial work now that we are
doing, the VA has provided funds to us just based on an
estimate of the number of people and the amount of time that
they will be working to scope out the requirements.
Typically, on large projects of this nature, if we were
starting at the beginning, we would program an amount of about
5.6 percent for our cost to administer the contract and perform
the requirements. And then there is additional funds for
design. So something in that order of magnitude would be
likely, although it could be greater in this case because the
nature of what we are dealing with here is greater.
So the manner in which that operates is that we will assess
what the requirements are. We will assess the level of effort.
We will develop a budget and provide that budget to the
Veterans Administration. And then our objective is to operate
within that budget once the two parties have agreed to it.
Mr. Takano. As of now, you are still trying to assess those
costs and----
Mr. Caldwell. Yes, sir. At this point in time, we have got
a bit of distance to go to have assessed what the entire scope
of requirements are for this project.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time is up.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Milsten, after the CBCA found that the VA, quote,
``does not have sufficient funds to pay for construction of the
entire project as currently designed and has no plans to ask
for money,'' end quote, so the question is, why were there no
plans after GAO alerted the VA to significant cost overruns and
delays in April of 2013 and this committee has held three
hearings highlighting the same thing going back to March 2012,
May of 2013, and April of 2014?
Mr. Milsten. I don't have a good answer for why we didn't
come back and ask for funds other than the fact that our
project teams out there on site felt that the hospital could,
in fact, be built within the budget. They were relying on the
advice of many people within the department to continue pushing
this project forward.
The Chairman. On the 22nd of December, our staffs had
conversations regarding the way ahead or the next steps at
Aurora. Your staff at that time, according to my staff,
promised to provide the committee with a risk assessment
complete with cost estimates by the end of the following
business day.
As you know, we don't have that. And from the testimony at
the table today, it doesn't appear we are getting it any time
soon.
Why would somebody promise that without the capability of
delivering?
Mr. Gibson. If I could address that, the response, Mr.
Chairman, I think Mr. Milsten misspoke that day. It was just a
bit out over the end of his skis. As we have looked at that
request, and I think you are aware that we offered to make that
document available in camera late last week to members of the
staff or Members of the committee.
As we have discussed with the Corps and as we discussed a
little bit on Monday, being able to keep close hold information
that could potentially influence the ultimate negotiation of a
contract is something that we need to be very cautious about.
And there is information in the risk assessment that could
compromise those conversations.
The Chairman. Again, as we have discussed in the past, and
I have great understanding of not wanting to compromise any of
the negotiations, but Congress has total oversight. And if we
were at the beginning of the project, that might be one thing,
but we are in the middle of something now. And it is not like
the committee would intend to make anything public, you know,
and you have opened the central office much more than it had in
the past. And we appreciate that.
And, you know, I understand what getting out over your skis
means even though I come from the great State of Florida. Ours
is on the water.
Mr. Gibson. You can do that on the water too.
The Chairman. Yeah. I tell you it hurts when you get out
over your skis.
So, Mr. Gibson, talk a little bit about accountability
within the agency because we are not talking about one project.
We are talking about a number of projects and we are not
talking about a small amount of money. We are talking about
tens if not hundreds of millions of dollars in cost overruns.
The veterans are most important and to get the projects
completed, we understand that. But, you know, there was
complete inept abilities at a number of levels. And I don't
think you necessarily need to name names here, but help assure
this committee that something is going to be done from within
that would prevent this from ever occurring again.
Mr. Gibson. Yeah. I think, first of all, you know that I
haven't exactly been bashful about enforcing accountability
where we had evidence to support that. Clearly veterans and
taxpayers and Members of Congress, our elected representatives
expect us to conduct a thorough review and where folks have not
done their jobs that we hold them accountable.
And my commitment is that we will do that. That is why we
asked the Corps to undertake an objective, and Joe Calcara, who
you met on the project, is leading that effort for the Corps.
And in my conversations with him, I made it very clear what I
want is on-the-ground truth. Call it like you see it. I don't
want you to pull any punches. I want to understand what went
wrong here. We need to understand that.
And the same guidance will go to the members of the AIB
once that investigative board is formed to ensure that we
understand exactly who is accountable, at what point, for what
decisions and what activities throughout the life of this
project.
Ms. Brown Mr. Chairman----
The Chairman. Yes.
Ms. Brown [continuing]. Before we move on, may I have just
30 seconds?
The Chairman. Certainly.
Ms. Brown. I was at that particular meeting where we had a
lengthy discussion and I felt that the person was, I don't want
to say being threatened, but was pushed to the point that he
said things that perhaps I didn't think it was appropriate
because a legal lawsuit was also going on.
And I think maybe we should hear from counsel, our counsel
as to our questioning when there is an active lawsuit against
the VA, so it is against us. And I think we need to consider
that when we are asking questions of the panel or the
committee.
The Chairman. I certainly understand that, but remember
that the VA is part of the administration and so the lawsuit is
against the administration, not against the Congress. And we
cannot abdicate our responsibility to provide oversight.
And I know that you and I will work together and we have
assured the agency and the central office that we want to be a
partner as we try to resolve that. We wouldn't want to do
anything that would imperil any legal action that may be taken,
but your comments are taken for the record and well deserved.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
I agree. As the army motto, one team, one fight, we are all
in this together. And it is all taxpayers' dollars and we got
to make sure that we protect them.
So I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. Okay. Thank you very much.
And I have got some other questions, but I know there are
other Members that want to talk. And even though Ms. Brown just
took two minutes of my time, I would now yield to Ms. Brownley
for five minutes.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I wanted to just follow-up on the chairman's
questioning around accountability too. And do you have any sort
of time line? I think if evidence proves that steps need to be
taken to hold people accountable within the VA going through
this process, do you have a time line that you can share with
us?
Mr. Gibson. The honest and direct answer is no. And the
reason has to do with the uniqueness of this particular
investigation and the complexity of the issues.
I think our success is going to depend on our ability to
focus, as I mentioned earlier, on particular episodes. And if
we do that, I would expect that an investigation could be
completed within probably several months' time, but it is not
something--this is sworn testimony and a formal and elaborate
process because, again, if we are going to take administrative
action, the evidence that we collect has to withstand scrutiny
on appeal.
Ms. Brownley. So we can expect in a couple of months' time
give or take a little bit that we would have a time line at
that particular point?
Mr. Gibson. I would be delighted to keep the Members
updated on the progress of the AIB as I am aware of it.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you very much.
My veterans in Ventura County in California are extremely,
extremely excited about the prospects of an upcoming plan to
build a new community clinic in our county really truly to
fulfill really the long-awaited unmet needs for our veterans
like dialysis treatment, expanded physical therapy, mental
health, primary care services, and so on.
And so, you know, when I hear and understand these cost
overruns and delays, it makes me very concerned about future
projects. And so if you could just speak to what you are doing,
you know, within the VA to ensure that these kinds of cost
overruns and long delays aren't going to repeat itself again.
I know construction projects are tough and nothing can be
perfect, but I want to have some sense of a feeling of security
that these kinds of things aren't going to happen, we're going
to repeat the same mistakes.
Mr. Milsten. Yes, ma'am. Some of the things that we are
undertaking as we go forward is developing a 35 percent plan
before we come forward for funding which then makes sure that
the funding that we ask for is based on a sound set of
requirements.
This is a similar process that the Corps uses in the MILCON
process so that it again eliminates some of that back and forth
on what the requirements are.
We have instituted a requirements management, change
management process that says at the completion of 35 percent,
the project is examined for how does it go against what the
department approved as part of its strategic plan.
That again is looked at about the 65 percent to make sure
that the project didn't grow without clear, concise reasons for
the growth and that those changes were approved both in budget
and in program or square footage and meet the strategic needs
of the department.
That project is then again reviewed against the base
requirement at the completion of the design before we move into
construction.
In addition to that, we have instituted a program of
contracting with the construction managers out there in the
industry to come in and perform a rigorous constructability
review. Again, this is something similar to what the Corps does
with their constructability, bid ability reviews that they go
through to make sure that the requirement can be built. And
this begins to eliminate some of those change orders that come
and delays that come downstream.
So those are some very important pieces that we put in
place. In addition to that, we have adopted a project review
board process similar to the Corps that has my boss looking at
the projects on a periodic basis as they begin to see
indicators come up that say their risks are getting a little
high or their costs are getting close to the programmed amounts
so that we have the ability as a department to intervene and
get things back on track before they go totally off the rails
and we have no option.
So those are some of the big things that we have put in
place to make sure that we have control on our projects going
forward.
Ms. Brownley. And this is all modeled after the Army Corps
and their military construction?
Mr. Milsten. Yes, it is. And that is because we have
recently acquired a whole bunch of people with Corps of
Engineers' experience and we are looking to put those sorts of
controls that a significant number of them are familiar with
and have demonstrated some success.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Dr. Roe.
Mr. Roe. Thank you all for being here and also thank you
for taking on this very difficult project.
And not to be too flippant or not to be--I am sort of going
back 40 years. This is a FUBAR on steroids if I have ever heard
one or seen one. And I look at this and I have been involved in
building a medical center, an office building, another hospital
and an office building, another community hospital LEED
certified, and a $20 million office building that my practice
is currently in. All projects came in under budget and on time.
And I found this the most astonish--I feel like I am in the
twilight zone when I listen to this. And if you are in private
business, and, Mr. Secretary, you understanding this extremely
well----
Mr. Gibson. I do.
Mr. Roe [continuing]. Your lenders won't lend you any more
money.
Mr. Gibson. That is right.
Dr. Roe. You go out. A project like this would have been
shut down and moth-balled years ago because it is so
outrageous. And what I have heard is--I want to ask just a few
questions and I want to make a statement.
After listening to this and listening to Ms. Brown for the
last several years here, I am not sure the VA ought to ever
build a hospital. I mean, this is not rocket science. There are
5,700 hospitals in the United States operating right now. And
this one just can't ever seem to get to the finish line. It is
amazing to me how badly this has been done.
And what I heard also today is there is no time line for
accountability. Maybe sometime this year. And we still don't
have any idea how much it is going to cost.
When this hospital first was bid out, what was the number
that was put out there? So when the bid was made, we were
supposed to build this hospital for, how much was that?
Mr. Milsten. The initial contract with the builder was for
a firm target price of 604 and a ceiling of 610.
Dr. Roe. Okay. So you had a $600 million hospital?
Mr. Milsten. Yes.
Mr. Roe. So what I just heard a minute ago, and I heard the
secretary say that the next number we are going to hear is $1.1
billion, and that is not the end of it. And just for the
English translation for poor country people like me,
reprogramming means you are going to take money from one
project and move it over to another project, but you still need
the money in the first project to move the money from.
Am I right about that?
Mr. Gibson. That is correct.
Dr. Roe. So it is not less money. We are still going to--
and I think we ought to be honest about that, we are at $1.1
billion.
Mr. Gibson. And that includes----
Dr. Roe. And we don't know what the next number is going to
be. Am I right?
Mr. Gibson. That is absolutely right. The $1.1 billion
includes not only the $600 million from construction. It
includes the land acquisition. It includes the architects and
engineers. It includes the construction management and other
incidental costs associated with managing the project. So there
are other elements to the $1.1 billion.
Mr. Roe. Look, I have been practicing medicine for over 40
years and, yes, technology is going to change. The hospital I
started practicing, a new hospital 35 years ago looks very
different today. You are going to make modifications to it.
But building an operating room is building an operating
room. And if you are building one for cardiac surgery, we know
what that looks like by the thousands in this country. And I
for the life of me cannot understand how you could miss a
number by a hundred percent.
And the other thing Ms. Brownley brought up was to date--
and this project started when? When did somebody go with a
shovel and everybody standing out there gets their picture?
Mr. Gibson. There was actually dirt moving in 2010.
Dr. Roe. 2010, so five years ago. And the original
completion date was when?
Mr. Milsten. Three years after that.
Dr. Roe. So 2013.
Mr. Gibson. 2014.
Dr. Roe. And now we are looking at 2017 maybe. And so I
certainly can understand the frustration of the veterans who
would be in this, I think, a phenomenal facility if it ever
gets built.
But do you think that the VA ought to build another
hospital after this and after Orlando and we have got, I guess,
Louisville coming up, isn't that right, it is going to be
built, or should we just give that to a company that builds
hospitals and tell them what you want? Let them go build it and
get a competent contractor and a competent architect and go
build it.
Mr. Gibson. I think the answer to that question----
Dr. Roe. It is embarrassing for me to go back and face my
taxpayers at home and the veterans at home when they keep
saying, Doc, when is this building going to be done. And we
keep saying, and she has been saying this now for years, so
maybe we should go another route.
Mr. Gibson. It is embarrassing to me, too, sir.
Dr. Roe. I am not blaming you, Mr. Secretary. You weren't
there at the original--you haven't been on the team very long,
but I am just asking a rhetorical question.
Should the VA build another facility?
Mr. Gibson. I think it is a fair question.
Dr. Roe. Let the private sector build it.
Mr. Gibson. I think it is a fair question. And I think as
we look at the Corps' assessment that we have asked them to do
on this and other major projects that are under construction or
have recently been completed, I think they come back and they
look at what went wrong and they look at our structure and our
processes.
And with that as part of the information, we make an
informed decision about, okay, how do we do this part of your
business in the future. And it may well be that the best
outcome, the best outcome for veterans and for taxpayers is
that we turn to the Corps and we say, Corps, we want you to
build our hospitals from now on. That may be the decision. And
if it is, so be it. That is all I am after. I want the best
decision based on those two parameters.
Dr. Roe. Well, I don't see how it could have been done much
worse.
Mr. Gibson. No. On this one, I don't either. You know, I
think frankly, and I alluded to it earlier, that the crux of
the issue here happened as we were trying to push to get to a
firm target price. And we were doing that without having design
completed.
And what we did is we set up an inherent conflict and then
we obligated ourselves to deliver a design that could be built
for $604 million when the design was still moving and we never
reconciled those two. We never forced the issue. And so you are
right. It is a mess and it is what you referred to as FUBAR.
Dr. Roe. Thank you for taking this on.
I yield back.
The Chairman. I am not going to say anything.
Ms. Titus, you are recognized.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am glad to learn what FUBAR means. I didn't know that.
The Chairman. Well, ma'am, I didn't say--I didn't say that
now.
Ms. Titus. Well, you know I represent Las Vegas, Mr.
Chairman, and I have appreciated working with you and I thank
you for being here. It is very important that we talk about
this issue, not just because of the problems that exist now,
but we have invested a lot in future expansion and more
facilities; we want to be sure that they work right.
The hospital in Las Vegas had a lot of problems. You are
aware of that. It was too small by the time it got built. They
had to build a new emergency room. They built it and opened it
in pieces, so that is confusing to the veteran of what services
are actually available.
You have given me some information in the past and you
probably don't have this right in front of you, but I would ask
that the VA give me some kind of hard facts about when it is
going to be opened and what the timeline is for all of the
facilities and all of that associated with the hospital, if I
could get that from you in the future?
Mr. Milsten. Yes, ma'am. Of course.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Now, one other thing is it seems to me that we need to take
one step back. You have talked about all of the improvements in
terms of more oversight for the contractors for the bids and
how you are going to be doing the construction, but I think
part of the problem is the metrics leading up to the decision
of what to build and what to put in a facility. It is one of
those ``build it and they will come.''
And Las Vegas, it was anticipated that once you had a
hospital, the number of veterans served would increase by two
percent; in Las Vegas, it increased by 19 percent. We are going
to have more veterans who need these facilities. There are
going to be different kinds of veterans with more serious
problems, more women veterans. So can you tell me about what
you all are doing about the metrics, in advance of deciding
what you need and what to build?
Mr. Milsten. One of the other pieces that we have
instituted in the department is a return to, if you will,
market-area master planning. So we take an area--in this case,
we are working with a VISN--and we look at all of the needs
within the VISN. The Department sends down a set of gaps that
they have identified that need to be closed by the VISN and
then a rigorous process is undertaken. It takes about a year
and a half to go through this where we look at both capital and
noncapital solutions to close these gaps, and then we put the
facility master plan together that then informs the SCIP
process, the strategic capital plan going forward so that we
have a true look at where we are going; that we have a
Departmental control on the facilities that fill into a
marketplace; that we have a better-defined requirement which
cuts down on changes later on, cuts down on that flux and it
will get our facilities built in the right fashion; and then
after the project is built, we have gone back to instituting
a--or we have instituted a post-occupancy evaluation that comes
back in and says, okay, here was a set of gaps or requirements
that the project was set to meet; did we, in fact, meet them?
And if we didn't, then we still have something to accomplish
and we also develop a lesson learned that says the way to close
this gap may not be that particular path, so that we don't
repeat the same mistakes over and over again.
Mr. Gibson. And, Dennis, if I understand correctly, we use
a ten-year planning horizon so that we are not looking out, you
know, with year or two years; that we are looking much farther
down the road forecasting changes in veteran population and
unique patient growth.
Ms. Titus. Well, I would just encourage you to work closely
with local forecasters, economic and demographic forecasters,
when it is at the university think tanks so you can anticipate
growth. That seems to be a factor that hasn't been a----
Mr. Milsten. One of the things we are doing is we are
bringing in planning consultants that have that kind of
expertise and have the ability to reach into the marketplace.
We are not depending on our own in-house ability to forecast;
we are looking at how we bring consultants in that have that
experience, the same experience that supports the private
sector, informing them on their healthcare-building decisions
would be then helping us to help forecast our needs.
Ms. Titus. Okay. That is good. I am glad to hear that.
And I would just, again, say please keep in mind women
veterans. The secretary has assured me of that. The chairman
has promised to hold a hearing on the needs of women veterans,
and also keep that in mind, and I will look forward to getting
the information about the Las Vegas hospital.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Dr. Benishek, you are recognized.
Dr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibson, Dr. Roe really said a lot of the things that I
wanted to say, and to me, I am frankly shocked and I completely
agree with Dr. Roe in that I don't see why I would ever want to
trust the VA to build another thing ever. I mean the answers
that you have given here, the reasons why this has all happened
sounds to me like you have never built a hospital before.
We should have had the plans in before we did the bidding,
oh, yeah. I mean the answers don't make any sense to me. My
question, from what Dr. Roe has said, has anyone been
disciplined during this whole process?
Mr. Gibson. There have been, in Denver, for example, the
project executive and the contracting officer were removed from
those particular positions. But I would tell you the more
comprehensive look at what happened in Denver will be taken by
the AIB and----
Dr. Benishek. Frankly, one of your earlier answers sort of
shocked me too: We are looking for evidence of mismanagement.
Well, the fact that there is a cost overrun of a half a billion
dollars is kind of a priori evidence that there has been
mismanagement. And the answer that you are going to look for
mismanagement is sort of a wash with me.
Mr. Gibson. The issue is being able to document the
individual accountability with evidence because what will
happen is if we take an action and we don't document it with
demonstrating that that particular individual was accountable
for that particular issue and have the evidence to support
that, our decisions are just going to get overturned. So we
have to go through this process to gather that evidence.
Dr. Benishek. It just seems very difficult to me, Mr.
Gibson.
Mr. Gibson. It does to me, too.
Dr. Benishek. My opinion coming in on this committee, we
shouldn't allow the VA to ever do any construction project
again; they should just be bid out to the private sector and
let the Army Corps of Engineers--because if you are telling me
that you can't even discipline the people that cost a half-a-
billion-dollar-cost overrun because you don't have the right
tools or your management plan or your union plan doesn't allow
it to happen, there is a real problem here and the American
taxpayers are paying for it and our veterans are paying for it
with the lack of their care, and, you know, I just don't get
it.
Let me ask you another question here. Now, do you know what
the average cost per square foot of this hospital is going to
end up being?
Mr. Gibson. We won't know the answer to that question until
we know the estimated cost to complete.
Dr. Benishek. All right. How much money have you spent
already on the project?
Mr. Gibson. Roughly, $800 million has been obligated.
Dr. Benishek. So that is the money that you have spent
already?
Mr. Gibson. The majority of that is spent, not quite all,
but all of it has been obligated.
Dr. Benishek. So that is more than the original--$200,000
more than the original bid price of the project?
Mr. Gibson. Well, as I mentioned earlier, there is--was a
construction contract of about $600 million that didn't include
architect engineer fees, construction management fees, the
acquisition of the land, the site preparation, and other costs
that are associated with building a project of this complexity
and size.
Dr. Benishek. So those costs weren't taken into the account
of the original price of the project?
Mr. Gibson. They were taken into account.
Dr. Benishek. So what was the original price of the project
supposed to be?
Mr. Gibson. The original appropriated amount was somewhere
just south of $800 million.
Dr. Benishek. So we spent all the money that we originally
thought we were going to spend, but we only got a project that
is half done?
Mr. Gibson. That is correct.
Dr. Benishek. All right.
I don't have any more questions. I will yield back the
remainder of my time. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Kuster, you are recognized.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And just for the record, I share our colleague's
frustrations and it is clear that all of you do, as well.
I want to learn from this in terms of going forward, and
there was a comment in our brief about the model of hub-and-
spoke medical services in the VA, and I am just wondering,
given everything we have heard today and we have known for a
few years now about the cost overruns, the complexity, I think
I noted your comment about cutting speed to delivery, it seems
exponential. The longer the delay, the more change orders, the
more change in the scope, and I think certainly my colleague,
Ms. Titus talking about let's try to be more focused on
projecting what the needs are.
But given all of that, I am just wondering, is there any
thought going on now at the VA--and this is for Mr. Gibson--
about whether this hub-and-spoke model is the best model.
Should we be trying to create these megacenters, medical
centers, and in particular, in light of the major reform that
this congress passed and the president signed back in July
about the concept of sending our veterans for private pay? In
many parts of the country we have outstanding tertiary
healthcare facilities that are complex and expensive to
duplicate within the VA system. So I will just leave it for
your comment.
Mr. Gibson. I think, first, it is important to note that
what came first were the hubs, and what you have seen happen at
VA has happened across all of medicine in the United States
over the last several decades, is a movement toward a primarily
ambulatory care or an outpatient-care model. That is where the
vast majority of your care is delivered. And so what we have
done over the last 20 years is create these outpatient clinics,
much more convenient, much more readily accessible, to provide
a large portion of the healthcare services that our veterans
require.
Ms. Kuster. And presumably, less costly to build?
Mr. Gibson. Yes, they are.
Ms. Kuster. Okay.
Mr. Gibson. In fact, principally, we have used a lease
structure in order to be able to pursue that dramatic
expansion. But there are still requirements, care requirements
for veterans that will need hospitalization. So, as is the case
in this particular instance, it is an instance of replacing an
old and outdated facility.
Now, the question you raise is part of a much longer and
philosophical kind of question about the role for non-VA care,
the requirements to maintain continuity of care, and the
recognition that the typical VA healthcare patient is older,
sicker, and poorer than the average population. So there is a
sense here of not, you know, do we just dump those veterans
onto the public healthcare market and let them fend for
themselves in terms of achieving the best healthcare outcomes
or do we look to build an integrated system which would include
medical facilities or hospitals as part of that system, but
recognizing that some healthcare can and should be provided in
the community.
Ms. Kuster. And I appreciate that, the reality test,
because I think that is a part of it. In terms of congress, our
oversight is about the care for the veterans----
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Ms. Kuster [continuing]. And the precious tax dollars and
where we find that balance. But I think for the American people
and for the Members of Congress, we need to address this issue
that veterans are coming back with much more complex medical
conditions. Veterans are aging, and as you say, due to the
challenges they have, they have less resources on their own to
seek their own care.
Mr. Gibson. Right.
Ms. Kuster. I appreciate what you are doing. I am taking up
the mantle of being the ranking minority in the oversight
committee and intend to work very closely with my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle to help maintain the balance or
hopefully restore the balance of providing the care in a timely
way.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you for your continued support and
service, ma'am.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Kuster.
Now, to a new member of our committee from New York: Mr.
Zeldin, you are now recognized.
Mr. Zeldin. Thank you, Chairman Miller.
And I appreciate your recognizing that I am a new member
because I am going to ask a new question. In one of Mr.
Coffman's questions, with regards to going from a 42 percent
estimate, going up 8 percent over the course of the year, Mr.
Milsten, you referred to a term called an artificial budget.
Can you tell me what an artificial budget is?
Mr. Milsten. When the court decision came down and they
said that we had failed to deliver a design that could be built
for the contract amount of 604, we had been measuring progress
against 604 and we were measuring it as a term of art where we
use work in place. So what we paid for was then evaluated
against what the total contract was. Well, the reality--what
the court--what the civilian board told us is that the number
was completely wrong, and so that is the artificial piece that
we were measuring against.
So when we were--I mean there were fact sheets that showed
that I think we were as high as 62 percent at one time out
there, but that was against that 604 number for what we had put
in place. And when the court board came down and said that
number doesn't hold any water, that is the artificial piece
that I was talking about.
Mr. Zeldin. I also understand from the questioning that you
need an authorization by June, but that it is going to be at
least several months before we know how much money you would
need. I am just trying to understand, are we going--would we
find out how much money you would need before you are actually
getting the money?
Mr. Gibson. There is two steps in here. The first thing
that is required will be--or requested, will be an increase in
the authorization in order to allow us to continue to operate
during this interim period of time. For reasons that were
explained earlier, you know, the best course of action we
believe is that we keep construction underway at this project,
rather than shuttering, mothballing and demobilizing activity
on the project. So we will need an increase in the ceiling
prior to June, probably within the next 60 days or so in order
to support a higher level of spending during this interim
period, then there would have to be another one for the full
construction cost.
Mr. Zeldin. Right now, the contractor working at the site,
what budget is the contractor operating off of? What are their
numbers?
Mr. Gibson. When we put the interim contract in place, what
we did was we funded it with $70 million; $50 million to cover
month-to-month new work that is being undertaken, based upon a
detailed schedule that is being developed between Kiewit Turner
and VA that focuses work on critical path items, plus there is
about $20 million available for settlement of subcontractor
disputes. And so we are going to be allocating another $31
million into the contract and we have some amount of money left
that was unobligated under the contract that we will also use
to settle subcontractor disputes.
Mr. Zeldin. The $50 to $70 million numbers, is that between
now and June? Is that per month?
Mr. Gibson. That will likely--what we did in the interim
contract is we put those amounts in place for a 90-day period
of time. So whatever we run out of first, time or money, that
ends that contract. Both parties reserve the right to extend it
and our expectation is to extend it because we don't believe
the Corps will be in a position to enter into a contract to
complete the project until probably June.
Mr. Zeldin. Mr. Takano was asking you about the
investigation. Is it possible that people who are responsible
for negligence are still working on this project?
Mr. Gibson. I think it is unlikely. As I mentioned, we have
changed the reporting relationship for construction facilities
management, so that removes one particular senior executive. I
mentioned earlier that we had also changed out the project
executive and the contracting officer. I would tell you the
project executive that we have on the scene now, and have had
since April, is a star, a young fella named Kevin, Kevin
Lindsay that came to us from Corps of Engineers.
Mr. Zeldin. Mr. Caldwell, real quick question: Has the Army
Corps ever build a hospital before?
Mr. Caldwell. Yes, we have.
Within the last, let's say since 2007, about 12 either have
been completed or are under construction.
Mr. Zeldin. Okay. Great.
So this is very informative for me. Chairman Miller, you
know, I have heard this new term of artificial budgeting. Ms.
Brownley was asking for a timeline of when she is going to get
the timeline.
Asking for funding without knowing what the cost is--that
came from the State Legislature in New York--with $200,000, our
county, which has the second-highest vets population of any
county in the country, highest in the state, with $200,000, we
created a program for PTSD. Hundreds of veterans--and we are
saving lives with $200,000.
And the concern is when you are $500 million over budget,
you are taking money away from other programs that can save
lives and give care to our veterans who need it and deserve it.
I actually think the whole thing is pretty outrageous and I am
very grateful that Chairman Miller is having this hearing and
Mr. Coffman is advocating so hard to keep us informed.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Zeldin. Welcome to Congress.
(Laughter)
The Chairman. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since we last met, there was a strategic shooting at the El
Paso VA.
The Court: You can stop the clock on this. Don't need to
clock him on this.
Go ahead.
Mr. O'Rourke. And I just wanted to take a moment, and I
know that I speak for you and for the Committee in extending
our condolences to the family of Dr. Fjordbak, who, following
9/11, left a lucrative practice is, moved to El Paso to work at
the VA and help treat our veterans who were returning from
Afghanistan and Iraq, including veterans who had served in
previous wars. And from everything we know about him,
exemplified the kind of service and commitment to excellence
that we wasn't to see more of in the VA.
And I want to thank the secretary for the leadership at the
El Paso VA, your Interim Director Pete Dancy is doing a
remarkable job. And as tragic as this shooting, this murder
was, I note that the El Paso VA is going to come back better
and stronger than ever. And I'd also like to conclude this part
of my time by thanking all of the employees, many of whom are
veterans, the frontline staff, the doctors, the providers, the
mental health experts, the volunteers who do a remarkable job
in El Paso day in and day out under some very trying
circumstances, especially following the shooting on January
6th.
And I commit to you, Mr. Secretary, that we will do
everything that we can to support that staff, be there for
them, and make them stronger than ever going forward.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you. Your support means the world to me
and I know, to them.
Mr. O'Rourke. Mr. Chairman, I would like to continue by
developing on the theme that we are looking at in terms of the
VA's opportunities and competence when it comes to building
major medical facilities and providing world-class care and
outcomes for our veterans in a timely fashion. Again, despite
what I think are the best efforts of a truly remarkable team at
the El Paso VA, due to a number of factors from staffing to
resources to leadership, in some cases, we have not been able
to deliver on that for the veterans.
What I hear day in and day out from the veterans that I
represent and serve is that when they can get in, they are
treated like royalty and very infrequently have any complaints
at all. The struggle, of course, has been getting into the VA
in the first place or having an appointment that is not
cancelled or not having your records dropped or erased or
feeling like you have been forgotten. One of the other factors
that makes it difficult to deliver world-class care in El Paso
and to better serve our veterans is the age and the state of
the facility that we are in today. And you were kind enough,
Mr. Secretary, to visit El Paso in July of last year, and after
a tour of the facility, you confirmed that conclusion that we
have reached, now for a very long time in El Paso, that the
facility we have is inadequate, insufficient and unacceptable
and we can and must do better for our veterans and for those
who serve them out of that facility.
Further complicating things in El Paso is William Beaumont
Army Medical Center is building a new $1.1 billion facility
nine miles away from its currently co-located position with the
VA health clinic. We have, what I would say is an opportunity,
right now to decide what we can do to improve the kind of
facility, the delivery of care, and the access to that care in
El Paso. There are a number of partners there who want to work
with you and want to work with us, including Texas Tech, which
has the Paul L. Foster School of Medicine, the first four-year
medical school built anywhere along the U.S./Mexico border. We
have University Medical Center. We have Tenet and HCA
Hospitals. We have a community, though, one of poorest from
income and property values, is one of the richest in service,
that is willing to get behind this and make it a success.
I want to follow-upon your commitment to take El Paso from
one of the worst performing to one of the best, and I want to
help answer Dr. Roe's question, and a question that you agreed
was a valid one, which is, should the VA be in the business of
building these facilities? We certainly don't expect $1.1
billion to be spent in El Paso, Texas--we would gladly take it,
we are not expecting it. What we will offer is that through
these partnerships, through the commitment and funding from the
local community, we can make a deal for the VA that would
prevent you from building a brand new facility or a hospital
that I think there are some serious questions about the
competency of the VA to do just that, and instead, perhaps,
test or prove a different model in the delivery of healthcare.
It would solve, I think, a lot of problems for VA nationally,
while meeting the expectations that we should have in El Paso
of having world-class care for each and every veteran.
Now, we received a memo that was written by VHA Under
Secretary Clancy August 18th of last year that said within 60
days, they would have a game plan for such a facility. I
probably don't have to tell you that today, at least in our
office, we do not have a copy of any such plan. And despite, I
think, our polite but insistent demand that we see one and be a
partner in that, we have yet to see anything.
You, current Secretary Bob McDonald, who also visited El
Paso recently, we want to thank him for that--that was
following the shooting--have both express to do me your
commitment, but I need to see some follow-through. I need to be
part of that process that you admitted often happens behind
closed doors and doesn't involve members of congress. I want to
be your partner in this; I don't want to be your adversary. But
after two years and documented failings, including by VHA and
the OIG, we absolutely need something better and we need to be
part of it. So what I am asking you today is from all the
lessons that we have learned from Aurora, from Florida, from
other facilities, and from the opportunity that we have in El
Paso, will you commit to working with us? Will you dedicate
someone, even on a part-time basis, to working with this
community to develop that plan? We will be your partner in
implementing it.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, we will.
I think one of the things both Bob and I have emphasized at
our months at the department is the need to build on the
strategic partnerships that we have out in our communities, and
I think that El Paso is a great example of that. As you and I
discussed a couple of months back, we really don't have a way
forward there, and we are not positioned for success in El Paso
today and we need to get ourselves positioned for success. And
I think the circumstances on the ground you just outlined very
ably, could create an ideal opportunity for us to leverage on
those local partnerships and do the right thing for veterans
and be good stewards of taxpayer dollars.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And I will conclude by saying that we will follow-up this
week to share what we have assembled and to gain from you what
you have----
Mr. Gibson. Thank you.
Mr. O'Rourke [continuing]. And then from there, I think we
need to move very quickly to implement something.
Mr. Gibson. I understand.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Costello, another new member who asked to be on this
committee from the great state of Pennsylvania, you are
recognized.
Mr. Costello. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In applying my experience as a real estate lawyer who has
been involved in acquisition and land-use approval and
development and construction matters, but not focusing on what
happened pre-bid award to KT, I want to share a couple of
observations with you. In looking through the materials, I am
just going to cite right from them.
First, the CBCA finding that VA delayed progress of
construction by delaying the processing of design changes and
change orders: Quoting, Much of the blame for the situation
must be ascribed to the VA by failing to control the joint
venture design team, delaying approval of the design,
presenting KT with a design which was allegedly complete, but
required an enormous number of modifications, failing to
process change orders for approximately one year.
And then you look at Mr. Chang's emails, one in
particular--two in particular, stand out: A June 13th, 2013,
email where he says we hired a senior resident engineer who has
never done anything that we have been doing in CFM, but he
won't take advice from those who came from the VA system. The
budget schedule and scope are not in control. I have no clue
when this project is going to be finished and how much it is
going to cost when this project is done.
That was in June of 2013. It concerns me from a
construction-management perspective--again, leaving aside the
design aspects that went into the actual bid, to which the
contractor was awarded--it concerns me from a construction-
management perspective that the moment that someone within the
VA organization would send an email like that or feel that way,
that it wouldn't simply freeze at that point and say, This
problem is too big for us; we need to go somewhere else and get
subject-matter expertise. Because when you are designing--when
you are managing a construction project and you are bringing
into the fold, construction-management firms or a construction
manager, you are not hiring them for a project that 95 percent
of which is going to go right. There is also going to be
modifications or change orders along the way. You are hiring
that construction-management firm or individual for when things
are going to go really, really bad so that it doesn't become
worse.
And when you go back, I think it is a year earlier in an
email, Mr. Chang indicates, All I can say--this is a year prior
to the email that I just cited to--all I can say is the storm
is coming. How we got into this mess, it is simple: Scope,
schedule, and budget were not managed; no leadership; no
knowledge and experience in this business; not following
handbook; no skill and organization.
That points to, I think, a much more fundamental dynamic
here, which is that subject-matter expertise on very
sophisticated construction projects like this do not reside in
the VA and so moving forward, similar to what Congressman Roe
said and other Members here, I just question whether, as part
of a general budget, you should be--we should be looking to
fill subject-matter expertise of that sophistication when it is
really better outsourced. And so I would like you to share your
comments moving forward on the types of questions you are going
to be asking yourself and what you are going to be presenting
to the Chairman and this Committee on whether maybe you just
don't want to be in the business of building hospitals, maybe
that is something better outsourced, so that, frankly--again,
looking at what the CBCA's findings were, a lot of the
additional--at least some of the additional cost is actually a
function of not merely mismanagement, but not managing it. It
is not just the design, it is the management or lack of
management here that has caused further delays and caused
further expense and I think that is the real troubling--that is
a deeply troubling aspect of the overall problem.
Mr. Gibson. I am sure that you understand, based on your
experience, that using a construction--a contract vehicle such
as IDC or construction management at risk, in order for that to
work effectively, you have to have very strong project
leadership on the job, and frankly, we didn't have it. And
those emails and the things that you just read make it very
clear that we did not have it.
I would love for you to have the opportunity to come visit
this facility today and sit down and spend time with the
project engineer, project executive on this particular
facility, and surmise from your own objective observations
whether or not that is the kind of person we want leading
complex projects, whether we do our own hospitals in the future
or not--I have already put that on the table--and I said
perfectly willing for us to look at that. All I am after is
what is best for veterans and what is the right thing for
taxpayers, and if that means turning over major hospital
construction to the Corps of Engineers, I think that is fine.
But that is a big decision, let's make it an informed decision.
Mr. Costello. And my only follow-up to that would simply
be, within a project this big you are talking about a team of
highly skilled professionals----
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Costello [continuing]. All of whom not only make--hold
the project accountable, but hold one another accountable.
Mr. Gibson. Yes.
Mr. Costello. And the other underlying concern here is that
there was not, I feel, at least from what I have seen, a lot of
accountability within that team.
Mr. Gibson. There was not.
Mr. Costello. And that led to even more of a runaway
expense and I think that is really a testament to what happens
when we try to have--and this isn't a criticism directed at
you, but a more broader point--that is what happens when we
have bureaucracy trying to do too many things rather than what
they are specifically designed to do, and what you are
specifically designed to do is not build hospitals. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Ms. Radewagen, who is another new member who asked to be on
this--who comes from the furthest location from any committee
member, the American Samoa.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is an honor and privilege for me to be a member of this
committee. As you know, each May is Asian-Pacific American
Heritage Month and National Military Appreciation Month. And
over the years, I have traveled around to many bases to
celebrate with the military and I discovered that American
Samoa's vets, like other vets, they tend to settle near the
base they were last stationed at because their families have
settled in and their children are in school.
We have three major exports, canned tuna, NFL football
players, and soldiers, military personnel. Veterans make up 10
percent of the territory's population, so access to veterans'
healthcare is deeply important and I look forward to working
with this committee.
My question, Secretary Gibson, is: How long will it take to
get a new long-term contract with KT? Can you please explain
the process that will be taken to get to that point?
Mr. Gibson. Do you want me to answer that one, Lloyd? I'd
be glad to.
Mr. Caldwell. Yes, sir. Go ahead.
Mr. Gibson. Let me take a shot at it and I will let Lloyd
chime in here.
The Corps has an assessment team on the ground in and out
at Denver right now; they are experts from all over the
country. These are chiefs of sections, not deputies; it is a
very expert team. They are going through their assessment. They
are developing right now an acquisition plan, and they will go
through that process and have that acquisition plan presented
and, you know, everyone would hope approved during the month of
February.
And then between the month of February--and their target
time period is June--during that period of time, they would go
through the careful, close work with KT, supported by VA, to
determine the schedule; to determine the scope of work to
ensure that the design has been completely locked down, and
ultimately to determine the cost to complete and settle on a
contract vehicle to enter into with, whether that is KT or
whether that is another party, that would be determined as part
of the acquisition strategy. So that is the general time frame.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
And lastly, Mr. Milsten, if you plan to move money from
other major construction projects that Congress has
appropriated money to build, what is stopping those projects
from being mired down by the same cost overruns and delays that
current VA major construction projects are facing?
Mr. Milsten. One of the things that we are looking at as we
go forward with this reprogramming effort is to find those
projects that taking some of the money off them will not or
will have minimal impact on their ability to go forward. We
continue to press for the speed to delivery to get these
facilities done, and as part of any effort, we want to work
with the Committee and with Congress to replenish those funds
that we reprogram off so that those projects can keep on-track
to provide those services to veterans.
Mr. Gibson. I would also point out the number of
improvements that have been implemented over the last couple of
years that are being applied currently, as well as the lessons
that we will learn from the Corps' review of Denver, as well as
other major construction projects, to ensure that we are using
the very best practices possible in all of our projects.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Radewagen.
And before we go to the second panel, Ms. Brown, do you
have some comments?
Ms. Brown. Yes, sir. Thank you, a couple of things.
Mr. Secretary, the Committee is asking me exactly when do
we expect the Orlando hospital to be complete because they want
invitations to come down----
(Laughter)
Ms. Brown [continuing]. And former Members want invitations
to come.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Brown. So, we all want to participate.
Mr. Gibson. We will plan a major celebration for the ribbon
cutting in Orlando.
Ms. Brown. Yes.
Mr. Gibson. I know construction is scheduled to be complete
at the end of February, but there is an activation period that
will follow that where we are moving equipment in and all that
sort of thing. We will be sure to get dates to the Committee
ahead of time.
Ms. Brown. We will ask the Committee Members to formally
come down for a site visit when we open.
I do think that we need to separate building a hospital
from building a clinic. I don't think that we have had the same
problems with the clinics as we have had with the hospitals.
Can you clear that up for me?
I haven't had any problems with my clinic in my district.
Mr. Gibson. Yeah. I think there have been challenges with
clinics, as well as hospitals. The nature of those challenges
have, in most instances, been somewhat different. I would say
where they are similar has to do with the early stages of
developing and defining requirements and then locking down
those requirements so that we are able to move expeditiously
through the process.
Ms. Brown. And at issue that maybe the Committee needs to
deal with. We had a project in Miami that was two smaller
projects and once we put them together, it became a larger, you
know, one big project that you all need to come back for us,
and maybe we need to develop some kind of authority so that you
can move forward, because that held up that project. So we need
to work together in areas that we can to make sure that we can
expedite the process.
Mr. Gibson. Yes, ma'am. We would appreciate that
opportunity. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. And so with that--and there are many other
things. Someone said something about mismanagement and I want
to say that part of the problem--let's say in Orlando, part of
it was we changed the sites. And in this Denver hospital, it
was going to be a joint-use hospital and it became a single-use
facility, so all of those things got to be considered as we
discuss and decide how we are going to move forward, and you
can't just say it is one item; it is a multiplicity of reasons
why projects get delayed, and we need to do our part to make
sure that doesn't happen also.
And so with that, Mr. Chairman, I am very excited about
working with you to move the VA forward.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Brown. We are all
looking forward to working collaboratively with the VA. I would
say that the one incident in Miami where there were two
projects, actually, that was something that this Committee
uncovered. That was a large project that was purposely split
into two so that they could proceed forward, and that is why we
had the problem that we did, and, you know, nobody wants to
delay anything, but we certainly want to make sure that
everybody follows the rules.
But with that, thank you, Mr. Gibson, for being here.
Mr. Milsten and Mr. Caldwell, thank you so much, and you
are now excused.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Members.
The Chairman. We are going to go ahead and move forward
with our second panel. We are going to hear from Mr. David
Wise, director of physical infrastructure issues at the
Government Accountability Office; Mr. Roscoe Butler, no
stranger to this committee, the deputy director for healthcare
for the American Legion's Veterans Affairs and Rehabilitation
Division; and also Mr. Ray Kelley, also no stranger to this
committee, director of the national legislative service for the
Veterans of Foreign Wars.
As, per the custom, your statements will be entered into
the hearing record.
And Mr. Wise, now that you have made it to your seat, we
are going to let you go first. We will recognize you, sir, for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF DAVID WISE

Mr. Wise. Yes,
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the
Committee, I am pleased to be here today to discuss information
from our April 2013 report regarding the construction of new
major VA medical facilities. Our report examined the Agency's
actions to address cost increases and schedule delays for VA
projects in Denver, New Orleans, Las Vegas, and Orlando. At the
time of our review, VA had 15 major medical facility projects
underway at a cost of more than $12 billion, including new
construction and renovation of existing medical facilities.
For those four projects we originally found that cost
overruns range from 59 percent to 144 percent. Delays ranged
from 14 to 74 months; however, costs and delays have since
increased with cost overruns now ranging from 66 percent to 144
percent and delays ranging from 14 to 86 months with the
potential for further increases.
My statement today discusses three key issues related to
the VA medical facility construction program. One, the extent
of and reasons for cost overruns and schedule delays for the
four new medical facility projects we reviewed; two, actions VA
has taken to improve its construction management practices; and
three, VA's response to our 2013 recommendations to improve the
management of costs, schedule, and scope of these construction
projects.
When comparing construction project data updates provided
by VA for this testimony, with the cost and schedule estimates
first submitted to Congress, we found the cost increases range
from 66 to 144 percent representing a total cost increase of
over $1.5 billion and an average increase of approximately $376
million per project. Since our 2013 report, some of the
projects have experienced further cost increases and delays.
For example, VA's reported delays for the four major projects
now range from 14 to 86 months with an average delay of 43
months per project.
Of those projects, Denver had the highest cost increase and
the longest estimated years to complete. Estimated costs
increased from $328 million in June, 2004, to $800 million, as
of November, 2012. VA moved the estimated completion date from
February, 2014, to May, 2015; however, these estimates may
further increase and VA has been unable to provide total
estimated costs and schedule data for the Denver project at
this time.
At each of the four projects, different factors contributed
to cost increases and schedule delays as follows: Changing
healthcare needs of the local veteran population expanded the
scope at the Las Vegas project; decisions to change plans from
a shared university-VA medical center to a standalone VA
medical center affected plans in Denver and New Orleans;
changes to the site location by VA delayed efforts in Orlando;
unanticipated issues, especially environmental, in Las Vegas,
New Orleans, and Denver, also led to delays. Some of these
factors resulted in expensive, cumbersome and lengthy change
orders.
Since 2012, VA has taken some steps to improve its
construction management process including creating a
construction view council to oversee VA's development and
execution of its real property program. The council is intended
as a single point of oversight and program accountability.
Establishing a new project delivery method, known as integrated
design and construction, which engages the construction
contractor early in the design process to streamline
construction and reduce the need for change orders. VA used
this procedure in Denver--in the Denver project, but too late
to fully benefit from it.
In our 2013 report we made three recommendations to address
systemic issues that contributed to overall schedule delays and
cost increases, including developing guidance on the use of
medical equipment planners, as part of the design and planning
process; sharing information on the roles and responsibilities
of VA construction project management staff; and streamlining
the change order process. VA agreed with our recommendations
and has taken action to implement them. While we have closed
out the recommendations, the impact of these actions may take
time to show improvement, especially for ongoing construction
projects, depending on several issues including the
relationship between VA and its contractors.
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of the
Committee, this concludes my formal statement, and I would be
pleased to answer any questions you may have at this time.

[The prepared statement of David Wise appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Wise.
Mr. Butler, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF ROSCOE BUTLER

Mr. Butler. Thank you.
Due to poor planning and budget execution with VA
construction management, a project that could have come in
under $600 million has spiralled into a billion-dollar debacle
that has tarnished the good faith of the veterans of Colorado,
the hundreds of workers who labored to build that hospital, and
honestly, the good faith of veterans across the country. The
veterans of America are crying out, Enough is enough and demand
better results.
Good morning, Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, and
Members of the Committee. On behalf of our National Commander
Mike Helm and the 2.4 million members of The American Legion, I
want to say thank you for the scrutiny that you are applying to
sorting out the unfortunate and unnecessary chaos with VA's
construction projects. The veterans of Colorado have waited for
a replacement hospital since the late 1990s. Three VA
secretaries made promises, but failed to deliver. Now, VA's
construction problems have spiralled into epic proportions,
especially the Colorado replacement facility.
The American Legion's deputy director for healthcare, I
have been an active participant in our organization's System
Worth Saving Task Force. Last year, as you know, the chairman
of our VA`R commission testified on behalf of The American
Legion at a field hearing in Denver which critically--where,
when critical errors were taking place.
There appears to be systemic problems with how VA manages
their large construction projects. Let's examine the big four
projects. In Colorado, they broke ground in 2009 and the
replacement facility is still incomplete and is hundreds of
millions of dollars in overruns. In Orlando, they broke ground
on August 22nd, 2008, and they are hundreds of millions of
dollars over budget and have missed deadlines after deadliness.
In Las Vegas they broke ground in 2007 and after numerous
delays the hospital was opened, but unfortunately needed
millions of dollars in expansion because they couldn't even
meet basic needs like a proper ramp for EMS to drop off
patients at their emergency room. In New Orleans, they broke
ground on October 24th, 2008, and six years later, veterans are
still waiting for their replacement facility to open.
GAO said the average time overdue on these four projects is
35 months and this is just an average. The average cost
overruns are $366 million, again, this is just an average.
Frankly, this is unacceptable. Other agencies and private
sector organizations continue to build major projects across
the nation, yet VA replacement on the Fitzsimons campus
continues to be delayed while the costs continues to skyrocket.
VA needs to complete their outstanding projects so veterans
will no longer be required to use inadequate and outdated
facilities. The American people want a first-rate healthcare
system for veterans. You look at the internal planning process
through the Strategic Capital Investment Planning Process and
you will see that VA is trying to meet the needs of an
expanding veterans population, but mistakes and mismanagement
are crippling these projects and nobody seems to be held
accountable.
VA also needs to take a look, a long hard look, as how they
are managing their construction projects because their results
across the board are unacceptable. All options must be put on
the table to ensure that no stone is unturned. Steps need to be
taken to assure that future VA hospitals are planned, designed,
and built within a transparent, accountable system that puts
veterans first. You have projects in four states and who knows
how many more are needed as VA expands to meet the needs of our
21st Century veterans.
Falling behind schedule might be standard practice at VA,
but you have to take--think about what that means. Behind
schedule means veterans of Colorado, Florida and Louisiana are
still asking, When is the waiting game going to end? The
American Legion thanks the Committee for their close attention
to the problems that veterans face accessing healthcare. The
American Legion is working diligently and tirelessly to keep
the focus on the VA hospital in Aurora, as well as other VA
construction projects.
After a decade of broken promises, American veterans, those
who gave 100 percent of the defense of our nation are tired of
promises and simply ask VA to build them a 21st Century world-
class VA medical hospital and to get the job done now. After
all, American veterans deserve better.

[The prepared statement of Roscoe Butler appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Butler.
Mr. Kelly, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAY KELLEY

Mr. Kelley. Mr. Chairman, thank you for inviting the
Veterans of Foreign Wars. I am representing the men and women
of the Veterans of Foreign Wars and our auxiliary at this
hearing today.
Over the past few years, it has been very apparent that
VA's ability to control costs and deliver major construction
projects on time is and should be viewed as a great concern.
Veterans are not being served when construction projects take
months and years longer than expected to complete and the price
tags inflate as time drags on.
Last year, the House passed legislation that would improve
VA's major medical facility construction process. These
improvements include using medical equipment planners,
developing and using a project management plan, peer-reviewing
all projects, creating and changing--creating a change order
metric, and using a design-build process when possible. VA
claims they have started using medical equipment planners. This
practice will assist in reducing scheduling delays and cost
overruns. To ensure VA's construction process can be as
efficient as possible, it is important that the other
provisions are enacted.
VA's lack of standardized project management protocol has
led to poor communication within VA and between VA and general
contractors, which has led to delays and cost overruns. There
have been cases where separate VA officials have provided
contradictory orders to the general contractor. By developing
and using a project management plan, all parties, at the onset
of the project will have a clear understanding of the roles and
authorities of each member of that project team.
Construction peer excellence review is an important aspect
of maintaining a high level of construction quality and
efficiency. When used, these review teams are made up of
experts in construction management who travel to project sites
and evaluate the performance of the project team. While
meetings provide an important feedback, a separate set of eyes
on the project management plan to ensure the plan is in place
to make the project come in on time and on budget.
VA has historically relied on a design-bid-build project
delivery system which, when entering into contracts to build
major medical facility projects. With this model, an architect
is selected to design a facility. The design documents are used
to secure a bid, and then the successful contractor bid-holder
builds the facility. Design-bid-build projects often encounter
disputes between the customer, in this case, VA, and the
construction contractor.
Because these contracts are generally firm, fixed price,
based on a complete design, the construction contractor is
usually responsible for cost overruns unless a change order is
issued. This process can be adversarial because neither party
wants to absorb the costs associated with the change and each
change order can add months to the project completion date.
A design-build project places the architectural engineering
company and the construction contractor under one contract.
Placing the architect as the lead from start to finish and
having the prime contractor work side by side with the
architect allows the architect to be an advocate to VA. Also,
the architect and the prime contractor can work together early
in the design phase to reduce the number of design errors. It
also allows them to identify and modify the building plans
throughout the project. While these initiatives work for
improving future projects, the VFW believes a look back at all
currently funded projects should take place to see what steps
are needed to finish the nearly 50 partially funded, but not
complete, major VHA construction projects.
VA's fiscal year 2015 budget submission showed that there
was more than $6 billion available for 49 VHA projects through
the end of fiscal year 2013. What the submission does not show
is why some projects were initially funded years ago, but
little to no progress has been made to complete them. Many of
these projects have safety implications and provide specific
services for spinal cord injuries and need to be set on course
that will bring these projects to completion.
VA's Strategic Capital Plan, or SCIP, has been a great tool
in identifying gaps and access utilization and safety, but if a
clear plan is not in place to close these gaps, delays in care,
safety risks and, an increased cost to close these gaps will
continue.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I will be happy
to answer any questions the Committee has.

[The prepared statement of Ray Kelley appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ray. Mr. Coffman, you
are recognized.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wise, what are
some of the key differences between how VA manages major
medical facility construction projects compared to federal and
private sector stakeholders responsible for similar projects?
What are the likely effects of these differences?
Mr. Wise. Well Mr. Coffman, two things stood out to us when
we did the work for the April, 2013 report. One was, and I
think has been discussed in panel one, the entry of medical
equipment planners at the early part of the planning process.
Both the Naval Facilities Engineering Command and the Army
Corps of Engineers official said this is very important to
them. These units work hand in glove in order to make sure that
you have a parallel and symbiotic relationship between the
people who are building the facility as well as those who are
bringing in the equipment that the facility needs to house.
Obviously those things need to be completely compatible,
otherwise you have some disconnects if not the inevitable
result is change orders, which add time and cost to the
project.
That brings me to my second point. Other with whom we spoke
the change orders, also in both the public and private sector
were, rather surprised at the amount of time that it took the
VA to administer change orders. This was also discussed fairly
thoroughly in the first panel. We saw VA change orders, that
had taken up to a year to implement. This caused problems for
the contractor because then he is waiting for payment while the
process of winds its way through the Veterans Administration's
approval process.
They have done a couple of things I think that may help in
that process. They have raised the threshold a bit, up to
$250,000 in some cases. They hired some additional attorneys
who deal with the change order process. How this will work
going forward we will see. But those are two things that really
stood out when we did the research and the work in order to
produce that report.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. I think in your report you also
reference that the Army Corps of Engineers has built similar
projects for the Department of Defense on schedule and within
budget. Am I correct in that?
Mr. Wise. They have a track record of building a lot of
medical facilities, that is true.
Mr. Coffman. But on schedule and within budget?
Mr. Wise. It was not in our scope to analyze USACE and
NAVFAC projects regarding this timelines and adherence to
budgets.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Mr. Kelley, in your testimony you
rightly acknowledge that many of VA's major construction
projects were funded years ago but that very little progress
has been made, giving rise to safety implications. What would
you recommend VA do in the future to expedite its processes in
order to avoid these same mistakes?
Mr. Kelley. There needs to be a prioritization of these.
And the SCIP process does that. But then on the implementation
side there seems to be a failing on that prioritization. So we
have got nine of 12 seismic correction facilities that are
partially funded at some phase. Some of them have been funded
since 2010 and no money has been spent on them. And we need to
understand why that money has been allocated and no progress
has been made. And should we have entered into that contract to
begin with if we were not ready to start the project as soon as
the contract was completed? What missing link is causing that
wait? And what, is that money having to be repurposed to
another program and now we are waiting for money to be
repurposed so we can start it? There are a lot of questions on
the timing of funding and where that funding is sitting.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Mr. Wise, the GAO report states that the
problems experienced at the audited construction projects were
representative of systemic problems throughout the VA. Could
you elaborate on how these problems extend beyond just the
facilities you assessed?
Mr. Wise. Well if you look back at the three
recommendations that we made they point, to systemic issues
that have a broader impact. For example, one recommendation
dealt with the lack of communication and the inability to
pinpoint exactly who at the VA is responsible for what. We also
recommended that VA implement steps to streamline the change
order process. We saw that these are the kinds of issues that
have broad implications in terms of being able to administer
what are very complex and very expensive projects.
Mr. Coffman. Very well. And so I think in your report you
said that each of the hospitals under construction at that
time, and I think there were four, I think over several hundred
million dollars each, on average, over budget, and about three
years behind schedule on average. Is that correct? And then
would the Aurora situation be the worst one out of the four?
Mr. Wise. Aurora had the most egregious overruns, both in
terms of cost and delay.
Mr. Coffman. Okay. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ms. Brown. Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Yes, Mr. Wise, you know before I came to
Congress I served on a humble community college district board,
and I was elected, and we had bonding authority that allowed 55
percent of the local voters to approve capital construction
bonds. And, you know, suddenly my district was dealing with
upwards of a $1 billion program after we leveraged the local,
the money. It seemed to me that cost overruns, the change
orders, would frequently come before my committee. My one, I am
wondering where was Congress' role in oversight? Is that any
part of your recommendations as part of your GAO report? That
somehow the oversight function of Congress, the subcommittee of
this committee, should have been regularly informed about where
things were with design, the design relationship with the
contractor? I mean, how did this get out from, well you were
saying that the DoD has a better track record within its own
bureaucracy of managing the building of hospitals?
Mr. Wise. Well--sorry, go ahead.
Mr. Takano. How was it that, what, how could the
accountability be tightened up here?
Mr. Wise. Yes, it is, the relationship between the
committee or the subcommittee and the Veterans Administration
is not something I am privy to. But what I can say is that when
we looked at the kind of activities going on in the Veterans
Administration we saw that there were certainly a number of
issues to do with the cost overruns and the delays that were
extensive. And so it is fair to assume that in some kind of
normal reporting process that this is something of interest to
congress,. We make our recommendations obviously to the
administration, to the federal agencies because we work for
Congress. We are doing the work on behalf of the committee. So
hopefully the work we do makes the committee more aware of the
key issues enabling it to take positive action and work with
the Veterans Administration to try to improve these projects
and hopefully provide better services, more timely services,
and cost effective services to the veteran community.
Mr. Takano. I am just referencing my experience as a local
public official managing taxpayer dollars, capital construction
dollars, and the frequency with which we would have to get
progress reports from the staff as the elected officials. I am
just wondering how effective it is for an administration, a
department like the VA, to be able to provide that sort of
accountability. I am just wondering if we have staffed up our
Oversight Subcommittee enough, given it enough resources, so
that it is able to inject itself on a regular basis to manage
these hundreds of millions of dollars.
I am just astounded. I am trying to find enough money to
fund graduate medical education. People do not know that we
fund nearly 100 percent of the medical residencies in this
country. And we are facing a shortage of doctors, both in the
public sector and within the VA. And I am thinking about the
hundreds of millions of dollars that we could have saved on
these cost overruns to fund the education of these doctors.
Mr. Chairman, I would ask whether or not we are funding our
oversight function enough on this committee to be able to
oversee what goes on in that department. I do not see how else
we are going to be able to hold the department accountable
without enough of our Oversight Committee being able to be able
to review these projects and to make sure that the project
management is adequate.
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Takano. I know you have a background in this area as
well.
The Chairman. If the gentleman will yield, yes. And we have
asked for additional dollars. Last year we were given
additional dollars by the Speaker. We have asked for additional
budget. Ms. Brown and I have talked together, as has our staff,
to hire additional forensic investigators in regards to
computers and budgetary issues as it relates to these
construction issues. So most definitely, our oversight role has
been beefed up quite a bit since we took over this particular
committee.
Ms. Brown. Just 30 seconds?
Mr. Takano. I will yield.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. However, I do not think that we want
to get into cost overruns. I have, in the Orlando situation,
spent three hours with VA, but I also spent three hours with
the contractor. So it is not just one party that is at fault.
Did you do the research on the, Orlando facility and why it
took so long to move forward?
Mr. Wise. Well, madam I do recall in your statement you
alluded to one of the major reasons that had resulted in the
problems with Orlando i.e. several changes in the site location
changed.
Ms. Brown. Whoever was in charge.
Mr. Wise. I am sorry?
Ms. Brown. If the Democrats were in charge, it would move
to one city.
Mr. Wise. Right.
Ms. Brown. If the Republicans were in charge, it moved to
another. So I mean, we need to take the politics out of
building hospitals. In the end the Secretary should have the
authority to decide what is in the best interests of the VA. I
was able to pull all of the players together and we were able
to move forward. You cannot just say that it is one thing that
has caused these problems. It is the multiplicity. We have been
part of the problem. For over 25 years we were talking about a
hospital in Orlando. It is ludicrous. We have the growth in
Central Florida. We need that hospital up and operational and
it will be, I hope, in my lifetime to be open in the next
couple of months.
I yield back. But the point I am making is that we can do
our oversight, and we can do other investigations. But we do
not need to get into the business of change orders. I mean, if
so we need to, go to the administration. We have oversight to
make sure they are doing what they are supposed to do. I yield
back.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Takano. Thank you.
Ms. Brown. I took his time. I am sorry.
The Chairman. Again, you take mine, you take his. But, you
know, I do not believe anybody on this committee can say that
we have politicized anything within our purview. And I would
say that this decision to put the facility where it is now was
done under a different administration. And had it been a
Republican administration at this point we would be going after
them just like we are today. It is for the veterans of this
country, not for a political reason. I need to go ahead and go
on to----
Mr. Takano. Sir, if I could follow-up with you after the
committee----
The Chairman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Takano. Yes.
The Chairman. Ms. Radewagen, do you have any questions that
you would like to ask? Okay, thank you very much. Ms. Kuster.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wanted to ask Mr. Wise
about your examination and this comparison of the, particularly
the Army Corps and their oversight of the DoD facilities, and
whether, what recommendations you would have going forward for
the VA? Or do you have an opinion as to whether or not we
should, Congress should consider the Army Corps, because of
their expertise, because of all their experience, supervising
construction of large medical facilities at the VA going
forward?
Mr. Wise. That is a good question and an interesting
question. It sounded like from what I heard on the first panel
today that this is something that is on the table. So it
certainly seems worthy of consideration. It is not something we
have examined in any detail. But it appears that VA certainly
is looking to the Army Corps for some of its expertise in
helping it to resurrect the situation in Aurora and get it
moving again. And perhaps that could be a model. It is
something that the Deputy Secretary is certainly open to based
on his testimony. I presume he will be consulting with the
committee and others to make that determination. It does sound
like they have gotten a number of Army Corps people working in
the construction area in the OACL in the VA. So perhaps VA is
beginning to adopt some of those methods that have been used by
the Army Corps.
Ms. Kuster. That did sound encouraging, the hiring of
people with this kind of expertise and this methodology of
oversight for projects this size. And I am just wondering for
our friends in the VSO community, Mr. Kelly and Mr. Butler, do
you have an opinion, or does your organization have an opinion,
about this notion of looking into the future now, particularly
with, in relation to the reforms that had been passed, as to
whether the VA should be creating such large hub facilities at
such an expense? I am picking up on my colleague Mr. Takano's
testimony. We can all think of lots of great uses for these
billions of dollars to provide healthcare across this great
country. Do you have an opinion about this? About the focus on
these large tertiary facilities?
Mr. Kelley. Yes, ma'am. I don't think you can wholesale say
that large facilities should go by the wayside, or that we
should only use large facilities. You have to look case by
case. Large metropolitan areas are going to have to have large
hospitals that are veteran centric. But as you look around the
country there are services that are underutilized within VA and
we are building a facility and underutilizing a service just
because we need to have that service. We need to start looking
at public-private partnerships to fill those holes. The hub and
spoke method that you were talking about, having a central area
and then having areas outside of that are more convenient.--
Working with partner hospitals that can provide a service that
is just underutilized but needed in the community. There is no
need to have on staff a cardiology staff if they are doing one
or two heart surgeries a day, when across the street they are
doing 20 or 30 and they have got the staff and the expertise to
do that. Why are we spending resources on that when it could be
put somewhere else for need within that facility? So VFW is
open to looking at those public-private partnerships,
developing new ways to do that. But I cannot say never build a
large hospital again.
Ms. Kuster. Sure, yes. And I agree, we have a wonderful, at
the White River Junction, Vermont, although right on the border
so we consider it our facility in New Hampshire as well, they
have a great relationship with Dartmouth Medical School. And
that is what I am trying to, you know, not only is it
expensive, the example you gave about the cardiac surgery, it
is not even safe in some circumstances if they are not doing
the volume. So I, my time is up, but Mr. Butler, if you have
anything to add? And I am not suggesting, by the way, that we
do not build any more of these. But I just, more focus on
getting the resources where they are needed. And I come from a
rural district, it is not an urban center.
Mr. Butler. I would say, agree that you have to look at it
on a case by case basis. But the challenge for the VA is the
average age of a VA medical center. You know, a lot of the
facilities have outlived their life cycle. And so VA needs to
invest and reinvest in their medical facilities, whether it is
building a hub and spoke facility or expanding upon its other
additional resources. The one thing that the American Legion
does not support is that we do not support voucher out care. We
do not support shutting down the VA system and turning the VA
system into a voucher system. We support that the VA system is
for American veterans and the VA should maintain its system of
healthcare for our American veterans and continue to build upon
what it already has.
Ms. Kuster. Absolutely. Thank you so much. I appreciate
your service. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To Mr. Wise, when we
recently got a report back from the Office of the Inspector
General on performance issues at the El Paso VA and we got it
last month, we asked, our follow-up question to Dr. Day was
what is the, of the 128 parts of the system, which is the best
performer? And his response was I cannot single out one, but
those medical facilities that are affiliated with an academic
institution perform far better than the average VA medical
facility. So my question to you is why was the decision made to
separate Denver from a medical school, and how did that
contribute to some of the problems that you have uncovered in
your report?
Mr. Wise. To the first part of your question, I am not
exactly sure why although I believe there were some issues
about governance that the university and the VA were unable to
resolve about how it would be run. The second part was about
the contribution to the delay and overrun, right?
Mr. O'Rourke. Right.
Mr. Wise. Yes, that was definitely a factor. Because once
the original idea, of a shared facility, was off the table then
you got into a situation where you needed to go back in to do
redesign and then VA became responsible for a lot more costs
than it had expected to share at the time. VA was absorbing a
lot of standalone costs that were at that point rather
unexpected. So all this resulted in numerous change orders,
resulting in additional loss and delays.
Mr. O'Rourke. And that also happened in New Orleans, did
you say? Or did someone mention----
Mr. Wise. Yes, there was also a situation in New Orleans--
--
Mr. O'Rourke. Where it was affiliated and then the
affiliation was separated?
Mr. Wise [continuing]. Louisiana State University, LSU.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay.
Mr. Wise. It was a similar situation and partnership that
was originally intended with an academic institution, also did
not go forward. And that also contributed to some of the delays
and overruns in New Orleans.
Mr. O'Rourke. I will follow-up with the VA. I would be
really interested in understanding why they made that decision
to separate if in fact VA medical facilities affiliated with
academic institutions outperform the average. Did the GAO, did
you look at accountability for the mistakes made related to
these facilities?
Mr. Wise. Our parameters in this engagement were really to
look at what happened and to try to identify the systemic
issues that were behind it that caused it to happen, and try to
identify some recommendations that would hopefully help
mitigate it happening going forward.
Mr. O'Rourke. And I will say that I understand the scope of
your study. But one of the systemic problems that we have is a
culture that has not historically valued accountability. I am
not speaking about current leadership. I fully believe that
Secretary Gibson and Secretary McDonald and their team fully
understand this and are trying to change the culture. But I
would say that that has contributed to problems. And one of my
follow-up questions to the VA, perhaps I will submit it for the
record, is Secretary Gibson said those responsible for some of
these mistakes were removed from their positions. And I do not
know if that is a term of art, meaning that they were fired, or
that they were transitioned into some other position within the
VA. In other words, was there personal accountability for very
grievous mistakes, where you are taking resources in a zero sum
system away from potentially facilities in El Paso to pay for
facilities in Aurora, Colorado, and you have veterans in El
Paso who are not getting the service they need. That is the
urgency behind the question.
And I realize I only have a minute left. And so to follow-
upon Ms. Kuster's question for Mr. Butler and Mr. Kelly, taking
out the extremes which is, you know, continuing with the status
quo, or as you said, Mr. Butler, privatizing, voucherizing VA
medical care, let us just assume we are not going to do either
of those. After mistakes of this proportion, what would your
membership be open to in terms of a different system? In terms
of having for example what I call the Summers model, core
competencies delivered at a world class level, very accessible
out of the VA, and then perhaps non-core competencies,
diabetes, getting your teeth fixed, having something not
related to your service, is not performed at the VA but somehow
managed out of there. I do not know if you, Mr. Butler or Mr.
Kelley, could quickly comment on that?
Mr. Butler. Well I think for the American Legion our
resolution supports the VA remaining intact as a system of
healthcare for American veterans. We support that VA can refer
patients out. We supported the VACA with the provision that a
sunset provision be added into the VACA. We, support veterans
when they need to go outside the VA system to obtain their
care, then we surely understand that need and that requirement.
But our position is that the VA system is a VA system for
American veterans and that system should be maintained.
Mr. O'Rourke. Mr. Chair, could I have 20 seconds for Mr.
Kelley.
The Chairman. You may.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you.
Mr. Kelley. I think the goal is to provide care for
veterans that is conducive for them individually. We have found
under VACA, under the Choice Act, that we have done a survey of
our membership and pretty close to 60 percent of them, even
when they had a choice, stayed with VA. They wanted to wait a
little longer because that is where their continuum of care
was. So we need to look at all these factors when we start
making decisions. Yes, there are areas where veterans are, that
they are not being served properly by VA. And opening up other
opportunities outside of VA, whether it is short term or long
term, need to be looked at. Specialty services that, you said
diabetes care, may be an area where it is more suitable for
that to be contracted out in certain areas. But we cannot,
again, have one solution to be the fix. We need to look at
every opportunity to improve the delivery of care for veterans.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. All right, everybody. Look outside, it is
snowing. Heavily. Even for a Coloradan. Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you. I guess I am stuck here so I can just
go ahead and ask my questions now. Mr. Butler, I have a
question for you. I think my position is closer to yours. But
we do know that there are some financial restraints that we
have. I guess my question is in some areas, rural areas, not
addressing healthcare but cemetery. In some areas, I do not
know whether it makes sense to build a full-fledged cemetery.
Maybe we could do something, partner with the local community
to expand it existing cemeteries. And maybe in some rural areas
addressing healthcare we could, do some partnerships in order
to provide, a wing in a hospital for veterans. I mean, there is
no one answer. What would you all be open to?
Mr. Butler. Well I think your, under your existing
authorities they allow for a lot of those opportunities, what
you just mentioned. So under the current authority for
healthcare you have your fee basis authority, you have the new
legislation that was introduced through VACA, you have also
PC3. The American Legion supports all of those options. So I
would agree that it is not one option, that fixes everything.
You have to look at all of the available opportunities and
determine what is best for American veterans. And that is the
key. What is best for American veterans, and to ensure that
their needs are being taken care of and in a system that is
designed for veterans. And if VA refers those veterans outside
because they don't have the resources or service to provide
that care then that is fine as long as VA has the appropriate
funding to meet the needs of veterans.
Ms. Brown. And Mr. Kelley.
Mr. Kelley. I am with Mr. Butler on this in that there is
no cookie cutter solution. Veterans in rural Montana need to be
thought of differently than in downtown Chicago. And those
veterans' expectations of delivery of care are different as
well. So we need to take that into account. I think there is an
understanding if you live in a rural remote area that life is a
little tougher, and it is going to be a little tougher for you
to get that care and there is some acceptance of that. But we
need to look at ways to prevent in the middle of a snowstorm
allowing people, or insisting on people, driving several
hundred miles for just follow-up care who could be seen in a
community when, and as Mr. Butler said, those authorities are
there. We need to exercise them. We need to, we need to not
make that the exception in some cases and make it the rule
until we have suitable solutions in place.
Ms. Brown. Well you know, it was amazing because I am
pretty old school that a lot of the veterans like the
telemedicine, wherein they can do a lot from home and then if
they need to come, they come in. What is your opinion of
telemedicine?
Mr. Kelley. Absolutely. We have veterans who swear by it,
just as you said. And even within a community outpatient
clinic, I will use myself as an example. I went in for my
annual physical. My primary care saw a mole on my back that she
didn't like. She said, do you have a few minutes? Let's have
somebody take a picture of it, we'll send it up to Baltimore.
They will look at it and if you need to be seen, you will be
seen. I did not have to go to Baltimore for a second
appointment. That was sent up there. Within a few days they
came back and said, no, it's okay. So it saved me a trip. It
saved VA resources. And quality healthcare was served. So we
need to look at all avenues again.
Ms. Brown. Mr. Butler.
Mr. Butler. I would agree. I was at a VA hospital in
Georgia where they had a virtual lab, wherein veterans were
being treated in their OR and--or, yes, not OR, but in their
ICU. And the doctor was somewhere else at another place
monitoring the veterans. So there are many advances in modern
medicine that we need to bring all together to ensure that all
of the advanced technologies out there that are made available
are being used to treat our American veterans.
Ms. Brown. And Mr. Wise, in closing thank you for your
testimony. As I said, it is many issues. For example, I know a
lot more about the New Orleans situation then I do Denver. I
have been there several times. I was very instrumental in
making sure that that particular New Orleans project moved
forward because the hospital there was wiped out completely by
Katrina.
Mr. Wise. Right.
Ms. Brown. And so, you know, in visiting the area I knew it
was not any other facilities nowhere near for the veterans to
have the services that they needed. So it was going to be a
joint between them and the universities. Part of the problem
was the Governor, the Mayor, I mean, it was a mess. So I am
happy that it is close to ending, coming to be open. And maybe
we can find exactly when it is going to be open. Not you, I
know. But the Secretary.
Mr. Wise. Okay.
Ms. Brown. Yes. Thank you, though.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Brown. I appreciate
the good work and the comments. I have one follow-up question.
Mr. Wise, I think in your written testimony you stated,
actually it was your updated report of 2015, you reached out to
VA and asked them for an estimated cost, final cost for the
Orlando project and you were not given that cost estimate. At
least, that is what I have been----
Mr. Wise. I think that was for the Denver project, that
reference, no? I believe?
The Chairman. It is the Denver project?
Mr. Wise. That is the one we could not get final, well the
same as what Mr. Gibson said this morning----
The Chairman. Yes, I just was asking for Ms. Brown's
hospital. I was under the impression that it was the Orlando
project, but I apologize. And with that, the one thing I think
we can all agree, the way healthcare is delivered today is much
different than it was delivered years ago. The idea of building
massive hospitals at over $1 billion apiece is not a
sustainable model. We have to look at other ways and options.
Nobody on this committee is talking about dismantling the VA
when we talk about providing choice to people on their
healthcare. And I believe that we all want to work together to
make sure that the veterans get the healthcare that they have
earned, when they need it, where they need it, and that what
they get is quality healthcare. So with that, we will adjourn.
[Whereupon, at 1:15 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

Prepared Statement of Jeff Miller, Chairman

Good Morning. This hearing will come to order.
I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing titled,
``Building a Better VA: Assessing Ongoing Major Construction Management
Problems Within the Department.''
The purpose of this hearing is to address continued problems
occurring in VA's persistent construction delays and cost overruns
involving its construction of the Replacement Aurora, Colorado VA
Medical Center. The VA has been found by the Civilian Board of Contract
Appeals (CBCA) to have breached its contract with its prime contractor
on this project and the facility could eventually cost as much as $1.4
billion to complete.
This Committee has held numerous hearings in the last few years
involving VA's inadequate management of its construction projects, each
of those hearings being based on considerable evidence. ``We have come
to a point in VA's major construction program where the administrative
structure is an obstacle that is not effectively supporting the
mission. As a result, our veterans are the ones who are left without
services and our taxpayers are the ones who are left holding the check
or writing a new one.'' That was part of my opening statement during
our March 27, 2012, hearing on VA major construction, but it seems
nothing has changed nearly three years later, despite warnings and
corrective suggestions being presented from inside and outside the
Department.
Based on the lengthy Committee investigations that gave rise to
these hearings, the Committee asked the GAO to audit VA major
construction projects. Their report, issued in April 2013, found that
on average, the hospital construction projects reviewed were about
three years late and $366 million over budget. Every time we have asked
VA about those results, it has argued that it is not delayed or over
budget based on its own accounting.
Further, when we held a hearing on the Aurora VAMC construction
project in April 2014, the tenor of VA responses was that it was the
contractor's fault that the project was not completed and that the
project was still operating within its budget. I have a feeling that
the VA will not be able to cling to those illusions any longer.
On December 9, 2014, the CBCA found that the VA materially breached
its contract with its prime contractor on the Aurora VAMC construction
project, Kiewit [Kee-Wit]-Turner (K-T). It found that VA did not
provide a design that could be built within its stated budget, and it
was also the VA's fault to the point that the CBCA said K-T would be
well within its rights to simply walk off the job. And that is exactly
what it did.
Now, VA is left scrambling to make K-T whole enough to get back to
work. VA may even have to come back to Congress to ask for perhaps up
to 600 million more taxpayer dollars to fix problems the Committee has
brought to light year after year only to be ignored by the VA.
I visited the Aurora construction site Monday with Congressman
Coffman to see again in-person what is taking so long and why this
project has been a veritable money pit for the last several years. Once
completed, this facility will be well-equipped to provide the best
possible healthcare available, which is exactly what the veterans
served by every VA facility deserve. It is long past time for these
projects, marred by bureaucratic ineptitude, to be complete. I look
forward to hearing from the VA, and the other witnesses here today, on
how we can correct the abysmal state VA's major construction program
has been in for years.
With that, I now yield to Ranking Member Brown for any opening
remarks she may have.

Prepared Statement of Corrine Brown, Ranking Member

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing today. From day
one, I have been a member of this Committee, and I am pleased, after 22
years, to be the Ranking Democrat. I look forward to working with you
and all the other members to help our nation's veterans.
We all agree that providing veterans timely, quality healthcare in
a safe environment is a focus of this Committee. The VA provides the
best care and treatment for veterans in the world and we need to make
sure that continues.
One critical element of this focus is the manner in which VA
provides veterans access to healthcare.
For many years, VA has structured itself around a ``hub-and-spoke''
system where clinics and other smaller facilities feed into large
medical centers.
One of the discussions this Committee must begin to have is whether
this structure is the best structure for VA healthcare looking into the
future and again, looking down the road, what steps do we begin to take
to ensure that veterans have reasonable access to the healthcare they
need.
This Committee has authorized, and Congress has appropriated,
billions of dollars for VA construction programs over the past decade.
The question we must ask ourselves is are we getting what we paid for,
and has access improved for our veterans.
We must ask ourselves what must be done to make the VA construction
program function as we intend it to. What must we do to make sure that
the facilities we are building today do not come in over budget and
late. If we do not do this we run the risk of building facilities that
may already be obsolete when the doors are open and are merely
expensive memorials and little else.
For nearly two decades the VA was out of the major facility
business. By not building any major medical centers in the 20 years
preceding authorization of the Las Vegas, Orlando, Denver and New
Orleans Medical Centers, has the VA lost the ability to manage a
construction portfolio? Do we need to expect better management and more
effective processes? What are the barriers currently in place that make
it difficult for VA to come in on time and within budget? Should we
look outside the VA for expertise?
From my personal experience with the years of delay in Orlando, and
the issues in Denver, it seems the VA continues to struggle with
construction planning and execution. What we need is to work together
with the stakeholders to come up with a viable solution.
One possible solution is for the VA to work closer with the private
sector and establish relationships with hospitals. One idea might be
that VA use a ward in an existing hospital, bring it up to VA standards
and then have a presence in that community. Facilities, resources and
personnel could be shared, which would reduce costs for everyone
involved and improve access.
Mr. Chairman, I am looking forward to hearing from the VA not only
what they are going to do to address past problems and delays in the
construction process, but other ideas on how they can ensure these
problems actually get fixed and are not repeated in the future.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and I yield back my time.

Prepared Statement of Mr. Sloan D. Gibson

Good morning, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee. I am here
this morning to update the Committee on the status of the construction
of the replacement medical center in Denver. Joining me today is Mr.
Dennis Milsten, Director for the VA Construction and Facilities
Management Office of Operations.
The Department's main priority regarding the Denver project is to
complete this facility without further delay, and to do that while
delivering the best possible value to taxpayers given the difficult
circumstances that have occurred. Our commitment to completing this
project intended to serve 390,000+ Colorado Veterans and their families
has never wavered, and current VA medical facilities and programs
continue to ensure that no Veteran or their families goes unserved.
We are working aggressively to rebuild trust, improve service
delivery, and pursue longer-term excellence and reform. This includes
initiatives like My VA, which involves building a world-class,
customer-focused, Veteran-centered organization, and strengthening the
efficiency and effectiveness of our array of support services.
Completion of the Denver replacement medical facility is important
to improving access to care and services, and I again apologize for the
delays that have occurred. Let me review where we are on this project.
The Department was notified on December 9, 2014, of the decision by
the Civilian Board of Contract Appeals in favor of the construction
contractor, Kiewit-Turner, thus allowing it the option to stop work. VA
immediately contacted the contractor to determine a course of action to
continue construction to complete the facility. I personally met with
Kiewit-Turner leadership to forge a way ahead that would avoid the
delay and disproportionate costs of stopping and re-starting
construction activity immediately ahead of the holiday season.
VA reached an interim agreement on December 17, 2014, that was
subsequently signed on December 22, 2014. As part of the interim
contract, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) is on site to
provide technical and management advice. This will also allow USACE the
time to review the specifics of the project and formulate the final
plans to negotiate and administer a long-term agreement for
construction completion.
We have undertaken a comprehensive review of VA's major
construction program and have taken numerous actions to strengthen and
improve execution of our on-going major construction projects. With the
acceptance and closure of the April 13, 2013, Government Accountability
Office report recommendations and the implementation of the
Construction Review Council recommendations, VA has significantly
changed the way it conducts business, but more work remains to be done.
To help ensure that previous challenges are not repeated and to
lead improvements in the management and execution of our capital asset
program as we move forward, we will continue to focus on these lessons
learned:

Integrated master planning to ensure that the planned
acquisition closes the identified gaps in service and corrects
facility deficiencies.

Requiring major medical construction projects to
achieve at least 35 percent design prior to cost and schedule
information being published and construction funds requested.

Implementing a deliberate requirements control
process, where major acquisition milestones have been
identified to review scope and cost changes based on the
approved budget and scope.

Institutionalizing a Project Review Board (PRB)--VA's
Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction worked with
USACE to establish a PRB for VA that is similar to the
structure at the USACE District Offices. The PRB regularly
provides management with metrics and insight to indicate if/
when the project requires executive input or guidance.

Using a Project Management Plan--outlines for
accomplishing the acquisition from planning to activation to
ensure clear communication throughout the project.

Establishment of VA Activation Office Ensures the
integration of the facility activation into the construction
process for timely facility openings.

Conducting pre-construction reviews--Major
construction projects must undergo a ``constructability''
review by a private construction management firm to review
design and engineering factors that facilitate ease of
construction and ensure project value.

Integrating Medical Equipment Planners into the
construction project teams--Each major construction project
will employ medical equipment planners on the project team from
concept design through activation.

These improvements are being applied to the 53 on-going major
construction projects and our other major medical center construction
projects, including the Orlando replacement facility, where
construction is scheduled to be completed at the end of February, and
our New Orleans replacement facility, which is currently on schedule,
and is anticipated to be completed in the fall of 2016.
In the past five years, VA has delivered 75 major construction
projects valued at over $3 billion that include the new medical center
complex in Las Vegas; cemeteries; polytrauma rehabilitation centers;
spinal cord injury centers; a blind rehabilitation center; and
community living centers. This is not to diminish our concerns over the
mistakes that led to the current situation on the Denver project, but
only to remind that we have successfully managed numerous projects
through our major construction program. VA takes full responsibility
for the situation in Denver and we will continue to review our major
construction program and the details of this project to improve our
performance. In addition, as identified in section 201 of the Veterans'
Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of 2014, VA's capital management
program will undergo an independent assessment, which will be provided
to you within 60 days of its conclusion.
In closing, each day, VA is moving toward its goal of improving and
streamlining our processes to increase access to our Veterans and their
families. I am personally committed to completing the Denver project
without further delay and to do that while delivering the best possible
value to taxpayers given the difficult circumstances that have
occurred. Bottom line: We want to do what is right for Colorado
Veterans and to get the Denver medical facility back on track in the
most effective and cost efficient way.
This committee has been a strong and supportive advocate for
Veterans' healthcare, and VA will continue its efforts to be
transparent about the construction of the Denver replacement facility.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the Committee today. My colleague and I
would be pleased to respond to questions from you and Members of the
Committee.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T7992.027

Prepared Statement of Raymond C. Kelley

Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member and Members of the Committee:
On behalf of the men and women of the Veterans of Foreign Wars of
the United States (VFW) and our Auxiliaries, I would like to thank you
for the opportunity to testify today regarding the Department of
Veterans Affairs' (VA) management of major construction projects.
Over the past few years it has become very apparent that VA's
ability to control costs and deliver major construction projects on
time is and should be viewed as a great concern. Veterans are not being
served when construction projects take months or years longer than
expected to complete and the price tags inflate as time drags on.
Last year, the House passed legislation that would improve VA's
major medical facility construction process. These improvements
include: using medical equipment planners, developing and using a
project management plan, peer reviewing all projects, creating a
change-order metric, and using a design-build process when possible.
VA claims they have started using medical equipment planners. This
practice will assist in reducing scheduling delays and cost overruns.
To ensure VA's construction process can be as efficient as possible, it
is important the other provisions are enacted.
VA's lack of standardized project management protocol has led to
poor communication within VA and between VA and the general contractor
has also led to delays and cost over-runs. There have been cases
identified where separate VA officials have provided contradictory
orders to the general contractor, where one VA employee authorized the
continuation or start of a new phase of building, while another VA
employee gave the order not to continue or start a particular phase.
This lack of VA project management coordination led to a portion of the
Orlando, Florida facility to be built then removed.
By developing and using a project management plan, all parities at
the onset of the project will have a clear understanding of the roles
and authorities of each member of the project team. Included in the
plan will be clear guidance on communication, staffing, cost and
budget, as well as change-order management.
Construction peer excellence reviews are an important aspect of
maintaining a high level of construction quality and efficiency. When
used, these review teams are made up of experts in construction
management who travel to project sites to evaluate the performance of
the project team. These meetings provide important feedback--a separate
set of eyes--on the project management plan to ensure a plan is in
place to make the project come in on time and on budget.
VA has historically relied on the design-bid-build project delivery
system when entering into contracts to build major medical facility
projects. Sixty percent of current VA major medical facility projects
use design-bid-build. With this model, an architect is selected to
design a facility, the design documents are used to secure a bid, and
then the successful contract bid holder builds the facility.
Design-bid-build projects often encounter disputes between the
costumer--VA in this case--and the construction contractor. Because
these contracts are generally firm-fixed-price, based on the completed
design, the construction contractor is usually responsible for cost
overruns, unless VA and the contractor agree on any needed or proposed
changes that occur with a change of scope, unforeseen site condition
changes or design errors. VA and the contractor negotiate these changes
through change orders. This process can become adversarial, because
neither party wants to absorb the cost associated with the change, and
each change order can add months to the project completion date.
A design-build project teams the architectural/engineering company
and the construction contractor under one contract. This method can
save VA up to six months of time by putting the design phase and the
construction performance metric together. Placing the architect as the
lead from start to finish, and having the prime contractor work side-
by-side with the architect, allows the architect to be an advocate for
VA. Also, the architect and the prime contractor can work together
early on in the design phase to reduce the number of design errors, and
it also allows them to identify and modify the building plans
throughout the project.
While these initiatives will work to improve future projects, the
VFW believes a look back at all currently funded major construction
projects should take place to see what steps may be needed to finish
the nearly 50 partially funded but not completed major Veterans Health
Administration (VHA) construction projects.
VA's FY 2015 Budget Submission shows there was more than $6 billion
available for 49 VHA projects through the end of FY 2013. What the
submission does not show is why some projects were initially funded
years ago, but little to no progress has been made to complete them.
Many of these projects have safety implications or provide specific
services for spinal cord injuries and need to be set on a course that
will bring these projects to completion.
VA's Strategic Capital Investment Plan (SCIP) has been a great tool
in identifying gaps access, utilization and safety, but if a clear plan
is not in place to close these gaps, delays in care, safety risks and
the increased cost to close these gaps will continue.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. I will be happy to
answer any questions you or the Committee members may have.

Information Required by Rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives

Pursuant to rule XI2(g)(4) of the House of Representatives, VFW has
not received any federal grants in Fiscal Year 2014, nor has it
received any federal grants in the two previous Fiscal Years.
The VFW has not received payments or contracts from any foreign
governments in the current year or preceding two calendar years.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
