- CHOICE CONSOLIDATION: ASSESSING VA'S PLAN TO IMPROVE CARE IN THE COMMUNITY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHOICE CONSOLIDATION: ASSESSING VA'S PLAN TO IMPROVE CARE IN THE
COMMUNITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-45

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

___________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
24-363                       WASHINGTON : 2017
_________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

JEFF MILLER, Florida, Chairman

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               CORRINE BROWN, Florida, Ranking
GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-         Minority Member
Chairman                         MARK TAKANO, California
DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee              JULIA BROWNLEY, California
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               DINA TITUS, Nevada
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                RAUL RUIZ, California
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             KATHLEEN RICE, New York
RALPH ABRAHAM, Louisiana             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
LEE ZELDIN, New York                 JERRY McNERNEY, California
RYAN COSTELLO, Pennsylvania
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American
Samoa
MIKE BOST, Illinois
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Don Phillips, Democratic Staff Director

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C O N T E N T S

----------

Wednesday, November 18, 2015

Page

Choice Consolidation: Assessing VA's Plan To Improve Care In The
Community......................................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Jeff Miller, Chairman............................................     1
Prepared Statement...........................................    38
Mark Takano, Acting Ranking Member...............................     2

WITNESS

Honorable Sloan Gibson, Deputy Secretary, U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs...............................................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    39

Accompanied by:

Honorable David J. Shulkin M.D., Under Secretary For Health,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Baligh Yehia M.D., Assistant Deputy Under Secretary For
Health For Community Care, Veterans Health
Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Joe Dalpiaz, Network Director, Heart Of Texas Health Care
Network (Visn 17), Veterans Health Administration, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs

CHOICE CONSOLIDATION: ASSESSING VA'S PLAN TO IMPROVE CARE IN THE
COMMUNITY

----------

Wednesday, November 18, 2015

Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U. S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:30 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jeff Miller
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Miller, Lamborn, Roe, Benishek,
Huelskamp, Coffman, Wenstrup, Walorski, Abraham, Costello,
Bost, Brown, Takano, Brownley, Titus, Ruiz, Kuster, O'Rourke,
Walz, and McNerney.

OPENING STATEMENT OF CHAIRMAN MILLER

The Chairman. The Committee will come to order. And I
appreciate everybody joining us for today's oversight hearing
entitled ``Choice Consolidation: Assessing VA's Plan To Improve
Care in the Community. In late July, we authorized the
Department of Veterans Affairs to use a substantial portion of
the Choice Program funds to cover a budget shortfall. And, in
turn, VA was required to submit a plan to the Committee
detailing how they were going to consolidate and improve the
many fractured programs and authorities that the Department
currently uses to refer veterans to non-VA providers.
So we are here this morning so that VA can present this
plan to the Committee, and together, we can measure its merits
and challenges. Non-VA care, or care in the community, as VA
now calls it, is an increasingly vital component of the health
care system of the Department of Veterans' Affairs. Each month,
veterans, survivors, and certain dependents of veterans receive
approximately 1 million appointments, more than 21 percent of
all of the appointments that VA provides from doctors and
nurses and other health care professionals in community
hospitals and clinics outside of the walls of the Department of
Veterans Affairs. Allowing veterans to see these providers is
vital to ensuring timely and convenient access to care.
And I suspect that as the veteran population continues to
grow in both age and in numbers, and as the health care
landscape continues to shift, the need for non-VA providers to
supplement--and note I said supplement, not supplant--the care
that VA provides in-house will only continue to grow. I think
the success of VA's Care in the Community Program is hampered
by inconsistent and competing eligibility requirements,
business processes, and reimbursement rates across the seven
methods that they currently use to refer veterans to outside
providers. And as a result, non-VA care, as we know it today,
has become unmanageable and unsustainable.
The success of the VA health care system over the next
several years will depend, in large part, on VA's ability to
consolidate these seven desperate methods to a single
coordinated program that is easy for veterans and community
providers to understand and buy into and easy for employees to
administer and to manage. And certainly, this is no easy task.
It is going to require us to have some difficult conversations
about the purpose of the VA health care system and what it
should and feasibly can achieve. It is also going to require us
to examine VA's massive physical footprint, and make decisions
about the future of the facilities that once served great
purposes, but may no longer be benefiting the veterans as they
should be.
The plan that the Department submitted in late October to
accomplish non-VA care consolidation and take the first steps
towards building the VA health care system of tomorrow offers a
promising, but really kind of a fuzzy definition or vision of
the future. And so hopefully, we will be able to dialogue with
the VA and bring things into a little more clearer perspective
so that we can figure out where VA needs to go next.
I am hopeful that the testimony and the responses to our
questions that we will hear this morning will shed some much-
needed light on how VA intends to transform the collection of
non-VA programs and authorities that we have today in the
coordinated system of care that our veterans have earned. I am
grateful to the Deputy Secretary, The Under Secretary for
Health, and the two leaders of VA's consolidation efforts for
being here this morning to present the Department's proposal. I
now recognize the Acting Ranking Member this morning, Mr.
Takano, for an opening statement.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Miller appears in the
Appendix]

OPENING STATEMENT OF MARK TAKANO

Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for calling this
hearing today. Access to safe, quality health care is a
priority for this Committee, and one that veterans who have
served expect. We owe them no less. Today, we are going to hear
from the VA about their plan to improve access to care.
Congress mandated this plan in Public Law 114-41, the Surface
Transportation and Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act
of 2015. About 2 weeks ago, along with the other three corners,
the Ranking Member received a strategic-level briefing from VA
on this plan. After listening to what VA had to say, she is
generally in agreement with how VA is moving forward. During
this briefing, VA told her that without Congressional support,
they could not accomplish all of the tasks set forth in the
plan.
Today, I am fully prepared to be in a listening mode. I do,
however, have some concerns with the price tag that this plan
comes with, and the ability of the VA to implement this plan
throughout the agency.
As we all know, VA does not have a great track record when
it comes to implementation. The policies are in place, but VA
has had difficulty in the past with compliance as many reports
have revealed. VA has told us that the implementation of this
plan will be a multi-year process, and will require an
additional investment of money. I hope today, or in the very
near future, we get to hear about the cost. Another concern is
this plan seems to be relying, in part, on an IT structure that
actually works. Congress has been very generous to the VA in
the past, investing millions of dollars in IT solutions that
don't seem to do what they are supposed to do. I do not want to
see a repeat of these failures.
Mr. Chairman, while I recognize that VA cannot do it all by
themselves, especially in rural communities, I want to
reemphasize that privatizing the VA is not an option. I do
believe that VA, with this plan, is headed in the right
direction for providing more and better access to our veterans.
I believe that we as a Committee need to listen today, and if
what we hear makes sense, then hold them to this course that
they have set out to follow to ensure that the veterans of
today and of the future are assured quality, safe health care,
wherever they choose to live. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, again,
for holding these hearings. And I yield back the balance of my
time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Takano. Members, we
are joined this morning by the Deputy Secretary, the Honorable
Sloan Gibson. With him today is the Honorable Dr. David
Shulkin, Under Secretary for Health; Dr. Baligh Yehia, who is
the Assistant Deputy Under Secretary for Health and Community
Care; and Mr. Joe Dalpiaz, VISN 17 network director. Thank you.
It was great to visit with you guys the other morning when we
had breakfast. Thank you very much for what you do. And Sloan,
you are recognized for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SLOAN GIBSON

Mr. Gibson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you noted, David, I
would further elaborate, has been with VA now for about 4
months. He comes to us from a career in the private sector,
managing large health care organization. Baligh has been with
us for about 18 months, extensive years of clinical experience,
and continues to see patients in the VA system. And Joe has
been with VA for over 30 years, much of it as a medical center
director. And he has spent the last number of months as a co-
lead working with Baligh on this report.
Mr. Chairman, at the Committee's May 13 Choice Program
hearing, I discussed our need to consolidate our community care
programs. I was gratified to hear you say, and I quote, ``We
must all prepare for the Choice Program of tomorrow, one that
brings the universe of non-VA care together under one umbrella,
so that the care of our veterans that they need to receive is
more efficient and effective regardless of where it takes
place,'' a statement that is echoed, again, in your opening
remarks today.
We are determined to seize this opportunity and make the
most of it. And we are grateful to the Committee for responding
so positively to our indicated need for consolidation. VA is
already in the midst of an enterprise-wide transformation
called MyVA, which will modernize VA's culture, processes, and
capabilities. Our proposal to consolidate community care is
definitely a part of that effort. Care in the community has
been and will always be a vital component of health care for
veterans, when they live too far from a VA facility, when they
need care that is only available in the community, and when
increasing demand for VA care exceeds existing capacity as we
have seen in recent years.
We are referring veterans to community care more than ever
before. But as you noted in your opening statement, Mr.
Chairman, we are saddled with a confusing array of programs,
authorities, and mechanisms that greatly complicate the task of
ensuring veterans getting the care that they need when and how
they need it. Those include Project Arch, PC3, Choice, two
different plans for emergency care, affiliates with other
Federal agencies and academic partners, and then numerous
individual authorities. Each of these has its own requirements,
different eligibility rules, reimbursement rates, different
methods of payment, and different funding routes.
It is all too complicated for veterans, for providers in
the communities, and for VA staff. Consolidation will improve
access and make the process easier for veterans to use.
Veterans will have better access to the best care outside VA.
Providers will be encouraged to participate and provide higher
quality care. And VA employees will be able to serve both
better, while also being good stewards of taxpayer resources.
Our report is based on input from veterans, the independent
assessment, veteran service organizations, VA employees,
Federal stakeholders, and best practices in the private sector.
We also appreciate the many discussions that we have had with
the Committee staff. The report focuses on five functional
areas: Veteran eligibility, a single set of eligibility
criteria based on distance from a VA provider, wait time for VA
care, and availability of services at VA with expanded access
to emergency and urgent care.
Second, ease of access. Streamlined business rules to speed
up and simplify the referral and authorization process.
Third, high-performing networks. Partnering with Federal,
academic, and community providers to offer a tiered provider
network, which will enable VA to better manage supply and
demand and monitor health care quality and utilization.
Fourth, better coordination of care is a critical item,
making health information easier to exchange and helping
veterans make the best choices among community care providers.
And, lastly, prompt provider payment. Improving billing claims
and reimbursement processes to allow auto adjudication of most
claims and faster, more accurate payments. These efforts won't
just improve the way we do community care, they will make
community care a part of the fabric of VA care, making VA a
truly integrated health care system. Getting there will take
time.
But even as we work towards the longer-term solution, we
are working to improve the veteran's experience of care in the
near term. We have already expanded the provider base by
including providers participating in Medicaid. We have
eliminated enrollment date and the combat eligibility
indicators as factors limiting choice eligibility. We have
defined additional services as qualifying for exceptions to the
40-mile rule, and we have added urgent consult scheduling to
get veterans seen in 2 business days when it is necessary.
In the coming months, we expect to accomplish a number of
other close-in objectives: A streamlined referral and
authorization process; standardization of our partnerships with
DoD and our academic affiliates; critical make-versus-buy
decisions on information technology and contractor support; and
successful application of MyVA customer service systems to
community care coordination. These objectives will be the work
of an enterprise-level community care team, dedicated full-time
to improving and consolidating community care, and led by a new
Deputy Under Secretary of Health for Community Care.
We are eager to move forward with consolidation, but it
must be a collaborative effort with Congress. The
consolidation, like many of the improvements we have already
made, is only possible with your support. We need Congress to
provide the necessary legislation to support change and the
required funding and resources to implement and execute the
consolidation program.
I know that costs are an issue. But the critical cost right
now, I believe, for our focus, is the $421 million we expect to
spend on systems redesign and business solutions in fiscal year
2016. Other costs will come later as we tackle other aspects of
consolidation, such as expanding emergency and urgent care. But
our initial investment and one-time improvement to systems and
solutions will enable us to exercise more control over the
veteran's community care experience.
We detailed our specific legislative proposals in the
report. We have briefed their structure to your personal
staffs. And we are happy to work with any Member on these
issues. Thank you for the support that you have already shown.
We look forward to working with you to fully integrate care in
the community into the VA health care system.

[The prepared statement of Sloan Gibson appears in the
Appendix]

The Chairman. Thank you very much. You talked about needing
legislation to be able to do some of the things you need to do.
What things can you do without legislation? And talk to me
about the things you have already done.
Mr. Gibson. I would like to ask Dr. Yehia to respond.
Dr. Yehia. Sure. Thank you very much. That is a great
question. There are definitely some things that would require
some legislative approval. But we are moving out today to do
things that are within VA's control. And we call these quick
hits. These are things that we hope to get accomplished in the
next couple months. And these include things such as
streamlining the referral and authorization process. Right now,
it is very complicated to send someone out into care in the
community. There is a number of steps that our employees have
to go through and veterans have to go through. Those are some
things that we can lean up and make it better.
We want to really build on our core network, which is
described in the plan by standardizing sharing agreements with
our DoD partners and our academic affiliates. Right now, every
single individual VA medical center and their partner has a
different agreement. We want to move towards a standard
template that can actually start to tackle quality and specific
issues. We want to leverage some of the MyVA work that is going
on as it relates to customer service and start embedding that
into community care. And as the Deputy alluded to, we want to
carry out some critical make-buy decisions to determine if we
need to purchase specific programs or solutions, or we need to
outsource them to the private sector. And then during this
time, also we want to create, really the implementation plan,
where you create a timeline of the next steps and milestones
that we would have to meet to accomplish the plan. So those are
some of the things that we hope to do in the near term.
The Chairman. Sloan, can you talk about, under the new
Veterans Choice Program, whether or not you will use a third-
party administrator to manage the non-VA care networks? Or are
you wanting to bring that in-house?
Mr. Gibson. As Baligh alluded to, there are a series of
functions that have to be performed, creating the provider
network, managing the claims process, including claims payment,
some of the customer service dimensions like scheduling. So
there are a whole series of functions. And what we are
committed to do is in each one of those cases, to make a very
deliberate make-versus-buy decision, the only two criteria
being what is best for veterans and what allows us to be the
best steward we can of taxpayer resources. And I would tell
you, the one you have just noted is one of those where we will
make that make-versus-buy decision and do what we believe is
right for veterans and right for taxpayers.
The Chairman. Because the two people that are already
working within the program have already set up networks. And I
am just trying to figure out is it a duplication to go back and
bring more folks in-house? I am glad to hear that you are going
to look at that very closely.
Let me also ask you about the change to the 40-mile issue.
In the request or the report, you talk about changing the 40-
mile from a primary care provider. Why not allow veterans--I
mean, because if somebody needs cardiac care or some other type
of specialty care and there is not a provider within 40 miles,
they are being hampered from getting care closer to home. And
that is, I think, the focus that we are all trying to make, is
to allow the veteran to get the care closer to where they live.
Dr. Shulkin. Mr. Chairman, certainly we understand that
point. And I do think that you are correct, that providing
services closer to where veterans reside and making it more
convenient is what we want to do. That really will end up being
a choice that we are going to come back and need your help
with, because that would require significant new resources to
be able to fund that type of access delivery. So if that is
something that we were provided the resources with, we would
absolutely work to provide that type of service.
Mr. Gibson. I would also add, if I may, that the authority
you have recently given us to expand the aperture of undue
burden really gives us some flexibility today, the authority
today to make some of those decisions at the margin where, for
example, cardiac care, where a veteran ought not to be
traveling 100 or 150 miles for care. We can get that care in
the community under Choice now.
The Chairman. I think it is interesting that every time we
talk about changing or improving our program, especially when
you have two dual programs that are running side by side, the
VA and the non-VA care, you are always adding additional money
and not taking any savings over on the VA side. I know how CBO
scores. But we need to be looking at savings. In the next round
of questions, I do want to talk a little bit about that issue.
But the one last question I have for you, Sloan, is why is
there such a discrepancy with the access-to-care numbers, the
wait time that we currently see in the community when we talk
with our veterans and those that VA is reporting out?
Mr. Gibson. I think what you hear--I will tell you, I think
VA is delivering great timely access to care hundreds of
thousands of times every single day. Where we fall down is in
that 5 or 10 percent at the margin that aren't receiving timely
access to care. I have noted that over the last year and a half
or so, the number of veterans waiting over 30 days has gone
from about 300,000 now to about 550,000, because we have got
more veterans coming to us for more care. And those are the
veterans that are going to be the most vocal.
Having said all of that, we complete appointments, mental
health in about 3 days, primary care in about 4 days, and
specialty care in about 6 days. That is the average. So we are
providing a lot of timely access to good care. It is just we
are not able to do that consistently in every single instance.
The Chairman. So you are testifying to this Committee that
if a veteran calls and needs primary care, that that veteran
will get it within 4 days?
Mr. Gibson. I am telling you what the data tells us is that
completed appointments for primary care, on average, are about
4 days. I have no doubt, I know that there are instances out
there where veterans have been waiting a month or 2 months or 3
months to get primary care. I know that. And that is the 5 or
10 percent that I am referring to that we have got to be able
to address. But the challenge we run into is as we improve
access to care, more veterans come to us for care.
We completed 7 million more appointments over that 1-year
period of time after May or June last year, which should have
been more than enough to absorb that 300,000 we couldn't see
timely. What happened in the meantime is more veterans came to
us.
The Chairman. Do you count emergency room visits as an
appointment?
Mr. Gibson. Emergency room visits are not counted in those
totals. They are not.
The Chairman. That is not what our staff was briefed. Wait.
Wait. We are going to have a--this is what our staff was
briefed on, and if I am incorrect, let me know, that 20 percent
of the appointments are emergency room visits.
Mr. Gibson. No.
The Chairman. And we are being told, what staff was being
told--
Mr. Gibson. No. David?
Dr. Shulkin. Twenty percent of our visits are same-day
access, which means not the emergency room, but they walk in to
primary care, into their physician appointments, or walk-in
appointments. Urgent care can also be considered a same-day
access issue.
The Chairman. Okay. That is emergency care.
Mr. Gibson. Not emergency room.
The Chairman. I am sorry, Sloan, do what? Sloan is
answering and I can't tell you what you just said.
Mr. Gibson. Urgent care would count, but not emergency room
care.
The Chairman. Not emergency room care.
Mr. Gibson. Correct.
The Chairman. That is not, again, that is not what staff
was briefed. We will go back and we will double-check.
Mr. Gibson. Good. And we will do the same.
The Chairman. If you set a veteran's appointment at 21
days, and you hit that appointment at 21 days, does that
appointment count as a wait of 21 days or zero?
Mr. Gibson. It depends on when the clinically indicated
date was or when the date the veteran wanted to be seen. If the
veteran said I want to be seen in 21 days, then there is zero
wait time. If the clinically indicated date, the doctor says I
want to see you back in 3 weeks and we schedule it in 21 days,
there is no wait time.
The Chairman. So you are saying that if a veteran calls and
says I want to be seen today, and you say I can't see you
today, but I can see you in 3 weeks--
Mr. Gibson. Then that is 21 days wait time.
The Chairman [continued]. Okay. That is the way it is
counted. Okay.
Mr. Gibson. Yes. Absolutely.
The Chairman. Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One of my main
concerns is how we streamline and improve the flow of
information between the VA and community providers, whether
that is sharing the medical records or improving the billing
process. I see that in phase 2 of the plan, the VA expects to
enable medical record sharing between VA and community
providers. Can you go into more detail about what that will
look like? Am I correct to assume that this will be electronic
sharing and not just a sharing of paper records?
Dr. Shulkin. Congressman, yes. That would be correct.
Today, VA gets most of its record through paper. And what this
plan is saying is that that no longer would be our intent in
the future. We would develop a health information exchange. In
almost all the communities that all of you represent, you have
active health information exchanges. VA participates in many of
those. But this plan would say we would develop a health
information exchange specifically to have electronic
information come back to the VA to be able to make this user-
friendly and in a more timely fashion.
This is not complicated technology. It is commercially
available. And we participate in many of these around the
country. But this would be a specific HIE for this purpose.
Mr. Takano. How expensive will it be, do you think? I mean,
we are talking about small providers and large community
providers. I mean, I hear an earful about ACA and the
meaningful use of electronic health records. And many of the
small providers complain about the cost of this. So do we
envision having to come up with more money to enable this to
happen?
Dr. Shulkin. Congressman, part of the $421 million that the
Deputy Secretary referenced in his opening statement would be
for us to develop this type of portal, so that part of it would
be so that we could get this health information exchange. So
that is included in the figures that we would like to have
available to us, the flexibility to use money from 802 funds to
be able to help develop this.
Mr. Takano. Is this just the cost to the VA? Or are we also
looking at the cost to the providers? Because to upgrade their
ability, so I am envisioning these rural providers not
necessarily having the capacity. Are we going to enable them
through subsidies to acquire the technology?
Dr. Shulkin. In my prior life before coming to VA, as a
community provider, we participated in health information
exchanges. This is so common right now that most providers are
now participating in health information exchanges. And while
there is some cost to it, most systems, most community
providers have already developed these interfaces. So I do not
believe we are looking at a lot of provider burden here. In
fact, it should be easier for them than making photocopies and
having to send the VA paper as they are currently doing right
now. So I actually think this will be more efficient for the
providers.
Mr. Takano. Okay. In the plan, VA indicates there will be a
number of things VA can start doing to move towards
implementation of the plan without additional authority. Can
you tell the Committee what those are?
Dr. Yehia. Sure, Congressman. I mentioned those a little
bit earlier. But the point here is to really try to
meaningfully improve the veteran experience and the experience
of our community providers and employees in the short term. So
we are moving out to accomplish a couple of things today. And
those relate to such things such as streamlining the referral
and authorization process that I mentioned, standardizing those
sharing agreements with our DoD and academic affiliate
partners, infusing customer service training into community
care, and making some of these critical alternative analysis or
make-versus-buy decisions.
So those are some of the things that are within our control
today, that we are already starting to act on them to
meaningfully improve the experience of our stakeholders.
Mr. Takano. Well, the choice consolidation plan includes 13
legislative proposals that are integral to the success of the
transformation. I know the provider agreement draft legislation
that the Subcommittee on Health heard about yesterday is a top
priority. Which other proposals are the most important
immediately to setting the foundation for success?
Dr. Shulkin. I would be glad to start, Congressman. The
very top priority for us is to get provider agreements. Having
the ability to be able to contract with the providers that we
want, having the ability to work with our key partners,
Department of Defense, our academic teaching affiliates, the
Indian Health Service, other Federal entities, and other high-
performing networks around the country, is going to be our
critical feature here. So we absolutely would like to work with
you and have your support in that.
Secondly, the flexibility of the community care funds that
we have talked to you so much about and being able to have our
funding make sense for what veterans are receiving in the
community and not making it as difficult to access those funds
is absolutely key for us to do. Having the flexibility to
access the $421 million from 802 funding, not new funding, but
allowing us to access that funding so we can start developing
these types of systems that we have talked about here in fiscal
year 2016 is absolutely critical as well. And I would ask my
colleagues if there are any other key features.
Dr. Yehia. Those are the critical pieces. And you will see
in our legislative proposal section that we separated those
out, because those are things that we need today to move out to
deliver better care to veterans. There is a middle section of
proposals that relate to how we consolidate all the different
programs. And then the last piece relates to how we can improve
some business and health information sharing processes. So
those are kind of how our legislative proposals are divided.
And we asked that we focus initially on these immediate
legislative needs.
The Chairman. Mr. Lamborn, you are recognized.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thanks for having
this hearing. Secretary Gibson, as I understand it from the
briefings to staff, the VA previously wasn't tracking metrics
for off-VA care. Can you explain why this was not being done,
and perhaps what is being done now, if anything?
Dr. Yehia. I think what we were saying before is that
because we have such a patchwork of different programs for
delivering community care, the Choice Program, the PCP
contractor, affiliations with DoD and academics, they all are
in a silo. And VA doesn't have the visibility that it needs to
really assess kind of supply and demand. Do we have the right
population of doctors, the right specialties in the right
areas? Can we actually assess and monitor quality at the
regional and national level?
We don't have that level of visibility today. So in kind of
the one-time cost system improvements that we articulate, those
are the capabilities that we need. We need to have that
visibility at the national level to be able to assess how to
better match supply and demand, and how to monitor the quality
of care for our veterans. So you are spot on, that is what we
are asking for.
Mr. Gibson. I think the other light to shed there, VHA has
historically operated as a loose confederation of medical
centers. And what we are talking about here is moving toward an
integrated enterprise. And so, oftentimes, what I find is out
at a medical center level, there actually is a pretty good
finger on the pulse of the care that is being delivered by
local providers, because doc providers inside VA know who they
are referring patients to. They know about that provider, and
they are seeing their patients and assessing that provider
experience. But that is not consistent all across the entire
administration. We need to operate more like an integrated
enterprise so that we have got that kind of consistency.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you for that answer. And I am
going to shift gears and ask about IT. We had a hearing
recently, a combined hearing with another OTR committee, about
how the VA and DoD is not able to share medical records. But
some of what the plan is you are talking about for the future
is hinged on a cloud IT system for better sharing between the
VA and community providers. So if the DoD and VA haven't been
able to really integrate after 17 years, why do you feel it is
going to work to do something differently with the community
providers and the VA?
Mr. Gibson. First of all, as it relates to interoperability
with DoD, this came up at our breakfast the other day. And I
would plead with any Member of this Committee, give us an
opportunity to come over and demonstrate for you today what is
happening, the information exchange that is happening between
VA and DoD. We routinely offer those briefings. We get staff
coming, but we never can seem to get a Member to come.
So please, we would love to have you come. I will come too.
And we will put on that demonstration so that you can see we
are exchanging electronically vast amounts of information with
DoD every single day. We would love to share that with you.
The Chairman. If the gentleman will yield. Members, we will
take the VA up on that. It may be an early morning breakfast
event. I will bring the chicken biscuits. And we would love to
see it.
Mr. Gibson. Wonderful.
Mr. Lamborn. Mr. Chairman, thanks for your initiative on
that.
Mr. Gibson. But the other part of the issue has to do with
the health information exchange, the portal that Dr. Shulkin
was talking about earlier. Other comments to add there?
Mr. Lamborn. Dr. Shulkin, can you add anything to that, the
cloud IT system, that community provider sector?
Dr. Shulkin. When you come to this, to this demonstration,
because I had a chance to see this in North Chicago, one of our
integrated facilities with the Navy, as our doctors were going
back and forth between DoD and VA systems. So this joint viewer
does allow that. A health information exchange exactly provides
that opportunity with community providers. So you do use the
cloud. And you are able to go back and forth. It is not one
integrated medical record. I mean, we would all love to see
that, but the commercial companies are guarding their software
protection to do that. So what you have is the ability to see
information, clinical information. I think that is what you get
with the health information exchange as well.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question has to
do with implementation. Let's just say, hypothetically, today
was the day that we approved all the legislation that you
needed to move forward with the program. Can you talk a little
bit about the implementation and the timeframes associated with
that?
I know, I mean, I looked at the plan and saw the three
phases. And I think by the third phase, it is 4 or 5 years out
is my understanding. But there is also a lot of what you
classify as make-buy decisions that have to be made that are
going to be, I think, really important to that timeline. And
certainly thinking about the role of third-party
administrators, I think is, at least one that I think is a
pretty big deal, a pretty big decision on all of this. So if
you could just talk a little bit about the challenges, but what
your timeline is.
Dr. Shulkin. Yes. Congresswoman, great question. First
thing which I want to make sure that you understand is that we
are out there every day, traveling all the time. And we are
hearing from veterans that the current system isn't working
well enough for them. And they are pretty clear about this. I
know you are hearing the same thing too. So we are not taking a
wait-until-we-improve-the-system approach. We are, right now,
understanding things aren't working, and we are making these
types of incremental approaches as fast as we possibly can. We
are doing it in partnership with our TPAs and our provider
partners, Department of Defense, academic centers. So we are
starting right now, and have been, actually, to make this
better. We want to get there as quickly as we can. So the
timeline you are talking about, I am going to actually have Dr.
Yehia go through.
Dr. Yehia. Yeah, I think that is such a critical point.
Because the way that we set up the implementation plan or the
transition plan is not to have some grand reveal in a number of
years. We really want to make incremental improvements. So that
is why we came up with these different phases. The first phase
is really to develop the implementation plan, those details
that you need and we need of milestones and how we are going to
get there, those critical make-buy decisions, and then deliver
on the--what we call minimally viable solutions, incremental
improvements.
The next phase, which is another year, is to start
connecting different systems, getting these capabilities up.
And the third phase is rolling out some of these larger ones
and starting to maintain them. I think one thing to remember
about implementation, I know IT has been mentioned a lot, is
that from day one, when we started this plan, we were joined at
the hip with our IT colleagues. So our assistant secretary for
IT, LaVerne Council and her team, were partners with us. They
helped us develop a lot of these recommendations. They helped
us come up with the cost estimates. And now they are standing
up a project management team just for community care.
So I couldn't agree more that we need to do this as an
enterprise. It's not going to be run out of VHA. It is not run
out of IT. It is run at the Department level. I think the other
really important point about implementation and why it is
different than before is this collaboration that we have
created between field leadership, program office leadership,
and also external consultants that have expertise in things
such as health plans and value-based care, that VA doesn't have
all those specific competencies today.
So we are assembling these, what we are calling tiger
teams, dedicated staff, multidisciplinary, to start rolling out
some of the different aspects of implementation which, in my
mind, makes it unique.
Ms. Brownley. In terms of the make-buy decisions, and,
again, going back to third-party administrators, so, again,
that seems like a pretty big decision. And I know that we
have--it has been slow in terms of the Choice Program and so
forth. But it is my understanding, I can't speak for Health
Net, but with TRICARE, I know they have invested quite a bit
over the last, you know, 6 months, anyway. It appears they are
improving. But, again, it is going to be customer satisfaction
that tells the true story. But give me some idea of your
thinking, some of the pros and cons of using our existing
third-party administrators, or taking all of those services
within the VA. And you have 20 seconds.
Dr. Yehia. I can't stress enough that they are our
partners. So we are working with them day in and day out. They
are embedded in some of our medical centers. So they are our
partners in making the Choice Act work. I think we have engaged
some external consultants to help us determine what we are
calling an announceable alternative to determine what is best
for taxpayers and best for veterans. We are not taking this
decision lightly. It is not just an--we are using all the
resources we have to help us make the best informed decision.
Ms. Brownley. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Dr. Roe, you are
recognized
Mr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Dr. Yehia, you will
get all the tough questions being a University of Florida grad,
okay, from me. First of all, health care is changing in America
as we all know. And we are looking now, instead of just
procedural things, outcomes-based medicine. I know we have a
VISN director here who has been a hospital director also. And
if you look at the local hospital system, they will know pretty
much in that area where they are, who the providers are they
can use.
I will give you an example. At home, we have, and I will do
a little shout-out to my own practice, but we have a group of
about 500 primary care providers. We formed a Medicare ACO. It
is the best performing ACO in America with 25,000 or less
people in it. So the VA could easily integrate and get results
back from that. Mayo, Scott and White, I mean, on and on,
Marshfield, we all know those systems that can provide a lot of
care.
And I absolutely do believe you are on the right path. I
want to support what you are doing 100 percent, because I think
this blended system is the one that is ultimately going to
provide the care to veterans. I really believe that. And
simplifying the system has to be done. And it has to be for
your sanity and the veteran's sanity both.
So I want to give you a shout-out for that. To Mr.
Lamborn's comments about the IT system, I have had the fortune,
or misfortune, to be in North Chicago twice in the winter. It
wasn't as seamless as I would like to have seen it as a
provider. As a provider, seamless, if you are the boots on the
ground doctor, something that takes you 2 or 3 or 4 minutes to
get information from, you are hopelessly behind at the end of
the day. You have heard me say this over and over again, having
used an EMR system.
So we have to have a system that works for the provider
because, otherwise, it doesn't work for the patient. Those
things, what I would like to know is what percent of the
veteran population do you think will actually utilize this
system? Because you have got a little bit of an onslaught. I
think some of that was a woodwork in process, people heard
about it and hey, maybe I can go get that care. So how many do
you think will actually be in non-VA care and VA care?
Dr. Yehia. I think that is a great question. As a provider
in the system, you know, we are trying to design a system that
works great for veterans, our providers, and employees, and
community providers as well. When I see patients, I want--3
minutes is too long. So I can't agree more. And so I think it
is important that whatever we end up designing in partnership
with Congress works for us. Because I am going to be living it
day to day as well as I see patients.
With that in mind, your question about how many people are
accessing community care, about a million and a half veterans
have received some sort of community care. That doesn't mean
all of their care is in the community. They might have gone out
for a particular procedure or an episode of care. But there are
a good chunk of veterans that get their care in the community.
Recently with the expanded Choice legislation and removing
the eligibility date and the 40-miles-from-primary-care
physician, that makes about 900,000 veterans are now eligible
under the 40-mile geographic criteria. So there is a big
population of our veterans that are now eligible to access
community care.
Dr. Shulkin. Dr. Roe, let me just say, I think what you
just talked about, your statement, is a precise articulation of
what this plan is about. So I thank you for that. Health care
in America is changing, and changing rapidly. And this is
actually a plan that recognizes that and says VA has to not
only keep up with it, but take advantage of everything that is
happening good in American medicine. So I used to run our
accountable care organizations. It is exactly those networks we
want to tap into to get the best care for our veterans.
Mr. Roe. And it is easily reproducible. I mean, you can get
that data quickly back. The electronic health record is a
challenge, because in ours, where we brought in other doctor
groups, 40 different electronic health systems. And that is a
huge challenge across the country trying to figure out how to
make these things integrate. And that will be ongoing. I think
the other thing I want to do, as Ms. Brownley asked, what is
the timeframe? If this goes exactly like we think, which it
won't, how do you think the timeframe will be? Couple of years?
Dr. Yehia. Yeah, I think it is such a critical question. We
are really doing this in an iterative way. It is kind of like
agile design. As I mentioned before, we are not looking for a
grand reveal after a number of years. So we are hoping that
even starting today, we are starting to deliver incremental
improvements to veterans, employees, and our community
providers. After some of these make-buy decisions, and the
portal is an example, those take a little bit of time to
actually get into place. But that doesn't mean we are not going
out today and starting to make the system better. That is our
intention.
Mr. Roe. My time has expired. But I thank you for what you
are trying to do. And also, if you could just do one thing is
make sure--and Medicare does a pretty good job of this--are
timely payments to providers. If they are sitting there for
months and months and months, they are not going to
participate. I yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Kuster.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much. And thanks so much for
being with us. I think this is a really important conversation
to have, because the conversations I have been having with my
VA for several months now, actually over the last couple of
years, is that there is just such a patchwork of programs. And
they prefer the programs where they can stay in touch with the
providers in the community.
We have also had some challenges with our third-party
contractor on implementing the Choice Program in New Hampshire.
I have to ask one very parochial quick question. We are one of
only two States in the country without a full-service VA
hospital. And we had a special amendment under the Choice Card
to reduce to 20 miles. Can I reassure my folks in New Hampshire
that this 40 mile is not going to cause them to be driving over
the mountains in the snow again to get to the VA Hospital? I
told you it was parochial.
Mr. Gibson. Well, no, we expected the question, quite
frankly.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you. We are dogged in our determination
to care of our veterans.
Mr. Gibson. We deliberately, in the plan, did not address
the special circumstances in Alaska, Hawaii, and New Hampshire.
And so part of the process here as we work through this is to,
very deliberately, with all the stakeholders, look at each one
of those instances and figure out exactly the right thing for
veterans and for taxpayers. And we commit to you that we will
do that.
Ms. Kuster. Thanks. We will be on it. And just having said
that, and whether you say 20 miles or 40 miles, this picks up
on a previous question, part of the confusion is that to use
this distance when it is not relevant to the care that is being
provided, I think is really a dilemma. To say I am 20 miles or
40 miles from a facility, if it doesn't--you know, look, I need
heart surgery, I don't need to go to a primary care physician.
So are we going to resolve that particular aspect of this as
well?
Dr. Yehia. Yeah, so I think that is a great question.
Because we heard that from our veterans and our community
providers. The way we articulate in the plan is not to a
facility, but to the relationship. And so we say that it is 40
miles from a primary care provider. Because in health care,
that relationship between the patient and the primary care
provider is probably the most critical relationship there is.
They are the care coordinators. They provide access to
specialty care. And so the way that the eligibility criteria of
the plan is designed is, if you live far away from that
critical relationship, all the veterans health benefits package
is available to you in the community. So it is more
relationship-based and less facility-based.
Ms. Kuster. Okay. Thank you. I appreciate that. And part of
what I wanted to get at, and I think this is a goal, is just
the confusion of the bureaucracy. And you all inherited this as
well. It is complicated which veterans are eligible for which
services, what kind of health care we are offering. And I think
there is sort of a built-in conundrum for us on the Committee
and in the veteran community between focusing on those types of
injuries and ailments that come from their service, versus
those types of injuries and ailments that have to do with aging
and other disease processes that are built in to the DNA before
they even head overseas.
In our case, we have 65,000 Vietnam veterans in New
Hampshire aging. But I want to keep the promise to them,
because many of their concerns, health care concerns, mental
health care concerns are related to their service. We didn't
know it at the time. It took us a while to sort it out. But it
is very clear to me now as I meet with these folks, and I will
add in the folks coming back from--we have a high percentage
coming back from Iraq and Afghanistan, the TBIs, the MST, the
PTSD. Can you just comment on serving the whole veteran, if you
will.
Dr. Shulkin. Yes. I think you have said this very well,
that the current experience today is confusing and overly
complex. I would note that this is not purely a VA issue. This
is the managed care industry in general, right? Nobody really
understands their managed care benefits and the complexity of
what is happening in American health care.
Ms. Kuster. I absolutely agree.
Dr. Shulkin. But we recognize what you are saying. The
point of what we are trying to do, this type of incremental
change, is to simplify this. If you work with us to allow us to
get the flexibility of care in the funding, care in the
community, care-funding together, we think that will go a long
way towards allowing us to simplify the eligibility
requirements, the understanding of what veterans can and cannot
get from the VA. And we are committed to doing that early on in
this timeframe. And we are using veterans focus groups. And we
are out there in the MyVA efforts to try to make this more
veteran-centric.
Ms. Kuster. Well, I look forward to working with you. And
thank you very much for your presentation.
The Chairman. Dr. Benishek, you are recognized.
Mr. Benishek. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome. I just want
to reiterate what Dr. Roe said, that, frankly, I think this is
great that we have one way of VA veterans getting access to
community care rather than the hodgepodge of efforts. My
concern, of course, is the implementation and making it work. I
will give you an example here. I got many complaints from
providers in my district about the Choice Program due to the
inability of the Health Net to communicate with the VA and with
the private providers. I had a provider that told me they had
to wait weeks to hear back from Health Net. They want to update
authorization for care. And when they do hear back, they have
to spend 40 to 75 minutes on the phone to check on each and
every authorization. This is like, just this week.
So, I mean, I know that this Choice thing came in quickly.
And you tried to get it. But the implementation of this is what
scares me about it. Do you know what I mean? Are you aware of
this problem with these third-party providers? Who is dealing
with that?
Dr. Shulkin. We are not only aware of it, we are painfully
aware of it. We are hearing this every day, many, many times a
day. And so the Choice Program, which was brought up with the
best of intentions, has experienced considerable problems,
putting the veteran in the middle, quite frankly, but also the
providers. We are working with both TPAs. And the CEO of
TriWest is here in this room with us today. We are working with
both TPAs.
We have gone through multiple, multiple contract
modifications to make this work better. And we are using pilots
in several locations throughout the country. We are actually
co-locating the staff from the TPA with the VA staff. One of
the things that we learned in looking back on this, it was the
VA staff who had the relationships with the providers in the
community, and the relationships with the veterans. And when we
removed them from the process, problems began. So we are
working now with the TPAs to--
Mr. Benishek. I tend to agree with your assessment. As you
know, I worked at the VA. And I know the guys at the VA. I knew
their local providers. And that system actually seemed to work
okay in my community. And then having somebody they have no
idea who they are contracting with you, you know, taking a
percent of the money doesn't make much sense to me, to tell you
the truth. I am not sure that we were all that happy with the
plan to do that.
Dr. Shulkin. Right.
Mr. Benishek. Let me just talk to you a little bit more
about another issue and that is, the core competencies in the
VA. The plan calls for the VA to access non-VA care for
veterans outside of certain core competencies that the VA
should handle. What are those core competencies?
Dr. Yehia. I think that is a great question. When we
started this process to consolidate care in the community, Joe
and I really had to step back, because we couldn't look at it
just in a silo of how do you make this part of the system work
better without figuring out how it interacts with the rest of
the system, which is why, in the preamble of the report, we
talk about the future of VA health care. And I think the
principle there is that we cannot provide every single service
in every single location to every single veteran. And that is
the concept there. I think if we want to move towards that
integrated health care system, really creating a complementary
provider network to internal VA care.
This doesn't mean we are outsourcing VA or dismantling the
VA. What we want to do is have a more complementary integrated
system, so that if we are providing mental health care and
primary care in that area, we probably don't need a lot of
mental health care and primary care docs in the network. We
need other things that aren't provided at the VA. So we are
calling these kind of foundational services that VA would
provide. A lot of that is going to be locally determined. As
you know, health care is local. What is available in one market
may not be available in another. So that is where that spirit
comes from, is how to get to that integrated health care system
and creating a complementary network.
Mr. Benishek. Well, to tell you the truth, I really
appreciate your enthusiasm and your response. That may be due
to your relatively short tenure at the VA. I am hoping that
that will continue. And I know that, you know, that two
physicians up there are relatively new. And I actually really
welcome their input and leadership. And I am happy to work with
you to make this plan happen. I just have my concerns about the
pace. Thank you.
The Chairman. I think part of it is because the Gators are
9 and 1 right now. Mr. O'Rourke, you are recognized.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to begin
by telling you each how encouraged I am by this report that you
produced and your testimony today and your answers to our
questions, and how grateful I am on behalf of the veterans that
I represent for this initiative. And, Dr. Shulkin, you talk
about changes in American medicine that you are anticipating
and incorporating in the proposal that you have put forward.
And it is restoring the VA to its rightful place as a leader in
American health care who can set the standard and become known
for excellence and figuring out problems that are fundamental
to how we provide health care in this country.
So this, for me, in the--you know, as another short-timer
who hasn't been here yet 3 years, is certainly the high
watermark in terms of our work with and collaboration with the
VA. And I share, you have heard it from many of my colleagues
so far when they are asking you how long will this take. And,
Dr. Yehia, you have done a great job of avoiding the question
and saying we have got an iterative process and we are doing
this, that, and the other. I don't want to speak for anyone
else.
What I am concerned about is you have just a little over a
year left in this administration. And this is a very exciting,
necessary, essential proposal to reform VA care. And I want to
make sure that you can do and we can help you do everything
necessary to make it happen. So you don't have to answer that
question. But just know that is the interest. And I, for one,
want to help legislatively in any capacity I can to make sure
that we get this done.
I want to point out a couple of things that I think are
really encouraging. The focus on care coordination, which you
have talked about, and making it a fundamental principle of
excellence for the VA is just so important if we are going to
get this done. You mention in your report that you are seeing
rising demand for outpatient visits and decreasing demand for
inpatient hospital beds. And that seems to answer this
frustration we have with the $1.1 billion overage in Aurora,
and hundreds of millions of dollars over in Orlando and Las
Vegas and New Orleans.
We shouldn't be building stand-alone VA hospitals to only
take care of veterans. On top of that, 41,000 funded,
authorized positions unfilled. We have to prioritize where we
are going to focus in the VA. And so core competencies, as Dr.
Benishek raised, I think it is really important that that is a
fundamental aspect of this plan. And I like the way it is
articulated on page 18 of the proposal.
One question related to this, Secretary Gibson, you have
said in a previous hearing that for every 1 percent increase in
VA patient demand on the system, you incur an additional $1.4
billion in cost. Does this plan, through care coordination,
investment in IT systems, et cetera, create some of the
necessary efficiencies for us to be able to afford greater
veteran participation going forward?
Mr. Gibson. I will start and then you guys can finish. It
was actually Bob that used the 1 percent and $1.4 billion. But
I will own it. There are certainly efficiencies built in here.
As I alluded to in the opening statement, the fact remains that
as we improve access to care, and as we improve the veteran's
care experiences, we are going to find more veterans coming to
us for care, especially when it is financially advantageous to
the veteran, when their out-of-pocket costs are going to be
lower to come to VA. So we are going to continue to see that.
But there are some savings that are built in to this overall
cost picture. And I will ask Baligh to touch on those.
Dr. Yehia. So I think what you see here is that we are
moving towards best practices that are in industry. So we talk
about, by streamlining a lot of these processes, it is more
automated, less manual. Our employees can spend more time with
veterans. And so there is efficiencies gained there. By working
with high-performing providers in the community, providers that
understand the principles of high-quality care and utilization
management, there is efficiency there because they are not
going to be ordering that extra CAT scan that may be
unnecessary. Or they may be preventing an admission for a
diabetic that may require an inpatient stay for someone else.
So I think it starts with making the system a little bit
better, getting the right providers in the network. And then
probably the last component is how we start leveraging lessons
learned from CMS. CMS is doing a lot of great work in value-
based payments. So we are not reimbursing just for episodes of
care but for more outcomes-driven care. So we articulate some
of those there. That is the direction we want to move to. We
want to skate kind of where the puck is going and not
necessarily be tied to the systems today.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you. And, again, thank you for your
work. And I look forward to working with you on this. I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Huelskamp? Mrs.
Walorski?
Mrs. Walorski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
add to the panel how grateful I am that you are here as well,
and that we sound like we are on the same page, at least in the
concept of moving forward in trying to be able to rebuild that
trust with veterans and the VA.
The one question I have is all the way back to when the
Chairman started on this whole issue of Choice. And let me
start by saying, you know, I want the VA to be healthy. I want
the VA to work for my constituents in northern Indiana.
Unfortunately--so when I sit in these hearings and I listen to
every single question my colleagues are asking, I still think
in the back of my mind, we are not as functional in the State
of Indiana as some of our neighboring colleagues here.
And that is my desire. That is the desire of our veterans.
They want everything to work for them because we promised them
that when they went to fight. And so, that is my goal is to
continue--to work as closely as we can to get the VA healthy.
And so I so much appreciate the report that you have and the
plans and that kind of a thing.
But I am still caught in the question that Representative
O'Rourke didn't want an answer, but it will help me to have and
answer on when can we see some of this happening. Because I was
on the conference committee back in October when we did the
reform, reset type thing. We still don't really have a Choice
Program in my district, in northern Indiana. And so I just--it
is interesting, I just had a phone call with my district staff
that works on all of our VA case work in the district and they
were just telling me that just recently, we got a call from an
actual VA hospital in the State of Indiana telling the veteran
to call my office because the VA hospital can't get
appointments and can't get anything through for this veteran.
I am thinking to myself something is wrong. There is some
kind of a clog in the line. And I would ask you guys, and even
Mr. Gibson, if you would--I am more than willing to come to
that computer IT show-me-the-world type thing. I am more than
willing to be there. I will be there. But I am, again, asking
if you or the Secretary could seriously come into my district,
and if we could have conversations about how we make this work
better, because I think that would be one of the quickest ways,
and much more efficient ways to actually see that it just isn't
happening like you are describing it around some of these other
areas around the country, that would be my first question.
Mr. Gibson. We will do it. Bob or I will come, we will
bring some of our medical center leadership from Indiana, and
we will also bring senior representation from the TPA, from the
country.
Mrs. Walorski. I really appreciate it, I really do.
And then my second comment is back to this Choice Program.
I remember being on the conference committee when we talked
about that 40-mile radius. I am and still very, very concerned.
When you are looking at areas that have rural places which are
the hardest sometimes to get care to, that is why this evolved
in the first place. So it is like let's get care to them from a
community-based hospital, somebody near them.
One of the things that I find in my district, which I find
so frustrating to say, if we are going to look at broadening
that radius, it is going to cost a whole lot of money. And I
know when you are talking about you need our help, that means
money. But it is so problematic in places in these rural areas.
And to Representative Kuster's point, when you are dealing with
winter weather. Winter weather in my State closes States. We
have state of emergencies, and we can't travel, you know. I am
finding myself getting involved. The veterans are calling my
office, and then having me make phone calls to try to get
Choice implemented. It literally is not rolling out in our
district. So can you just comment on that? I mean, when can we
see that actually happening?
Dr. Shulkin. One of the points that Secretary McDonald
constantly makes is the VA is the canary in the coal mine for
American medicine. So the problems that you are describing
about rural health care are problems in every aspect of health
care.
Mrs. Walorski. True.
Dr. Shulkin. Getting providers there, getting the right
specialties there.
VA is looking at this issue. We are desperately trying to
hire psychiatrists in El Paso and specialists in Indiana. But
one of the ways that we are beginning to do this is to really
use telehealth. In a way for rural--
Mrs. Walorski. Telehealth is working in my district, I will
tell you that. But for specialized care, and for things like
cancer and those kinds of--it is so hard.
Dr. Shulkin [continued]. We are moving rapidly toward
specialty telehealth. In fact, people don't realize, nobody is
doing more telehealth in the country than VA. We are driving
this faster than anybody. And that can't be the total answer,
but we have to look towards new technology.
Mrs. Walorski. Right.
Dr. Shulkin. And we have to get more--
Mrs. Walorski. I do agree. Yeah, I will give you that, it
does definitely works in our State. But I appreciate your
willingness to come and help us troubleshoot. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Walz.
Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would like
to, first of all, applaud the Committee for showing that we can
simultaneously do our duty of oversight on accountability, and
start to provide vision for the future, because I think what we
are talking about in hearing people, this is our opportunity to
shape VA 2050, if you will.
Amongst the crisis situation that arose from Phoenix and
others, I think this is the silver lining that we are starting
to move towards that blended system you hear about.
And Deputy Secretary Gibson, I do have to say, at the time
when the VA so needed it, you instill confidence, your candor
and steady leadership is appreciated. And I think that needs to
be said publicly, because we are moving towards solutions, so
thank you.
My team and myself, and I know many have done this, have
gone on deep dive on this. It gave us that opportunity, working
with everyone from Health Net and TriWest who you said are here
today--not only are they here today, they were at roundtables
in Brainerd, Minnesota, with veterans. And at a time when
people could have ducked and covered, they didn't. They stood
up in the face of this and were very candid. I appreciate that.
Private providers, county veteran service officers, the
Minneapolis VA, VISN 23, American Hospital Association and
central office are digging into this. People want to fix this,
they want to get there. And you have heard it today, it is
working. I think the point that was brought up by my colleague
from Indiana just brought up, separating VA health care from
health care in general is--you cannot do it, the lack of rural
providers in the private sector is every bit of a problem as it
is for veterans.
My question to you and I want to be specific on this, and
you have answered it some degree, but out of all of those
meetings and other things that came, one of the things I am
hearing from the providers, from the private providers, is the
standards in the program are not industry standards, resulting
in some of them opting out. I want to understand why you think,
in your opinion, why are some providers opting out of this?
Because I know they want to help care for veterans, but we
shouldn't make it at a loss to them. If you could take that
one, I know you have answered it to a little degree, but this
was asked of my people out there of why this is happening.
Mr. Dalpiaz. If we look at rural areas in particular, two
big reasons: One is, and we have this in the plan, we need to
continue with or enhance special dispensation for rural
providers. The other finding, and it should have been very
obvious to all of us is when we wrote the initial requirements,
we wrote in very burdensome requirements for providers, and we
know in rural areas, there is a lot of small operations. And
what we hear from rural providers is, this is so burdensome for
me to participate, I have to hire additional staff, and I can't
do that.
So when we look at future requirements for a network, we
built in flexibility for special dispensation for different
parts of the country, rural areas being one. And we have to
take a very critical clinical look at the things that we are
requiring them to send back to us. They seem to be the two
things that are most troublesome and push people away from our
system. And we have learned those lessons.
Mr. Walz. So when we go forward, will that be a contract
thing that you have the capacity to do, or does this need
legislative improvements?
Dr. Yehia. So I think it is a combination of both. There
are some requirements that we have today that are not industry
standard, and the principles laid in here is to move us more
towards that. What are the leading practices? One of them is
tying the medical record to claims. That doesn't exist
typically in the private sector. Not saying that we don't want
records back, but there are other ways that we can incentivize
our community providers to get us health information back
without saying we are not going to pay you.
The critical thing that we would need is provider
agreements, and this is a simplified way that we can partner
with providers of the community. And those are exactly the
providers you are talking about; typically, the local, mom-and-
pop, small practices. These aren't the large conglomerations
that could enter in complicated, far-based contracts with us.
Those we can work through very complicated contracts with. But
the smaller providers won't work with us if we have them jump
through a number of hoops that Medicare doesn't require, or
partnerships with other health plans don't require.
So that, I think, is critical for us. If we can get
provider agreements passed, it is going to allow us to partner
with community providers, and then increase access to those
providers for our veterans.
Mr. Walz. That is exactly what they are saying. How quickly
can we do this?
Dr. Yehia. We have I think at the last Subcommittee
hearing, VA presented their proposal, and I think the Committee
is considering it. I know there is a counterpart bill in the
Senate that has been introduced. We would love for you to move
as quickly as possible in that.
Mr. Walz. Because I don't want to put these people in the
position either. It is pretty wrenching for them that they want
to do this, and they don't want to be seen as not providing for
veterans. So I think that is a positive step forward.
Again, I thank you for your work, and I have to say this
is--there are some positive developments, and we need to focus
on where there is crisis, we need to continue to have
accountability, but I think it is important for us to show that
there is lot of good happening too, so thank you for that.
The Chairman. Dr. Wenstrup, you are recognized.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is a very
encouraging meeting today. And I want to thank you for
listening, because that is what we are seeing taking place
here, you know. In the last couple years, we have had these
types of discussions about where, I think, we should be headed,
and we are seeing it happen. And I appreciate that very much.
I do agree with the Chairman when he mentioned that when we
are outsourcing, it doesn't necessarily cost us more if we are
lowering on the other side. We may find ourselves, and probably
will, in a situation some day, where we say we don't need all
these physical plants in the VA, and we can reduce our
footprint. And so we can save in a lot of ways and continue to
work on increasing productivity.
I especially like what you were just talking about,
provider agreements. If there is something in the way coming
from here that is making that more difficult, then we need to
change that. And you are right, especially in rural areas,
letting that lone practitioner out there be able to be a VA
provider. Which brings me to another point that, I don't really
think we need to say that this is non-VA care, you know. Our
practice, I guarantee you, 20-some orthopaedic surgeons, we
would have been glad to have a sign out in front of our
building saying ``VA provider'' and put the VA logo up there.
So I think we should shift away from calling it non-VA care,
but extending VA care, and I think that would be helpful.
Mr. Gibson. That has been my campaign for the last 6
months, to eradicate non-VA care from our vernacular, and
instead, refer to it as VA community care.
Mr. Wenstrup. Well, I appreciate that. Great minds must
think alike. I don't know. But I also appreciate what you were
talking about with the information sharing, because in our
practice, you know, we could go to--a patient comes to our
practice, we could get their information from any hospital in
the region without having to jump through a lot of hoops, and
it makes a big difference. So I applaud you for being in the
right direction, and I yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Dr. Ruiz.
Mr. Ruiz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Gibson,
simplifying and improving the process for veteran seeking
community care remains at the top of my priority list, and the
veterans living in my district. We--as soon as the Choice Act
was passed, we held some workshops in my district with
physicians, TriWest and the VA, and we heard a lot of the
different obstacles that were involved, including the enormous
amount of bureaucracy and the lack of information that our
providers had in order to enroll.
The two VA community clinics located in my district are
Palm Desert and Blythe, they are the point of care for VA-based
care in my district. I am eager to make those facilities more
veteran-centric. And I believe your proposal, while not
perfect, is a step in the right direction.
I, too, am a little concerned about the implementation
plan, and the deadlines, and the inherent evaluation, and
oversight that you have within the plan in order for us to meet
the goals that you set forward in the time that you want to set
them, and not have another over-budgeted plan, or I should say,
under-budgeted plan, where we get a surprise bill for billions
of dollars in the near future.
My questions rely on the fact that we are going to start
relying on community physicians to provide care in areas that
have low access to veterans facilities. Yet those are,
oftentimes, the rural underserved area. And in my district, we
have one doctor per 9,000 residents. So how are you going to
account for the physician shortage in the community for the
general population, and rely on them for the physician care for
veterans?
Dr. Shulkin. If you have the answer to that, that would be
great, because--yeah. This is a significant problem for
America. VA, I think, can bring to this several things: One is,
thanks to your additional authorities in the Choice Act, you
allowed us additional graduate medical education funding. And
so, for us to create partnerships with medical schools, and to
create new GME spots that focus on the shortage areas and focus
in the rural areas is absolutely top among--
Mr. Ruiz. Well, we should talk. I was senior associate dean
of a new medical school that had that exact plan that took my
students in under grad in college from underserved communities
into the under grad, into those medical schools in developing
residency programs in those underserved areas. One of the key
places that you can start having your residents go to, and that
are involved that are eventually going to work at the VA, is
FQHC.
So let me ask you another important question, because I am
limited with time. I have a veteran in my district who is not
the only veteran that has told me this story, who had bad, I
guess, consequences from the third party not paying their bills
on time, and therefore, the provider then would bill the
veteran. And the veteran didn't have the resources to pay that.
And also, the veteran was under the impression that the third
party was going to pay those bills.
My veteran now has poor credit scores because it went to
collections, and it went through all these other things. What
are we going to do to protect the veterans in case there are
glitches like that so they don't have the financial harm?
Dr. Shulkin. We spend a lot of time right now, our central
business office spends a lot of time helping veterans work
through these situations. Again, the VA is not dissimilar to
what is happening in the private sector. Patients don't
understand their bills and third-party payers are sometimes
inappropriately billing. So in those situations, we are there
to support the veteran. Sometimes the veteran does have an
obligation, because it wasn't a covered service, but many
times, we step in the middle to support the veteran. We do not
want to see what is happening--
Mr. Ruiz. How do you support the veterans, do you take on
the cost?
Dr. Yehia. If I may, I think the perfect example of this is
ER care. And right now, because of the different rules and
requirements that we have, a lot of veterans think they are
eligible for that benefit, but get denied the care. And that is
part of the reason why we wanted to tackle that--
Mr. Ruiz. One last comment, because I have about 25
seconds. You talk about the relationship that is important in
terms of primary care physicians, and you are absolutely right,
but our veterans need pain management, that primary physicians
are not trained, they are not pain specialists. They also need
psychiatric care.
So I believe that that relationship, that the access or the
criterion in which you allow a veteran to see a provider
outside of the VA, or in the community, should not just be the
relationship with a primary care physician, but it should be
service-based. So if they don't have a pain specialist at that
VA location, then they are allowed to see a pain specialist
within the community?
Dr. Shulkin. Yep.
Mr. Ruiz. When is that going to happen? Does it require a
bill, or can you guys make it happen?
Dr. Yehia. Yeah, I think that does, I mean, the concept of
going from the service would expand the aperture greatly for
all those, because we don't have pain providers everywhere. So
we can--I think we are open to having those discussions, but
those come with significant resources.
Dr. Shulkin. I would just add that the pain management is a
different issue than the behavioral health. We integrate--when
Dr. Yehia talks about primary care, we are actually talking
about a team called our pack teams, with behavioral health
integrated into the primary care services. Nobody does this on
the scope that VA is doing this now. So I think that one's
different than the pain management.
Mr. Ruiz. Okay.
The Chairman. Dr. Abraham.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We were fortunate
last week to be able to be back in our districts among our
veterans. And certainly, my study, or my county was unofficial
and small, but I did poll my veterans, about 56 or 60. And what
I found is what we alluded to the Chairman's statement earlier
in this hearing, that up to 62, 63 percent of my veterans are
still having significant wait times. And again, an unofficial,
small study. I understand that.
So, I guess my question, Secretary Gibson, to you, is under
VISN 16 when Secretary McDonald was here before, we had some
issues, that you guys said it is greatly improved, and I will
take your word for that to a point, you know that. But are we--
and again, it may just be my lack of knowledge--are we able to
access the VA's data as to how you figured wait times, the
actual tactics and logistics of how you got to those numbers?
Mr. Gibson. We would be glad to come walk through exactly
that.
Mr. Abraham. I would appreciate that.
Mr. Gibson. We would be delighted to do that.
Mr. Abraham. I would just like to understand how your
figures, how you get the numbers you get to?
Mr. Gibson. We would be delighted to do that. And that
includes figuring out whether or not emergency department
visits are included in the average wait times. Because people
keep handing me notes that say they are included, and I have
been told repeatedly they are not. So we are going to figure
that one out definitively.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you. And Dr. Shulkin, I will ask you
this: Will the veterans be able to choose a community care
provider of their own, or will it be from an approved VA list?
Dr. Shulkin. The concept here is to have strict criteria
that are based on performance, clinical outcome measures and
service measures.
Mr. Abraham. So you will judge that community provider
based on the criteria?
Dr. Shulkin. We are going to create network.
Mr. Abraham. Can I get a copy of those criteria?
Dr. Shulkin. Yes, yes. This would be still in development,
but we have developed two types of principles. One is what
develops, what we are calling this core service, or
foundational service, about what VA really needs to be expert
in and what can be done in a community. And secondly, the
specific criteria for criteria on quality and service measures.
Mr. Abraham. And again, what I am, I guess, more interested
in certainly from my aspect, is just the criteria part of the
primary care, because I think this is where we started and we
talked about specialists earlier, and you said you would need
more approps to go that direction.
Dr. Shulkin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Abraham. And the other question I have is how much cost
savings would result from setting all non-VA care reimbursement
at the Medicare liable rate?
Dr. Shulkin. There are some savings. I think that they are
built into the plan. Do you recall the number?
Dr. Yehia. So we--I don't have the number off the top of my
head, but what we hope to do is move more towards regional
Medicare rates, and those rates include calculations for
graduate medical education, as you know, in geographic rural
areas. That is our intention is to move more towards Medicare
rates. We know we can't get there 100 percent in every locale,
because there is going to be certain geographic location and
certain specialties, that in order for them to partner with us,
where the community rate is higher than Medicare. So our goal
is to move towards--closer and closer to a standard Medicare
rate that is regional across the country, and allow exceptions
as necessary for local communities.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Doc. My last question, should the
emergent and urgent care expansion that the plan introduces be
implemented? Will coverage of emergency care be available to
veterans who are enrolled in the VA health care system, but are
inactive, which VA currently defines as a patient who has not
accessed VA care in 2 years. Dr. Shulkin, you are nodding your
head.
Dr. Shulkin. The plan that we have proposed for you says
that a veteran would need to have active contact with the VA
system in the past 2 years to be eligible.
Mr. Abraham. To be eligible for the emergent and--
Dr. Shulkin. That is correct.
Mr. Abraham. Okay, thanks. That is all the questions I
have, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Titus, you are recognized.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to give a
first shout-out to Ghost and the Marine Riders at the
Leatherneck Club in Las Vegas. I rode on the back of one of
their motorcycles in the Veterans Day Parade. This was a great
honor for me, but also, I am no dummy, because in a parade,
somebody's going to boo you. But when you are on the back of a
Marine motorcycle, you are just getting a lot of this and a lot
of this and a lot of cheers.
Mr. Gibson. We want to see pictures. We hope they are on
your Web site.
Ms. Titus. That made me feel really good.
Second, I want to thank you, Mr. Gibson, and the Secretary
for helping us to get a director for the new hospital. That was
very important, you did that. I am looking forward to meeting
Ms. Kearns when she gets there on the ground and working with
her. So thank you very much for that.
We have heard around the room a lot of people talking about
the confusion over the Choice Act and the community care
programs; there are different ones, different benefits. And it
is not just the veterans that are confused, but also the staff
is confused. Now just about the time they get the hang of that,
we are going to change it all over the next 5 years and have
another new program. I want to be sure that you are building
into your plans ways to train people and to educate the public
so we don't have to go through this every time.
Dr. Yehia. I will take that, that is such a great question.
And in the actual system redesign and solutions, that first
bucket of costs, are a lot of resources dedicated to training
and communications. When we were developing the plan, as I
mentioned before, we looked towards industry, but also to our
partners at DoD and TRICARE. That was one of the big lessons
that we learned when we sat around the table with our TRICARE
colleagues, is over their decades experience of delivering such
a system, the importance of educating the staff, the community
providers and their beneficiaries on that. So some of those
costs for training are baked in. And in that $421 million that
we are requesting, that includes some of those exact things so
that people--to eliminate that confusion.
Ms. Titus. I think that would be very helpful so that
people will know where to go, what they are getting, one
program, and understand it. And that will be a big hurdle that
will be overcome.
Another thing, since this is a 5-year program, I think we
are seeing move very rapidly, medical marijuana, in the States,
half the States already have it. It is recommended, it is
legal. Doctors in communities do this, issue cards. We see it
in the MILCON bill on the Senate side, saying the VA can do it
for maybe this year. Are you considering this, let's not get
behind the ball again on an issue, let's get ahead of it.
Dr. Shulkin. We would need legislative support to be able
to consider that. Right now as you know, we are not able to
offer that. I think that the science on this and the experience
in the community that is happening across the country suggests
that this is something that we should be looking at more
carefully, and we welcome working with you on that.
Ms. Titus. I just think it is going to be a community
health issue. And if we are moving to more of that kind of
service, we need to be aware of it, not put our heads in the
sand on this issue.
Ms. Brown. Would the gentlewoman yield for a question?
Ms. Titus. I will yield.
Ms. Brown. My understanding is that we in Congress passed a
law saying that the VA doctors, even in the States that it is
legal, they cannot administer marijuana.
Ms. Titus. I appreciate that, and I will take my time back.
I understand that is the case, but I also understand that it
has been put into the MILCON bill on the Senate side for 1 year
that in States where it is legal, the VA can't refuse to do it.
So I don't know if that is going to be part of the compromise
or not, but I hope it is. I am supportive of that. But either
way, it is an issue that is moving very rapidly, and we need to
be on top of it. I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Coffman, coming from a State where
marijuana is legal.
Mr. Coffman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think you are going
to bring those chicken biscuits and we are going to have some
brownies from the State of Colorado.
Mr. Gibson, you touched on--first of all, I think this is
moving in the right direction, but you did touch on some issues
involving TPAs, the third party administrators. And I think
being at a decision point whether or not you want to move that
in-house and what the problems are. Could you, just briefly,
touch on some of the issues, again, that you see with TPAs?
Mr. Gibson. First of all, and we do this every single day.
I think the guys get tired of hearing me do this. I say, guys,
we are just going to do the right thing for veterans, and
allows us to be the best steward of taxpayer resources. So as
you look at all the different functions, scheduling would be a
function, processing claims would be a function, building and
maintaining the provider network. I am sure I am leaving some
out.
So you have got all these different functions, in every
case, we have to make a deliberate decision, do we do this
ourselves or do we outsource it? And the criteria are just that
simple. What is right for veterans, what allows us to deliver
the best service to veterans, and allows us to be good stewards
of taxpayer resources.
So where it makes sense for us to outsource, believe me, we
are going to head off in that direction.
Mr. Coffman. I would encourage you not to bring the third
party administrator functioning in, simply because I think you
have been objective with this Committee on problems with third
party administrators. I think we have had a problem, quite
frankly, when issues are done internally. Sometimes we just
don't get those reports that are accurate. My situation with
the hospital in Aurora, Colorado, where we have been told, even
despite the fact in 2013 there was a GAO report that said this
hospital, and three other hospitals that were currently under
construction, were each, hundreds of millions of dollars over
budget, years behind schedule, that we would be told by Mr.
Hagstrom before this Committee that everything was fine, and it
could be built for $604 million.
He testified in Colorado. Last year at a formal field
hearing that it could be built for $604 million. Then all of a
sudden, the VA loses litigation in December of last year. The
general contractor walks off the job and says, we are not going
to come on the job unless the VA is off the job. The Army Corps
of Engineers steps in, does an assessment and comes up with a
number of $1.73 billion.
So I just think that I like the idea that there is this
tension between yourselves and a private entity, and that
you're objective with us in terms of the problems. Because what
we tend to do is find out problems from whistleblowers or
litigation in the case of the Aurora Hospital. And so, I just
want to encourage you that whatever issues you have, make it
work with them because I think that the problems would be much
greater in-house, and we, quite frankly, would not be made
aware of those problems on a timely basis.
Dr. Shulkin. Congressman, I would just say as the Secretary
says, as the Deputy Secretary says, and as I say, this is not
business as usual. We have learned painfully from those
lessons, and we are looking at every issue as they make--
Mr. Coffman. I am sorry. God bless you for trying, but we
get that every time, every year. Every year, there are VA
leaders that step before us to say, it is going to be different
now, we are going to change now, the culture is going to
change. We got--it is newer, bigger, better, and then the
following year, we find out it is not, newer, bigger and
better. And the same problems exist, if not deeper. So it is
what it is, and I think you mitigate that by using things like
a third party payer, you know. I think that arm's length
distance between them is positive. And I think make it work,
because I certainly will not support expanding the VA
bureaucratic footprint after the experiences we--I have
observed being a Member of this Committee. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. McNerney.
Mr. McNerney. I thank the Chairman, I thank the panel for
having a welcome positive hearing today. The thing that I am
concerned about is we have a plan to consolidate the purchase
care programs. And maybe I missed your testimony earlier on
that, but what sort of--what is the basis for believing that
this is going to be a better provider than what we already have
or what has already been tried in the past? Is there a
statistical basis? Is there a model that you have seen that has
made this transition? What makes you think that this is going
to be a better program?
Dr. Yehia. So thank you. I think that is a great question.
I think the goal here was that we have a number of these
different programs, this patchwork of different community care
programs. We want to move more towards a standard, what we are
calling a high performing network. And so, we think this is
good because this is where health care industries are moving.
We have learned lessons from our Federal partners, such as DoD
and TRICARE. And at the end of the day, we want to create that
seamless connection to a complementary network in the community
that veterans can access. And we are basing that on things that
have been demonstrated well in the community, in the private
sector.
Mr. McNerney. Has there been any coordination with the DoD
in terms of transferring data or care information so that
veterans that are recently out don't have to go through the
huge rigmaroles?
Dr. Yehia. Yeah, when we first started this effort, we
worked very closely with our DoD partners. Again, recognizing
them as having many similarities to VA, they operate TRICARE.
And so, we sat down with them on multiple occasions to learn
about lessons learned, best practices and we continued to work
with them. The concept of them vetting some of our TPAs in our
medical centers, that was something that TRICARE did. And so we
are using a lot of those lessons learned from them.
Mr. McNerney. I mean, one of the biggest concerns we have
is the transition between the DoD and the VA. I have often
thought that we just need to have a czar that can tell people
what to do instead of having bickering back and forth, but--so
you are saying, hey, this is actually happening, we don't need
to have a big gun that is going to make this happen. Is that
right?
Dr. Shulkin. Yes, that is correct. We are--DoD has been
very integral in support of our move towards this type of new
plan. And we have several oversight Committees that we jointly
chair between DoD and VA, where this is a standing agenda item,
we are working in between meetings, but also have oversight
over this. And actually, I think, from my perspective, this is
going in a very positive direction.
Mr. Gibson. I will tell you, we all spend a lot of time out
in the field. There are countless examples of close
collaborative work locally between VA facilities and DoD
medical treatment facilities, where they are just doing
amazing. I was in Charleston, South Carolina, Baligh and I both
were down there last week. I went out to Goose Creek where we
jointly operate a clinic with the Navy. And one of the things
we were able to do is jointly fund the purchase of an MRI. What
you find is you have got a DoD doctor, you have got VA med
techs that are running the facility day in and day out. And on
2 days of the week, you will find DoD patients coming in; on 2
days of the week you will find VA patients coming in.
It is that kind of close and collaborative relationship,
and it is happening all over the country. The one other issue
that gets at this VA-DoD collaboration that I sort of sense you
are alluding to, has to do with the exchange of health
information. And before you arrived, the Chairman has agreed to
buy the chicken and biscuits for us and come over and do a demo
for the Members of exactly how we are exchanging information
today, day in and day out.
Mr. McNerney. That was going to be my next comment is how
useful would it be for the Members of the Committee to actually
see that. So Chairman, you are ahead of me. I congratulate late
you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Huelskamp, you are recognized.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
gentleman for joining us here today some very exciting
questions and comments. I have some follow-up I would like to
ask.
First, I did have a town hall in Colby, Kansas, which is
way up in northwest Kansas. And a veteran was actually leaving
that town hall, was going to drive to Aurora, Colorado, to pick
up a hearing aid. That is 227 miles, one-way drive. Gentleman,
there is a provider in Colby, Kansas, that you won't approve. I
mean, Choice is supposed to fix that. Telling him to drive that
far for something he should drive two or three blocks is
unacceptable.
Mr. Gibson. We agree completely. It shouldn't happen.
Mr. Huelskamp. It shouldn't happen. And that is what we
were hoping to fix. Couple of questions on that. But first, on
the aspirational document, it certainly is aspirational,
especially if you look at the cost. What is the 3-year cost,
your estimate to implement this plan?
Mr. Gibson. As I pointed out in my opening statement, the
essential costs that we are focused on right now is actually
the cost of the consolidation itself. The much larger numbers
have to do with anticipated, increased reliance. And the other
module, if you will, which has to do with opening the aperture
on access to emergency care and urgent care, which we believe
is really--we are not serving veterans well today with the
current statutory approach that we have to those aspects of
care.
Mr. Huelskamp. And I agree. By the way, you did pay that
veteran to drive the 454 miles, that is just a minor savings,
but he also did that same drive just to get the appointment.
Mr. Gibson. Let me make just one really quick comment,
because we started working this over a year ago where we
weren't able to use audiologists in the communities because
they weren't able to access our advantageous contract for
hearing aids. And what we have done is we have changed that. We
fixed it so that now an audiologist in the community can
actually access our advantageous contracts for purchase of
hearing aids. This, what you are describing should--absolutely
should not be happening.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yeah, I agree. But on the budget, if I did
the figures correctly in pulling the Choice out of that, which
is another question, if I read correctly, it is about a $10
billion, 3-year cost for implementation moving forward on this
plan, is that rough and ready figures?
Mr. Gibson. Again, what you are referring to are the costs
associated with increased reliance, as well as the cost
associated with opening the aperture.
Mr. Huelskamp. Well, I just wanted to make sure, because--
Mr. Gibson. The critical issue, at this point, has to do
with consolidating these seven or eight different programs into
a single channel for community care that veterans and
providers--
Mr. Huelskamp. Oh, I understand the approach here, and I
have some follow-up questions on that. But not even including
the extension of Choice, I think I see the figures is 10
billion in 3 years, so if I am wrong on that, please confirm
that. So it is certainly an aspirational document. There is not
going to be $10 billion we are throwing out there for this.
But one thing I want to ask strictly for the authors of the
report, I mean, you only had 2 months to put this together. Can
you lay this over top of the 4,000-page independent assessment
that said we have a leadership crisis here? How are you going
to fix--I think you have to fix the leadership crisis before
you even talk about implementing this massive change. It is
very big. So gentlemen, if you can provide some insight.
Mr. Dalpiaz. Well, I think I will leave the leadership
question to the Deputy. What we did with the independent
assessment is we pulled out each one of the items that related
to community care. So anything that looked like it would line
up, with our proposal, we literally took word for word from a
document, incorporated it and assured that we are covering it,
and that it was sensitive to the independent assessments. The
leadership part I will leave to others.
Dr. Shulkin. Yeah. Just very briefly, two quick things. The
amount of money that we need to get this going to consolidate
care in the community is $421 million. The other parts of it
are things that--
Mr. Huelskamp. That is not what is in the numbers. The
incremental cost of implementing its consolidation plan, just
one portion is $400 million to $800 million annually. That over
3 years is about $2 billion just for the incremental cost of
implementation. So if you could clarify that for the Committee,
I mean, these are your numbers.
Dr. Shulkin. Right, right. In fiscal year 2016, it will be
$421 million incrementally. And those systems then would
essentially carry into the future years. You are right.
The emergency care that the Deputy referred to is, has a
separate price tag that is decided upon. That could be decided
not to proceed with, or that could be decided to proceed with,
and the increased reliance has a separate price tag. That means
when you make the system more useable, we think more veterans
will come into the system.
In terms of the leadership issue, you are absolutely
correct, Congressman; this is our critical factor. We do not
have a hope of implementing this plan without the correct
leadership, and we are focused on getting leaders in to fill
our medical center positions, our regional positions and our
central positions, including finding a Deputy Under Secretary
that will oversee plan who has the experience in managed care
and population health to make this successful.
Mr. Huelskamp. Is this the new Under Secretary position
that you proposed to create?
Dr. Shulkin. We have submitted an organizational chart to
you that this is a new position, because VA currently does not
have this level of competency in a senior executive position
who knows how to implement this plan.
Mr. Huelskamp. Hopefully, we might have a second round, Mr.
Chairman. I apologize.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, let me
just say that as far as the leadership team in front of me, I
am impressed. In particular, with the medical leadership with
the graduate from the University of Florida.
Now on for my questions. I understand that TRICARE had 2-1/
2 years for preparation before it rolled out its program. We
had less than what, 2 months? If you had more time, I mean, we
insisted that you roll it out in this time period, we put in
some new rules and regulations, particular as pay to the
providers. Can you give me some feedback on that?
Mr. Dalpiaz. Having the opportunity now to look back on
those 60 days that someone had to write requirements, we
learned a lot of lessons. One of which is, in the future, we
probably wouldn't contract out the customer service portion of
what we do. We did that. And when we talk about the
requirements for what a future network might look like, that
really is coming from not only the lessons we learned in the
last year, and last year and a half. It is really TRICARE
lessons as well as you point out.
So one of the requirements that you see are things that we
envision in the future network based on our experience and
things that we would have done much differently if we had more
than 60 days to stand this up.
Ms. Brown. In the draft agreement legislation you submitted
to the Subcommittee on Health, you discussed requiring
providers to submit medical records to the VA. Will payments to
the provider and return of records be linked? There has been a
source of controversy for current providers under the Choice
Program, and, of course, it is about timely payment.
Dr. Shulkin. Congresswoman, we recognize that the timely
payment issue to our providers is a critical issue, because it
could threaten access to veterans. And coming from the provider
side, I am very sensitive to providing a service and not
getting paid. So we are going to be encouraging two things of
our providers. The reason why we don't perform as well as we
should on timely payments is because only 40 percent of our
payments are received electronically, and the industry standard
is above 95 percent.
Secondly, we are adjudicating 100 percent of our claims
when the industry standard is more like 5 percent. So we want
to fix both of those and we are going to be reaching out to the
providers. We saw the article recently about the Florida
providers and the amount that is owed to them. We are going to
be reaching out to them to ask them to send us their
information electronically, and delink some of the requirements
for medical record documentation. We do need to get the
documentation back to provide good continuity of care, but we
want to be providing prompt payment to our providers.
Ms. Brown. When we collapse the various programs and, you
know, it has been a lot of discussion about the Choice Program
and the program that we had in the community for years, but I
think it is a difference in the payment, one program over
another; what will this plan be for the future?
Dr. Yehia. So, that is exactly right. When we looked at all
the different programs, they all had different eligibility
criteria, different payment rates for providers, different
rules that they have to sign up to work with us. So we are
trying to move more towards a uniform standard approach.
I think as it relates to payment, we want to move towards
industry standards, which, in many areas, is Medicare, and so
those are the regional local Medicare rates. They take into
account if you are living in a very rural area, or have a
training program. And so this is our intention, is to move
towards that standard payment, with the caveat being that in
some locales, like Alaska or highly, highly rural areas, or
certain specialties, we might have to go higher than the
Medicare rate. But the standard we want to move to is towards
Medicare.
Ms. Brown. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Are we going to have
a second round?
The Chairman. Thank you very much. We are going to do a
second round of questions, if I can. I may deviate just a
little bit from the purpose of the hearing.
But, Mr. Secretary, how much money remains in the Choice
fund, and what is the current estimated time of depletion of
the current funds?
Mr. Gibson. There is currently, in the 802 section of
funds, about $6 billion roughly. And a rate at which we
extinguish that will be very much a function of care in the
community utilization during fiscal year 2016.
The Chairman. Do you expect that it will be depleted by the
end of fiscal year 2016?
Mr. Gibson. I think that there is a chance it could be. We
have got about $9 billion in care in the community budget in
our core budget for care in the community for 2016. And so, as
you look at current run rates, we actually spent over 10 in
2015, but there was an awful lot of ramp-up that happened over
the course of the year. So we could potentially find ourselves
exhausting the remaining $6 billion. But based on the numbers I
see right now, I think it is less likely that we would.
The Chairman. Okay. I asked the question because on a--in a
hearing on the 25th of June, you stated, and I quote,
``Referring to hepatitis C anti- and viral-infected veterans to
the Choice Program is not the best model to provide care for
taxpayers or veterans,'' end quote. And we infused a large
amount of money to help you with your capacity. You said you
had the capacity internally to handle that. But I have been
told now that VA has reduced new treatment starts to about 300
per week, and it is treating only those patients with advanced
liver disease. So all the veterans that are seeking the hep C
treatment are being pushed outside to Choice. And I want to
know if that is a true statement. And if so, why has the
guidance and the model from care from HCV changed from
September?
Mr. Gibson. Yeah, first of all, we appreciate allocating
the $500 million that you did to allow us to pay for the
pharmaceuticals. We did dramatically accelerate starts during
that period of time and we are able to get--I am not going to
remember the number off the top of my head--a very large number
of veterans started before the end of year, expending somewhere
over $400 million worth of the $500 million that was allocated.
I suspect that part of what has happened there is that we
cleaned out some of the pipeline. We basically had veterans
that were in the queue to receive that care and that were
eligible for the care, and that basically, we started getting
them that care.
I also know that the funds, budgeted funds for hep C in
2016 are substantially, very substantially less than what we
had allocated and spent during 2015. And that does create a
situation where we have got to ensure that we don't get ahead
of ourselves in terms of spending those funds.
The Chairman. And if I might, Ms. Titus talked about a
parochial issue, or Ms. Kuster, I think it was, a minute ago. I
have one too, but I have a sneaking suspicion it is not just to
the first Congressional district. I had a veteran come up to me
at a ceremony on Saturday that said that he had been scheduled
for a surgery at a VA facility, and he was called on the
Tuesday of that week, and was told that VA didn't have any
money in order to perform that surgery, and that he would have
to be put in the Choice Program which would delay his surgery.
So my question, I guess, is twofold. Number one, why in the
world would anything like this ever occur? And number two, it
appears to me that there may be facilities that are protecting
their internal funds by pushing folks out into Choice so that
they will have those dollars to utilize them. This was an
elderly veteran. We have since talked to him and gotten the
laydown as to actually what was said. But can you explain why
anybody would say VA had no money?
Mr. Gibson. Sure. Well, no, I can't explain that. Please
ask John to let me know--give me some particulars--I was
looking for him, but I don't see him--oh, there you are, had
your head down--to give me some information on the particular
veteran so that we can follow-up specifically and make sure
that that veteran gets the care they need.
Secondly, I cannot conceive of why we would say that we
don't have any money to perform that surgery inside VA. So that
makes absolutely no sense to me.
Third, I would tell you, as we look at October obligations,
total obligations in October for care in the community exceeded
$1 billion. Only $140 million of those were for Choice. I can't
imagine why we would be telling a veteran, you know, you have
got to go outside for Choice instead of us providing that care
inside, or either with another community provider. It makes no
sense.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Brownley.
Ms. Brownley. I don't have any further questions, but I
just wanted to make a quick apology, because I made the common
mistake in my earlier comments of calling TriWest, TRICARE. So
I wanted to apologize to TriWest. I presume everybody
understood what I was saying because nobody corrected me until
my staff, after I finished, said I kept saying TRICARE instead
of TriWest so I wanted to apologize. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you. I know Dave appreciates that.
The Chairman. Mr. Huelskamp.
Mr. Huelskamp. Hopefully they will be short here. If I
might make a request following up on the gentleman that wrote
the report. Would you go back and read the independent
assessment and provide some direction compared to how you can
implement the Under Secretary as well. Something in writing so
I can wrap my arms around this. And appreciate the Chairman's
questions about the funds left in Choice. I wouldn't want to
run--run out of money with that at a very critical time. 2016
becomes--every 4 years, becomes kind of a silly season around
here, and so I appreciate the reference to that.
But to follow-up with the gentleman that talks about moving
to the Medicare reimbursement rates, which is perfect. That is
all my hospitals, and we have 70 of them are looking for, and
the independent providers. Medicare audiology obviously doesn't
work well, different rate structure. But what bothers me is
requiring these providers and dozens of hospitals to go through
a different certification system.
Why is the Medicare certification system, which has been
around for decades and has its problems, but it is there, they
are qualified for Medicare. And by the way, these hospitals
serve more veterans than you all do, those that are outside the
system. So explain why we just can't use all the Medicare
certification system, and save all the problems and move on?
Dr. Yehia. Well, I agree with you. I think what we want to
do is move more towards that industry standard. I think two
points there: One in terms of rates; and two, how we partner
with providers. So the concept of provider agreements, again,
going back to that. We have--a lot of that is based, and the
word ``provider'' is based on Medicare. And so it is how we can
simply partner with our community providers to be able to
deliver care to veterans without going through a complicated
contracting process. That is exactly what we are looking to do.
And when we think of credentialing, the plan talks about
moving to standardized credentialing that everybody else does.
So we don't want to require anything--we don't want it to be
burdensome for these critical community providers that we need
to partner with to deliver care to veterans.
Mr. Huelskamp. Currently, there is a separate credentialing
process or just VA compared to Medicare?
Dr. Yehia. Currently, there is different credentialing
rules for the different programs. So when the Choice Act was
written into law, there was actually various credentials that
we have to have in order to work with those providers. The
Committee was able to expand some of those eligibilities to
include, like, Medicare payments and--or Medicare providers and
others. So some of those were Medicaid providers and others. So
some of those have been, are in statute or regulation. So if we
are looking toward moving towards that standard, we might need
your help to change some of these laws so that they are
consistent with those standards.
Mr. Huelskamp. I don't remember those restrictions being in
there. That was my outcome. That would save us all some time,
trouble, and money, and folks driving 227 or 400 miles. That is
what we are aiming at, so I appreciate your recognition of
that. So I have--again, 70 community hospitals could tell you,
we have already credentialed and the payment agreement is--
understood. I mean, if you can tie into the Medicare rates, I
think you solved about 50 percent of the problems for these
providers and for their veterans. So I appreciate that, and
appreciate the response. And if you put this in writing as
well, so I can understand that, Mr. Chairman. So thank you for
the time.
The Chairman. Ms. Brown, do you have any further questions?
Ms. Brown. Just a comment. With the change of the
presidential administration in 18 months, and the turnover of
higher level employees in the VA, are you concerned about
starting the consolidation program, and then having it stall?
And just, I have been listening to some of the candidates speak
and they clearly don't have any understanding about VA's
operation, and, I mean, comments candidates make, someone has
been in an emergency room waiting to be seen for 8 hours. Bull.
So can you respond to that?
Mr. Gibson. I certainly--I would love to. And I would tell
you two different thoughts here: Number 1, what we are trying
to do is to lay out a path that has been developed
collaboratively with Congress, with VSOs, with the provider
community, so that this winds up being something of an
inexorable direction that we want to head for care in the
community.
The second thing that it would offer up, I think one of the
vital roles that this Committee can play is helping to ensure
some continuity of effort across the administrations. So as we
work together on developing some of these solutions, having
this Committee, and all of Congress frankly, Senate
Subcommittees, as a collaborative partner in this process, it
gives you an investment in the direction that we are taking so
that there is some expectation that that continues in the
future administration.
Ms. Brown. I agree 100 percent. This Committee that I've
been on for 23 years, has always been very bipartisan. I mean,
when veterans go to fight, no one asks them what party, you
know, Democrat, Republican, or Independent. And, of course, I
think that Congress, you know, for many years, we did not
adequately fund the VA. And I am glad that we are now
soldiering up. I like that word. I learned it last week, and I
am using it. And we need to do our part. So any final comments?
Mr. Gibson. We are trying to do our best to soldier up too.
Okay?
Ms. Brown. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Brown, very much. Thank you to
the witnesses for being here today. We appreciate the effort
that you are putting into this consolidation program. We know
it is moving in the right direction. There are many, many
moving parts. We will have more questions, I am sure, as the
process continues on. But I would ask unanimous consent that
all Members would have 5 legislative days with which to revise
and extend their remarks, and add any extraneous material.
Without objection, so ordered. With that, this hearing is
adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Prepared Statement of Chairman Miller
Thank you all for joining us for today's oversight hearing
entitled, ``Choice Consolidation: Assessing VA's Plan to Improve Care
in the Community.''
In late July, Congress authorized the Department of Veterans
Affairs (VA) to use a substantial portion of the Choice program funds
to cover the Veterans Health Administration's multi-billion dollar
budget shortfall.
In turn, VA was required to submit a plan to the Committee
detailing how VA would consolidate and improve the many fractured
programs and authorities that the Department currently uses to refer
veterans to non-VA providers.
We are here today so that VA can present this plan to the Committee
and, together, we can measure its merits and challenges.
Non-VA care - or, Care in the Community, as VA now calls it - is an
increasingly vital component of the VA health care system.
Each month, veterans, survivors, and certain dependents of veterans
receive approximately one million appointments - more than twenty
percent of all the appointments VA provides - from doctors and nurses
and other health care professionals in community hospitals and clinics
outside of the Department's walls.
Allowing veterans to see these providers is vital to ensuring
timely and convenient access to care.
And, I suspect that, as the veteran population continues to grow in
both age and number and as the health care landscape continues to
shift, the need for non-VA providers to supplement - and please note
that I said supplement, not supplant - the care that VA provides in-
house will only continue to grow.
But, the success of VA's Care in the Community program is hampered
by inconsistent and competing eligibility requirements, business
processes, and reimbursement rates across the seven methods that VA
currently uses to refer veterans to outside providers.
As a result, non-VA care as we know it today has become
unmanageable and unsustainable.
The success of the VA health care system over the next several
years will depend in large part on VA's ability to consolidate these
seven disparate methods into a single, coordinated program that is easy
for veterans and community providers to understand and buy into and
easy for VA employees to administer and manage.
This is no easy task.
It will require us to have some difficult conversations about the
purpose of the VA health care system and what it should and feasibly
can achieve.
It will also require us to examine VA's massive physical footprint
and make decisions about the future of facilities that once served a
great purpose but may no longer be benefiting our veterans as they
should.
The plan that the Department submitted in late October to
accomplish non-VA care consolidation and take the first steps toward
building the VA healthcare system of tomorrow offers a promising but
still poorly defined vision of a future ideal state of VA care that
offers little in the way of concrete details, timelines, or goalposts -
leaving us blind as to how VA intends to get from where we are now to
where we all know VA needs go next.
I am hopeful that the testimony and responses that we will hear
this morning will shed some much-needed light on how VA intends to
transform the fractured collection of non-VA programs and authorities
that we have today into the coordinated system of care that our
veterans truly deserve.
I am grateful to the Deputy Secretary, the Under Secretary for
Health, and the two leaders of VA's consolidation effort for being here
this morning to present the Department's proposal and I now recognize
Ranking Member Brown for any opening statement she might have.

Prepared Statement of Honorable Sloan Gibson
Good morning, Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Brown, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the Department
of Veterans Affairs' (VA's) proposal to consolidate VA's care in the
community programs to improve access to health care. I am accompanied
today by Dr. David Shulkin, Under Secretary for Health; Dr. Baligh
Yehia, Assistant Deputy Undersecretary for Health for Community Care;
and Mr. Joseph Dalpiaz, Network Director, Veterans Integrated Service
Network 17.
VA is committed to providing Veterans access to timely, high-
quality health care. In today's complex and changing health care
environment, where VA is experiencing a steep increase in demand for
care, it is essential for VA to partner with providers in communities
across the country to meet Veterans' needs. To be effective, these
partnerships must be principle-based, streamlined, and easy to navigate
for Veterans, community providers, and VA employees. Historically, VA
has used numerous programs, each with their own unique set of
requirements, to create these critical partnerships with community
providers. This resulted in a complex and confusing landscape for
Veterans and community providers, as well as VA employees.
Acknowledging these issues, VA is taking action as part of an
enterprise-wide transformation called MyVA. MyVA will modernize VA's
culture, processes, and capabilities to put the needs, expectations,
and interests of Veterans and their families first. Included in this
transformation is a plan for the consolidation of community care
programs and business processes, consistent with Title IV of the
Surface Transportation and Veterans Health Care Choice Improvement Act
of 2015 (also known as the VA Budget and Choice Improvement Act) and
recommendations set forth in the Independent Assessment of the Health
Care Delivery Systems and Management Processes of the Department of
Veterans Affairs (Independent Assessment Report) that was required by
Section 201 of the Veterans Access, Choice, and Accountability Act of
2014 (The Choice Act).
This document provides a plan for how VA could consolidate all
purchased care programs into one New Veterans Choice Program (New VCP).
The New VCP will include some aspects of the current Veterans Choice
Program (Section 101 of PL 113-146, as amended) and incorporate
additional elements designed to improve the delivery of community care.
The 10 elements of this plan, as set forth in law, are listed to the
right. With the New VCP as described in this plan, enrolled Veterans
will have greater choice and ease of use in access to health care
services at VA facilities and in the community.

VA Budget and Choice Improvement Act Legislative Elements

1. Single Program for Non-Department Care Delivery
2. Patient Eligibility Requirements
3. Authorization
4. Billing and Reimbursement Process
5. Provider Reimbursement Rate
6. Plan to Develop Provider Eligibility Requirements
7. Prompt Payment Compliance
8. Plans to Use Current Non-Department Provider Networks and
Infrastructure
9. Medical Records Management
10. Transition Plan

The New VCP will clarify eligibility requirements, build on
existing infrastructure to develop a high-performing network,
streamline clinical and administrative processes, and implement a
continuum of care coordination services. Clear guidelines,
infrastructure, and processes to meet VA's community care needs will
improve Veterans' experience and access to health care. VA's future
health care delivery network will address gaps in Veterans' access to
health care in a simple, streamlined, effective manner and will
continue to support VA's missions of research and education.
VA is continuing to examine how the Veterans Choice Program
interacts with other VA health programs, including the delivery of
direct care. In addition, VA is evaluating how it will adapt to a
rapidly changing health care environment and how it will interact with
other health providers and insurers. As VA continues to refine its
health care delivery model, we look forward to providing more detail on
how to convert the principles outlined in this plan into an executable,
fiscally-sustainable future state. In addition, we plan to receive and
potentially incorporate recommendations from the Commission on Care and
other stakeholders.
VA anticipates improving the delivery of community care through
incremental improvements as outlined in this plan, building on certain
provisions of the Veterans Choice Program. The implementation of these
improvements requires balancing care provided at VA facilities and in
the community, and addressing increasing health care costs. VA will
work with Congress and the Administration to refine the approach
described in this plan, with the goal of improving Veteran's health
outcomes and experience, as well as maximizing the quality, efficiency,
and sustainability of VA's health programs.

The Path Forward

The design of the New VCP (Legislative Element 1) is based on
feedback from Veterans, Veteran Service Organizations (VSOs), VA
employees, Federal stakeholders, and best practices. VA's plan centers
on five functional areas. Within each functional area are key points to
enable Veterans to receive timely and high-quality health care.
1. Veterans We Serve (Eligibility) - This area addresses
overlapping community care eligibility requirements, as directed in
Legislative Element 2. Streamlining and consolidating these
requirements will allow Veterans to easily understand their eligibility
for community care and access community care faster. VA and community
providers will have significantly lower administrative burdens, which
have often impeded timely delivery of Veterans' care. This area
includes the following possible enhancements:

Establish a single set of eligibility criteria for all
community care based on geographic access/distance to a VA primary care
provider (PCP), wait-time for care, and availability of services at VA.

Expand access to emergency treatment and urgent community
care.
2. Access to Community Care (Referral and Authorization) - This
area addresses the complicated process of community care referrals and
authorizations, as directed in Legislative Element 3. VA will optimize
the referral and authorization systems and supporting processes,
enabling more rapid exchange of information to support timely delivery
of care. This area includes the following possible enhancements:

Streamline business rules in referral and authorization
to minimize delays in delivering care and eliminate unnecessary
administrative burdens.

Improve VA visibility into health care utilization in the
community.
3. High-Performing Network - This area leverages components of
existing non Department networks and identifies new community partners
to build a high performing network, as outlined in Legislative Element
8. Addressing issues of provider eligibility requirements and
reimbursement rates, as outlined in Legislative Elements 5 and 6, will
be key to this approach. This area includes the following possible
enhancements:

Develop a tiered, high-performing provider network to
better serve Veterans, consisting of the following categories:
--VA Core Network: Includes existing relationships with high-
quality health care assets in the Department of Defense (DoD), Indian
Health Service (IHS), Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHC), Tribal
Health Programs (THP), and academic teaching affiliates.
--External Network: Includes commercial community providers and
distinguishes Preferred providers based on quality and performance
criteria.

Move towards value-based payments in alignment with
industry trends.

Implement productivity standards to better manage supply
and demand.

Develop dedicated customer support to improve Veteran and
community provider experiences.
4. Care Coordination - This area focuses on improving medical
records management and strengthening existing care coordination
capabilities, as directed by Legislative Element 9. Improving medical
records management will support a high-performing network and enable
better decision making through analytics. It will also support more
effective care coordination and improved Veteran health care outcomes.
This area includes the following possible enhancements:

Offer a continuum of care coordination services to
Veterans, tailored to their unique needs.

Use analytics to improve Veterans' health by guiding them
to personalized services and tools (e.g., disease management, case
management).

Enable community providers to easily exchange health
information with VA.

Design customer service systems to help resolve inquiries
from Veterans and community providers regarding care coordination.
5. Provider Payment - This area focuses on improving billing,
claims, and reimbursement processes, as well as Prompt Payment Act
(PPA) compliance for purchasing care, as directed by Legislative
Elements 4, 5, and 7. This area includes the following possible
enhancements:

Implement a claims solution which is able to auto-
adjudicate a high percentage of claims, enabling VA to pay community
providers promptly and correctly.

Move to a standardized regional fee schedule, to the
extent practicable, for consistency in reimbursement.
The New VCP will use a system of systems approach to enhance these
five functional areas as part of the larger VA health care
transformation. This approach stresses the interactive, interdependent,
and interoperable nature of external and internal components within
VA's health care delivery system. The New VCP includes enhancements to
the following systems, which will have a positive impact on VA and the
greater Veterans' health ecosystem:

Integrated Customer Service Systems - Provide a reliable,
easy-to-use way for Veterans and community providers to get their
questions answered, provide feedback, and submit inquiries.

Integrated Care Coordination Systems - Establish a clear
process for Veterans to seamlessly transition between VA and community
care, supporting positive health outcomes wherever the Veteran chooses
to receive care.

Integrated Administrative Systems (Eligibility, Referral,
Authorizations, and Billing and Reimbursement) - Simplify eligibility
criteria so Veterans can easily determine their options for community
care, streamline the referral and authorization process to enable more
timely access to community care, and standardize business processes to
minimize administrative burden for community providers and VA staff.

High-Performing Network Systems - Enable the development
and maintenance of a high-performing provider network to maximize
choice, quality, and value for Veteran health care.

Integrated Operations Systems (Enterprise Governance,
Analytics, and Reporting) - Define ownership and management of
community care at all levels of VA, local and national, and institute
standard metrics to drive high performance and accountability across
facilities.
The New VCP plan envisions a three-phased approach to implement
these changes to support improved health care delivery, as outlined in
the Transition Plan (Legislative Element 10). This will deliver
incremental improvements while planning for a future state consistent
with evolving health care best practices. The first phase will include
development of the implementation plan and will focus on the
development of minimum viable systems and processes that can meet
critical Veteran needs without major changes to supporting technology
or organizations. Phase II will consist of implementing interfaced
systems and community care process changes. Finally, Phase III will
include the deployment of integrated systems, maintenance and
enhancement of the high-performing network, data-driven processes, and
quality improvements.
Executing the New VCP will not be possible without approval of
requested legislative changes and requested budget. The primary
objectives of the legislative proposal recommendations are to make
immediate improvements to community care, establish a single program
for community care, and implement necessary business process
improvements. The budget section of this plan is divided into three
parts: (1) System Redesign and Solutions; (2) Hospital Care and Medical
Services, including Dentistry; and (3) Expanded Access to Emergency
Treatment and Urgent Care. System Redesign and Solutions include
enhancements to the referral and authorization process, care
coordination, customer service, and claims processing and payment.
These changes are expected to improve the Veteran experience with
community care. As a result, this may increase Veterans' reliance on VA
community care, leading to increased Hospital Care and Medical Services
costs. Expanded Access to Emergency Treatment and Urgent Care is
important in providing Veterans with appropriate access to these
services, but is severable from other aspects of the Program and could
be implemented separately.
The incremental costs of the enabling System Redesign and Solutions
for the New VCP are estimated to range between $400 and $800 million
annually during the first three years. VA's community care programs
(hospital care, medical services, and long-term services and supports)
prior to the enactment of The Choice Act, cost roughly $7 billion per
year. Continuing the Veterans Choice Program, as amended, beyond its
current expiration will cost approximately an additional $6.5 billion
per year, assuming no changes are made to its current structure
(eligibility, referral and authorization, provider reimbursement,
etc.). Improvements to the delivery of community care as described in
this plan would require additional annual resources between $1.5 and
$2.5 billion in the first year and are likely to increase thereafter.
The proposed expanded access to emergency treatment and urgent care
requires an additional estimated $2 billion annually. Refer to the
estimated costs and budgetary requirements (Section 5) and legislative
proposal recommendations (Section 6) for additional information.
The estimated costs reflected in this report represent the funding
required to maintain VA's delivery of community care at current levels,
as well as incorporating the considerations outlined in this plan.
Additional changes or expansion of the program beyond the scope
outlined in this report could significantly increase the projected
costs.
VA cannot reach the future state alone. Ongoing partnership with
Congress will be critical to addressing the budgetary and legislative
requirements needed for this important transformation, including
outstanding decisions on aspects related to sustainability and cost-
sharing. The support and active participation of Congress, Federal
partners, VA employees, VSOs, and other stakeholders are necessary to
achieve more efficient, effective, and Veteran-centric health care
delivery.

Conclusion

Transformation of VA's community care program will address gaps in
Veterans' access to health care in a simple, streamlined, and effective
manner. This transformation will require a systems approach, taking
into account the interdependent nature of external and internal factors
involved in VA's health care system. MyVA will guide overall
improvements to VA's culture, processes, and capabilities and the New
VCP will serve as a central component of this transformation. The
successful implementation of the New VCP will require new legislative
authorities and additional resources and will position VA to improve
access to care, expand and strengthen relationships with community
providers, operate more efficiently, and improve the Veteran
experience.
Thank you. We look forward to your questions.

[all]
