- DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2014

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2014

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION
________
SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND
URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
TOM LATHAM, Iowa, Chairman
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            ED PASTOR, Arizona
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania      DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 TIM RYAN, Ohio
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mrs. Lowey, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Dena Baron, Cheryle Tucker, Doug Disrud,
Carl Barrick, and Brian Barnard,
Subcommittee Staff

________

PART 4
Page
Oversight Hearing: Management Issues at Departments of
Transportation and Housing and Urban Development..................    1
Oversight Hearing: Sandy Disaster Relief and Recovery............   59
Federal Transit Administration...................................  111
U.S. Department of Transportation................................  143
Department of Housing and Urban Development......................  185
Federal Aviation Administration..................................  239
Federal Railroad Administration..................................  527
Outside Witness Testimony........................................  565

________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Appropriations
Part 4

TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES
FOR 2014
?
?

DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND
RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2014

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS
FIRST SESSION

________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION, AND HOUSING AND
URBAN DEVELOPMENT, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS
TOM LATHAM, Iowa, Chairman
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            ED PASTOR, Arizona
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania      DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 TIM RYAN, Ohio
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mrs. Lowey, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.
Dena Baron, Cheryle Tucker, Doug Disrud,
Carl Barrick, and Brian Barnard,
Subcommittee Staff

________

PART 4
Page
Oversight Hearing: Management Issues at Departments of
Transportation and Housing and Urban Development..................    1
Oversight Hearing: Sandy Disaster Relief and Recovery............   59
Federal Transit Administration...................................  111
U.S. Department of Transportation................................  143
Department of Housing and Urban Development......................  185
Federal Aviation Administration..................................  239
Federal Railroad Administration..................................  527
Outside Witness Testimony........................................  565

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
85-070                     WASHINGTON : 2013

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

C. W. BILL YOUNG, Florida \1\      NITA M. LOWEY, New York
FRANK R. WOLF, Virginia            MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
JACK KINGSTON, Georgia             PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New JerseyJOSE E. SERRANO, New York
TOM LATHAM, Iowa                   ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        JAMES P. MORAN, Virginia
KAY GRANGER, Texas                 ED PASTOR, Arizona
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho          DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas        LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            SAM FARR, California
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas              CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
RODNEY ALEXANDER, Louisiana        SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
KEN CALVERT, California            BARBARA LEE, California
JO BONNER, Alabama                 ADAM B. SCHIFF, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida         BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania      TIM RYAN, Ohio
TOM GRAVES, Georgia                DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
KEVIN YODER, Kansas                HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas             CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ALAN NUNNELEE, Mississippi         MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska         WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida
CHARLES J. FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio
DAVID G. VALADAO, California
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland

----------

1}}
Chairman Emeritus

William E. Smith, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2014

----------

Thursday, March 14, 2013.

OVERSIGHT HEARING: MANAGEMENT ISSUES AT DEPARTMENTS OF TRANSPORTATION
AND HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

WITNESSES

CALVIN SCOVEL III, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
DAVID MONTOYA, INSPECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
MATHEW SCIRE, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MARKETS AND COMMUNITY INVESTMENT,
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
PHILLIP HERR, MANAGING DIRECTOR, PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE GOVERNMENT
ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
Mr. Latham. All right, the subcommittee will come to order.
And we welcome, today, HUD's Inspector General, David Montoya,
DOT's Inspector General, Calvin Scovel, Mathew Scire--am I
close? Good, good--GAO's Director of Financial Markets and
Community Investment, Philip Herr, GAO's Director of Fiscal
Infrastructure.
The subcommittee looks to your offices for help for us to
conduct critical oversight to ensure our tax dollars are well-
spent, and, actually, go to meet our nation's housing and
transportation needs. This oversight is even more important at
a time when we must shrink the federal budget and deal with our
mounting debt. Waste, fraud, and abuse should never be
tolerated, but this is especially true in today's budget
climate.
We look forward to your testimony today, and we'll look
closely for your work to make the tough decisions that will be
required as we put together this year's transportation/HUD-
funding bill. This is our first subcommittee hearing in FY
2014, so we will look forward to your testimony to inform our
questions for the cabinet's secretaries when they come.
I would ask that each of you limit your opening remarks to
five minutes, and we'll also limit each round of questions to
five minutes.
Before I recognize you for your opening statements, I am
pleased to finally welcome Mr. Pastor as our new ranking member
of the subcommittee. I look forward to working with you, in the
bipartisan tradition for this subcommittee that funds some of
our nation's most critical infrastructure investments, with an
eye towards stewardship of the taxpayer's dollars.
So, I am honored to recognize you for your opening
statement.
Mr. Pastor. Well, first of all, good morning, Mr. Chairman,
and good morning to everyone here. Sorry I was a little bit
late, but you know where I was at, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I also look to work with you this year. I know the
subcommittee has been a committee that works in a bipartisan
manner, and I expect that we will----
Mr. Latham. Absolutely.
Mr. Pastor [continuing]. Continue to do that. And so I look
forward to working with you.
And I want to thank you for calling this oversight hearing.
It provides a good opportunity for the subcommittee to examine
the key management challenges facing the Department of
Transportation and the Department of Housing and Urban
Development.
Many of the issues are not new to us, whether it's DOT's
role of safety oversight, the FAA's transition to NextGen, or
HUD's risk management FHA.
This morning, I'm interested in learning how progress can
be made to address these challenges, especially under the
condition of sequestration, as it takes hold in each agency.
Some management issues will require better oversight on the
part of DOT and HUD, while others will require resources at a
time when our budget is as tight as it is.
I look forward to this hearing, and hearing the thoughts of
our panel.
With that, I turn it back to you, Mr. Chairman, so we can
get to the testimony, the questions, and thank you for a good
day.
Mr. Latham. You bet. Thank you.
We will begin with HUD's Inspector General, Mr. Montoya.
Your full, written statement will be included for the record,
and you're recognized for five minutes.
Thank you.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Good morning, sir. Thank you.
General Latham, Ranking Member Pastor, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss HUD's
management challenges, and my office's oversight of its
programs.
Since becoming Inspector General, I have continued to meet
with Secretary Donovan and his senior staff on a regular basis
to discuss the various management challenges the Department
faces, including those I will briefly mention.
Let me begin with FHA's mutual mortgage insurance fund
capital ratio, which has been below the required two percent
level for the past four years. And each year has seen a further
decline.
Based on the latest actuarial study, in November 2012, the
ratio fell below zero, to -1.44 percent, which equates to a
-$16.3 billion against an active portfolio of $1.13 trillion.
While the Department has made changes to address the fund's
finances, I would highlight three areas of continued concern.
First, the FHA actuarial model is complicated, and
difficult to audit and use for risk management and strategic
planning purposes.
Two, we continue to recommend modeling at the midterm or on
a quarterly basis.
And three, HUD's unnecessary exposure when paying claims on
loans that were not qualified for insurance further depletes
the fund.
FHA remains slow to implement a rigorous claims review
process, and, when necessary, going back to the lenders to
recover losses.
Since Fiscal Year '01, OIG has annually reported on the
lack of an integrated financial management system, including
the need to enhance FHA's management controls over risk
portfolio of integrated insurance and financial systems.
Since 2003, HUD has spent more than $35 million, and does
not have a modern operational core financial system to show for
this investment. While there are various reasons, such as the
complexity and magnitude of the projects that are required to
migrate to a new financial system, it was a lack of proper
project management or mismanagement and not funding, which
caused this critical project's delay.
HUD's integrated disbursement and information system, known
as IDIS, which supports the Office of Community Planning and
Development's formula grant programs, including community
development block grant and home programs, continues to be an
area of distress, as we believe HUD's design and implementation
of IDIS is not in compliance with federal financial management
systems requirements.
Because we could not come to an agreement on our
recommendations, we forwarded our concern to the GAO, who has
been reviewing this matter, given the potential wider impact to
other agencies.
A continuing challenge for HUD is its Moving to Work
program, which has been a demonstration program since
approximately 1999. It provides public housing authorities the
opportunity to devise and test innovative, locally-designed
strategies that are aimed at using federal dollars more
effectively.
However, a 2012 GAO report found that the Moving to Work
program guidance does not specify that plans ensure that
performance is quantifiable and outcome-oriented.
By not identifying the performance data needed to assess
the results of the program, HUD is unable to effectively
evaluate the program. HUD has also not developed a systemic way
to identify lessons learned, to get the benefit intended and
expected from a demonstration program.
We have disagreed with HUD, who has indicated that it
intends to expand the number of Moving to Work participants,
because of my office's longstanding concerns.
Because of this, I have launched an initiative designed to
compile our previous work on problem areas that we and others
have reported on over the years, to provide HUD and the
Congress a clearer path to correct enduring problems in this
area.
With regard to HUD's HOME program, our efforts continue to
focus on problem grantees and connected issues of inadequate
controls, not always meeting the objectives of the program to
provide affordable housing, or not always meeting local
building code requirements.
HUD has proposed new rules, which, if implemented, should
strengthen HUD's future enforcement authority. In a recent
audit, we concluded that if the new regulations are properly
implemented, they will address our prior findings in most
areas.
However, in two key areas, oversight of field office
monitoring activities and the reliability of data contained in
HUD's IDIS information system, remain open audit
recommendations.
In closing, I would also mention that the Department faces
a significant management challenge in monitoring disaster
program funds, especially in light of the additional work it
will have with Sandy Disaster Recovery.
My office is strongly committed to working with the
Department and Congress to ensure that these important programs
operate efficiently and effectively, and as intended by
Congress.
I am happy to answer any questions.
Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Montoya.
We will now have Mr. Scire, with the five minutes.
Mr. Scire. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Pastor, members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to be here
today, to discuss our work on HUD programs, including the FHA
mortgage insurance program, and HUD's voucher and Moving to
Work programs.
Since 1934, FHA has been an important player in the
mortgage market, especially for first-time home buyers. FHA
insures these loans under its mutual mortgage insurance fund.
Last year, I testified before this subcommittee on the
health of the fund. Since then, FHA's independent actuarial
review reported that the fund's economic value had become
negative, meaning that the net present value of future cash
flows on outstanding insurance, which were a -$47 billion,
exceeded the fund's capital resources.
Needless to say, the fund, once again, has not met the
minimum two percent capital requirement; the fourth consecutive
year this has been the case.
HUD attributes the most recent decline in the fund's
economic value to several factors, including changes in
expectations for house prices, continued declines in interest
rates, and changes in the model itself.
HUD recently announced a series of steps it plans to take
to shore up the fund, including raising premiums, requiring
borrowers to pay annual premiums for longer periods of time,
and reducing losses on defaulted mortgages.
We also note that FHA had previously raised premiums,
tightened underwriting, and taken other steps to manage its
growing workload and improve risk management.
Further, FHA has enhanced its loan performance model by
moving to a technique we recommended, which should result in
more accurate estimates of the fund's economic value.
Nonetheless, there is more that FHA can do. For example, it
can complete risk assessments of FHA programs, and complete its
workforce and succession planning, as we recommended.
There is also more that FHA and the Congress can do in
framing expectations for FHA going forward.
Because of concerns about FHA's financial conditions, the
continuing uncertainty over the resolution of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac, and the potential impact of their resolution on
FHA, we included FHA in our high-risk issue, modernizing the
federal role in housing finance.
Let me now turn to our work on the voucher and Moving to
Work programs. As you know, the voucher program is the single
largest HUD program for making housing affordable for very low-
income renters. Last year, it helped 2.2 million such
households. We have reported that the program's cost, even
after controlling for inflation, had increased 8.8 percent
between '03 and '10. Almost half of this increase was due to
issuance of new vouchers; the remaining increase is due to
increase in subsidy payments and administrative fees.
We assess options for cost savings, including reducing
subsidies, which represent about 90 percent of total costs and
administrative fees.
These options generally would increase tenant payments; for
example, requiring tenants to pay a $75 minimum rent could
result in either $67 million in cost savings, or serving an
additional 8,600 households. For families with children
affected by such a change, this would equate to a monthly
payment increase of $27.
Proposals for reforming administrative requirements for the
voucher program also could lead to increased efficiencies and
cost savings, though likely not the same scale as subsidy
payment reforms. These include conducting inspections or
reexamining household income less frequently, and some of these
proposals are an outgrowth of the Moving to Work program, the
MTW program.
However, our assessment of the MTW program, as the IG just
mentioned, raises serious questions about HUD's program
evaluation and monitoring. And the IG went into some of the
specifics there.
Looking ahead, given the demand for most efficiently using
limited budgetary resources, it's critical for HUD to build on
its efforts to ensure the financial solvency of the FHA
insurance fund. At the same time, the continuing demand for
affordable rental housing for households with limited income
make more pressing that HUD, working with Congress, work to
improve efficiency of these programs.
Likewise, you face important policy decisions in terms of
framing the role that FHA should be expected to play, and in
weighing the depth of subsidy provided through housing
assistance programs and the potential impact changes in subsidy
may have on individual households and the number of households
that may be served.
And we look forward to supporting the subcommittee's
efforts in this regard.
This concludes my opening remarks.
Thank you, again, for the chance to speak today. I would be
glad to take any questions you may have.
Mr. Latham. Very good. Thank you very much.
Now we will go to DOT, the Inspector General, Mr. Scovel.
Mr. Scovel. Chairman Latham, Ranking Member Pastor, members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to discuss the
Department of Transportation's top management challenges.
DOT spends over $70 billion annually on a wide range of
programs, and continues to demonstrate its commitment to ensure
safe and reliable transportation systems.
Some of the nine challenges we reported in November are
longstanding, while others are new. Today, I will focus on
actions DOT needs to take to enhance aviation and surface
safety, ensure effective stewardship of resources, and
effectively implement transportation infrastructure programs.
Safety is the Department's top priority. In this past year,
FAA made important progress toward meeting new safety
requirements.
However, FAA needs to fine-tune how it collects and uses
safety data to identify operational errors by controllers, and
how it addresses pilot safety concerns.
According to FAA, a 50 percent increase in operational
errors reported between Fiscal Years 2009 and 2010 was due to
new voluntary reporting procedures. Yet, our audit found that
there were actual increases in errors.
Without complete and accurate data, FAA is challenged to
identify trends and the root causes of errors, and proactively
mitigate safety risks.
For pilots, FAA needs to ensure airlines adjust pilot
training and qualification programs to meet new requirements
that will take effect this summer.
FAA also needs to target aircraft repair stations, based on
risk, to make the most of its inspector resources.
Currently, FAA continues to emphasize completing mandatory
inspections at locations, regardless of risk, and has yet to
determine the number of inspectors it needs nationwide, due to
an unreliable staffing model.
In terms of surface safety, DOT has worked hard to remove
unsafe commercial drivers and carriers from roadways, and MAP-
21 provides new tools to enhance its efforts, such as giving
DOT greater authority to take action against reincarnated
carriers--a critical safety concern we reported last spring.
However, MAP-21 also presents new oversight challenges,
including the new National Tunnel Inspection Program and new
rail transit safety oversight responsibilities.
Turning next to DOT's stewardship of taxpayer dollars--
while DOT received a clean opinion on its financial statements
for the last six years, longstanding financial management
weaknesses have limited its ability to maximize its return on
investments.
Our review flagged significant inactive grant funds, and
prompted DOT to identify over $2 billion that could be applied
to active projects.
In response to our recommendation, DOT recently issued
guidance to improve monitoring of grant obligations.
Controls over the Department's contracts and IT investments
could also be strengthened. Poor contract structure and
software issues for FAA's $2.1 billion ERAM program have led to
a four-year schedule delay, and could result in cost overruns
approaching $500 million.
FAA is working to resolve these programs.
The Department also needs an Enterprise architecture for
its 400-plus IT systems, which cost about $3 billion annually.
With an IT architecture, DOT could realize cost savings, reduce
duplication and technical risks, and better align IT
investments with the Department's mission.
DOT plans to issue an Enterprise architecture policy by
July.
DOT also will need to address its information security
deficiencies, a material weakness for the last two years.
Two-thirds of the information security recommendations we
have made since 2009 have not yet been implemented.
Our work also highlighted areas where DOT can better
safeguard investments in key transportation assets.
For example, DC's Union Station requires DOT's attention to
properly manage mounting debts, and develop new funding streams
to support needed structural repairs before the station becomes
a safety concern.
Finally, DOT needs to effectively implement transportation
infrastructure programs, while protecting its significant
investments.
FAA has not set realistic expectations for modernizing the
nation's air traffic system. FAA spends about $1 billion
annually on NextGen, and plans to spend $2.4 billion more by
2017 on six programs that are key to NextGen implementation.
However, FAA has yet to fully develop an integrated master
schedule for these programs to address risks, make informed
cost and schedule tradeoffs, and determine what capabilities
will provide air space users with the greatest benefits.
The Department also faces challenges to increase states'
accountability for $40 billion provided annually in highway and
bridge investments.
At the same time, it must meet new MAP-21 requirements to
deliver highway projects faster, and manage investments in
surface programs based on performance.
A new priority for the Department is establishing effective
controls over $13 billion in Hurricane Sandy relief funds. Most
of DOT's relief funding went to FTA's public transportation
emergency relief program, established last summer through MAP-
21. FTA needs to get this new program up and running, while
also rewarding $2 billion in relief funds by the end of the
month--this month, Mr. Chairman.
This concludes my prepared statement. I would be happy to
answer any questions you or members of the subcommittee may
have.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Mr. Herr, you are recognized for five minutes on the GAO's
work on transportation issues.
Mr. Herr. Great. Thank you, Chairman Latham. Thank you,
Ranking Member Pastor and members of the subcommittee.
I am pleased to be here to discuss GAO's work on key
management challenges facing the Department of Transportation.
The nation's transportation system is critical to the
economy, and affects the daily lives of most Americans. It's
also undergoing strain, and cost estimates for repairs and
upgrades are in the hundreds of billions of dollars.
For this reason, surface transportation financing remains
on GAO's list of high-risk programs, a report that was just
issued last month.
Today, I will focus on three key challenges facing DOT.
First, leveraging surface transportation investments to
maximize national interests, improving surface and aviation
safety, and effectively implementing the NextGeneration air
transportation system--or NextGen.
First, DOT must leverage investment in surface networks to
meet national goals and priorities. Since I testified on this
topic last year, there has been progress, as acknowledged by
the IG, via MAP-21, to clarify federal goals and rules, and
require linking federal programs to performance, as GAO has
previously recommended.
However, DOT still faces challenges relating to
transitioning to a goal-oriented performance-based approach
which entails new responsibilities, targeting funds to
priorities such as the nation's freight network, which will
require significant coordination efforts, and managing
discretionary grant and credit assistance programs--an area
both GAO and the IG have highlighted as a challenge.
I would also note emergency relief programs have been a
particular challenge over the years for DOT.
And, finally, overseeing the federal aid highway program,
and the new Public Transportation Emergency Relief Program, and
the funds provided after Hurricane Sandy.
In terms of safety, though we have seen an overall decline
in traffic fatalities and injuries in recent years, and our
nation's air travel system is one of the safest in the world,
there are still challenges in this area.
Our recent work on safety highlights the need for
improvement in data and oversight, and to better target
resources. For example, our recent work on chameleon carriers
talked about the importance of data and analysis that is
critical to identify carriers that pose the highest safety
risks.
Reliable transit safety data will also be essential for
FTA's new oversight program, and data is a vital component of
FAA's new risk-based safety management system.
DOT also faces several key challenges implementing NextGen.
Delivering and demonstrating benefits such as capabilities that
will provide operators with a return on their investments and
NextGen avionics, keeping key acquisitions within cost
estimates and on schedule--in essence, managing highly
interdependent systems, and using the best tools and approaches
to do so--and keeping NextGen on course while sustaining legacy
equipment and facilities that will continue to be the core of
this national airspace system for a number of years.
In summary, DOT's key challenges are to leverage
investments, improve safety, and implement NextGen. Addressing
them will require collecting and using high-quality data to
support performance-based management, as well as making risk-
based decisions.
Also, developing and maintaining robust oversight to
operate effectively in a constrained environment, while
overseeing a range of new and emerging technologies and grant
programs.
And, finally, ensuring clear communication across the
operating administrations, but also with external partners,
Congress, and the public.
In closing, I would just like to say, thanks for the
opportunity to be here today, and I am happy to answer any
questions.
Mr. Latham. Thank you all very much for your opening
testimony.
It is not a question, but I just want to kind of make a
statement. With all we have to cover today, I am not going to
go into the subject of airport revenue diversion, but I want to
tell you that I continue to have members who are very
interested in the subject--in particular, with LAX. Just this
week, I received another letter of concern from two members
from California, and it has been an interest and concern from
both sides of the aisle; it is not any kind of partisan issue.
As you pointed out, last year--you have done work in this
area for a long, long time--and especially on LAX. And I know
your people are continuing their efforts, and I appreciate
that, and I am sure that all those members will continue to
have their interest--and I certainly will, too, to make sure
that this is taken care of.
I don't know if you have anything to say. There is not a
question, but I just wanted to make sure that----
Mr. Scovel. Yes, sir. I want to acknowledge that we do have
work underway. We anticipate completing it by the end of this
year. I believe we have kept your staff informed along the way,
and we are also informing FAA about our findings to make sure
that we never catch them by surprise on important matters like
this.
Again this is an important issue--certainly for this
committee, for us, and for the agency.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you. And another member concern
here--but, Mr. Scovel, take a moment to also commend you and
your staff for the MWAA audit this past year. I know Mr. Wolf
knew something was up. I have to tell you, I never imagined it
would turn out to be as long and far-reaching an investigation
with multiple front page stories on the Washington Post.
How confident are you that the leadership there is
effectively changing the culture of their operation?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My staff did an
outstanding job on that project, and it was virtually an all-
hands-on-deck effort in order to get it done.
We issued a couple of products last year in May and
November to try to close the loop on as many of the outstanding
issues as we possibly could, and we understand that there are
probably still more.
We issued 12 recommendations with numerous subcomponents to
the Department and to MWAA, the airport authority charged with
administering Dulles and National. We have kept in frequent
touch with them. Three of our recommendations are closed; the
other nine are still open, meaning MWAA and the Department have
agreed to our recommendations, they have given us a timeline,
they are on the way toward trying to effect our recommendations
in matters such as contracting, travel, ethics, governance,
transparency, HR resources, hiring, gifts--right across the
board that you mentioned were the subjects of numerous media
stories.
If you are asking me to give them a grade, of course, I
think any self-respecting IG would have to say it is incomplete
at this point. They have signed on to an implementation date of
June 30th, 2013, in order to have things done, to have
documentation in place, and to supply us with the references we
need in order to assess their progress.
Right now, I am confident we have their attention. Mr.
Potter has been in frequent communication with us. I have met
with him. I have discussed it with the Deputy Secretary and the
Secretary. The Department has an Accountability Officer in
place, and we have spoken with her on numerous occasions. March
1st was the last face-to-face meeting we had with her.
So, we have open lines of communication. We are seeing how
they will do. We will assess their complete performance once we
get everything back, and we will certainly keep you and Mr.
Wolf informed.
Mr. Latham. Is there a need for some kind of an oversight
board or some authority? And, also, are the states inclined to
actually look into this and do oversight?
Mr. Scovel. I don't know about the states; they have
certainly taken a great interest in MWAA's deficiencies--
particularly Virginia, since Dulles and National are both in
the state.
Part of the reason for my hopeful prognosis for MWAA is
that there have been changes in the composition of the board,
and they have brought a refreshing new outlook to their weighty
responsibilities.
As far as continued oversight, it is clearly needed because
when we began the MWAA effort, it was clear that MWAA had
never--or at least in a long time, since GAO last did its study
many years ago on MWAA's contracting practices--been used to
the kind of oversight scrutiny that we were prepared to give
and that we give to other agencies in our own Department
regularly.
And we encountered a little bit of pushback at first. They
corrected their outlook to us. We got what we needed. We were
able to arrive at the conclusions we did.
However, human nature being what it is, things tend to
unwind over time. And while much-needed changes may be put in
place in response to our recommendations, but if there isn't
continued oversight, those changes may unwind, and things may
loosen up to the detriment of proper fulfillment of all their
responsibilities.
So, I would say some oversight is needed; whether that is
to be us, another IG, or some other entity.
Mr. Latham. Authority, some way.
Mr. Scovel. Exactly. Those are policy decisions for the
Congress and the Department, but we would strongly urge some
continued oversight of MWAA.
Mr. Latham. Okay. I failed to mention it earlier, but if
GAO has any comments on what the Inspector General talks about
on any of these subjects we cover today, you know, and the
other way around also--if GAO says something, and you want--I
just want to get in shortly to the--or briefly to the NextGen.
And you talked about it in your testimony.
Really, going more about what the progress that they are
doing, as far as establishing costs and deadlines, when do they
expect to deliver a comprehensive plan?
Mr. Scovel. Mr. Chairman, if I were to summarize--our view
is that planning, on FAA's part, with regard to NextGen, has
rarely if ever been much of a significant problem. They have
been pretty good about putting out plans and concepts, and
trying to inform the Congress and the public of what shape
NextGen might take.
Where there have been significant problems--and continue to
be--is in the execution of those plans.
For instance, a NextGen implementation plan update is due
out this year. Yet, our experience with FAA's actual use of
that plan has been that it has been not properly utilized. It
hasn't been the most effective tool for FAA to execute, or for
the Congress to judge FAA's performance against that plan.
That led to one of our recommendations a year or two ago
for what we have come to call an integrated master schedule.
Think of a whiteboard in a war room, with every NextGen-related
program matched up against a timeline. As tasks are completed
and, even more important, as delays and problems are
encountered--technical delays, funding delays, or staffing--
whatever they might be--you can see the ripple effect down the
line through NextGen because so many of these programs have
complex interdependencies.
What happens, for instance, with regard to ERAM? That
ripples all the way down the line through the rest of NextGen.
Such a tool, I think, would certainly help FAA, and it may
well be a very useful insight for the Congress in making its
important decisions.
Mr. Latham. You mentioned a $500 million cost overrun. Last
year, they were talking about $330 million.
Mr. Scovel. Right.
Mr. Latham. What was changed? Why is it----
Mr. Scovel. Yes. Specifically, you are referring to the
ERAM program.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. Scovel [continuing]. Which, properly speaking, is not
part of NextGen; it is a foundation for NextGen.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. Scovel. As you know, ERAM is the automation platform
that controllers need to use in the 20 en route centers that
control high-altitude, long-distance air traffic.
This was a program that was supposed to be completed at the
end of 2010 for $2.1 billion. Because it is software-intensive,
there were lots of gremlins and hiccups along the way. FAA had
to re-baseline ERAM out to 2014, with what they estimated at
the time to be a $330 million cost increase.
Since then, $44 million more have been reprogrammed--with
the consent of OMB. I am told--from the operations account,
specifically to ERAM. So, that puts them up to $374 million.
Our concern, looking at the burn rate for the ERAM
contract--which is $12.6 million per month--if that were to
continue at that same rate through the stated deadline for ERAM
of the end of 2014, that would put them at another $101
million. So, that would be $475 million total.
MITRE, in a study, had estimated as much as $500 million at
one point. So, we are certainly within the ballpark of $500
million.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Pastor, did you have any comments on
that, or----
Mr. Herr. I was going to note that GAO's work on NextGen
has also pointed to the need for cost and schedule risk
analysis.
One thing we have recommended to FAA is adopting the GAO
cost guide, which is actually a very useful tool, and provides
criteria that can be applied to these kinds of programs. DOT
and FAA are in the process of adopting some of that.
So, I would second the idea that this kind of thing will
give you more oversight and more visibility into the progress
of the program.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Excuse me. A common thread that I found in all
four of your presentations is that either the inability to
collect data, or the lack of data, the evaluation of the data,
and then using that data to improve whatever it may be--whether
it be safety, or whether it be collecting this, that, and the
other.
And I would ask all four of you to--in looking at these two
departments, what generally seems to be the problem? I mean, I
would think that, by now, they would have, you know, the best
computers available to them--or whatever--and that they would
be able to collect the data and do that.
But all four of you said, whether you were talking about
HUD or Transportation, is, ``We have problems being able to
evaluate, because they are not collecting data, or it is
inefficient data, or, you know, they are not using the data.''
So, if I could just get a general comment on what you have
seen with these departments, and what keeps them from being
able to be more effective--and you can start with either end.
Mr. Montoya. Thank you Ranking Member Pastor. With regard
to HUD, it is twofold. With regard to their financial system
that they are trying to implement, it is basically a lack of
planning, improper planning at the front end before they start
spending money, the contractors. With regard to the programs,
it is really a lack of verification of data that is coming in.
HUD depends on thousands of people downstream to provide them
the data, to put the data into their systems, but there is no
oversight on behalf of HUD to ensure that the system is correct
going into the system in the first place. So we are not sure
that we can actually depend on the data. There is no
verification of the data, if you will. And so that has to do a
lot with the lack of resources on the part of HUD to do it. So
their dependence is on these other state and local authorities
to do that.
Mr. Pastor. So the lack of resources is to be able to do
oversight with the contractor at the local level?
Mr. Montoya. Right, right, in a number of ways. For them to
actually go into every one of these different entities, to do
it themselves, right, what we have struggled with is why they
do not at least do some sort of systemic sort of method by
which they can go in and take different organizations to look
at, especially those that are the most troubled or the ones
that we seem to have more problems with, to at least look at
those. And just radically go out there and look at different
various sizes of these organizations to look at it. You do not
have to look at 100 percent of them, but you should have some
sort of mechanism to be looking at some of them on an ongoing
basis, and there is not even that going on.
Mr. Pastor. So is it the lack of equipment, faulty
equipment? Are they still using paper and pencil? I mean how
would you assess the equipment capability that they have?
Mr. Montoya. Well, for us, a lot of their IT infrastructure
is very old, especially in their financial arena. It is 15 to
30 years old. It is Cobol. It is very expensive to upkeep and
maintain. So part of that is some of these--we had one occasion
where we were doing an audit and they were not using
appropriate electronic accounting systems to account for about
$2 billion in funds. So a lot of it has to do with old aging
systems. A lot of it has to do with just not adequate enough,
not robust enough, oversight on the part of the staff.
Mr. Scire. Maybe I can join in here.
Mr. Latham. Yes, I would like for you to join the
discussion.
Mr. Scire. On the discussion of HUD, I agree with what the
Inspector General has said. Some of the comments that I had
made involving, for example, the Moving to Work program is
really a failure to identify the information required to do
program evaluation. So it could be that HUD is doing a better
job in terms of the data that is needed for operations than
they are for doing program evaluation. So it is difficult to
say whether or not because of the poor data that FHA is getting
in the Moving to Work program, what sort of results you are
getting. Is it quantifiable? And so that is the problem we see
within that program. And we see that in other programs.
The other thing I would say in terms of systems that
support program operations is the importance of requirements
definition, in really trying to take all the right steps to
understand what sort of information is required at each of the
different levels that are actually operating the program.
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Pastor. I am looking at a list
of some of our most pressing open recommendations for the
Department of Transportation, and several of them do involve
data collection, identification of the data, elements that are
needed, actually collecting it, then investigating to the
extent that that is required, and actually analyzing it. If I
could just mention a couple, one has to do with federal
highways and how dollars are allocated against the need to
rehabilitate deficient bridges. Of the six hundred thousand
plus bridges in the country, a quarter of those at least are
deemed to be structurally deficient or functionally obsolete.
Yet for years, if ever, the Agency and the Congress have never
been able to determine how many highway or bridge dollars are
actually going into fixing those deficient bridges. After the
I-35W bridge collapse in Minneapolis in 2007, I testified at a
hearing with the then Administrator of FHWA and he was asked
that question. He testified that he believed that they would,
with a very labor-intensive effort that they would, kind of
pen-and-pencil kind of effort, that they would be able to trace
dollars to specific bridges. When they went back, they were
unable to do it. We audited them and found out that they were
unable to do it. It has really to do with the data elements
that are required to be presented by states in their highway
and bridge projects to the Agency. A deficient bridge,
typically involves interchanges and ramps and guardrails and
everything else. All of that is one big package that in the end
they are unable to say how many bridge dollars are going to fix
that bridge structure. FHWA with the help of AASHTO, the state
highway, and the transportation association, are trying to
refine the data elements, press those out to the states so that
the states will be on the hook to present those up to FHWA and
give the Agency and the Congress much better insight into
bridge expenditures and the overall inventory of deficient
bridges. That is an example of one thing that you are talking
about. It is identifying actually what is needed and down at
the most grassroots level making the changes.
Another one, though----and I can understand that. But
another one, which I find more disheartening, is what I would
characterize almost as an institutional resistance to
collecting the data. We have made a couple of recommendations
to FAA. One was a result of an NTSB investigation into the
fatal Colgan crash in 2009, where a regional aircraft in
Buffalo went down killing 50 passengers. Both pilots were found
to have been very much fatigued by NTSB. Fatigue was not cited
as a causal factor, but it was a significant concern mentioned
in the NTSB's final report on that accident. As a result, we
were charged with auditing pilot training and qualification and
a number of other things for FAA. We recommended that FAA begin
to collect data through the carriers on pilot commuting
patterns and trends, so that they could then see if there is a
link to fatigue. FAA and the industry are reluctant to do that.
It is deemed to be a benefit of the employment for pilots to be
able to live on the West Coast, say, where one of the Colgan
pilots did, and be able to commute back to Newark and carry out
the job. It happens all the time. Many pilots are commuters; 39
percent of the Colgan pilots operating out of Newark at the
time of the crash were commuters of more than 400 miles. It is
common sense that extensive commuting may lead to fatigue, yet
the Safety Regulatory Agency is reluctant to press that with
the carriers and the pilots as a whole.
Mr. Latham. Why.
Mr. Scovel. Um.
Mr. Pastor. No, that is fine.
Mr. Scovel. I do not know. I wish I did. Frankly, we
tussled. We tussled with the Agency on that recommendation
because we got that pushback. They finally agreed to survey the
available data to see what may be out there with the view of if
there is a gap in the data, then they might talk with us
further about actually doing something.
Mr. Pastor. Well, I can tell you unequivocally coming from
the West Coast to the East Coast causes fatigue.
Mr. Herr. Let me just add to the question. I think the DOT,
like many agencies, is transitioning from collecting
information to having to analyze it and make good use of it.
One area that I mentioned in my oral statement is looking at
the chameleon carriers. These are trucking firms that have been
put out of business. They come back under another guise. We did
some work a few years ago looking at how DOT and FMCSA could
better target these carriers. And the analysis we did was able
to identify some of these at-risk carriers in a way that I
think can show FMCSA a way toward making some of those changes.
Another area where data is important, it is right in front
of us now, is trying to understand bringing drones into the
civil airspace. One of the things that we highlighted in our
statement today is the fact that FAA needs information from DoD
and other groups like DHS that are involved in efforts to
understand what some of the risks are. And then from that
information, use that to develop standards in risk profiles. I
think it is very important to collect the information, but then
the next piece is to be able to do the analysis. For some of
these analyses, like some of the work that we did at GAO
identifying at-risk carriers in the trucking industry, we had
Ph.Ds with statistical backgrounds doing that work. It is not
just punching a few numbers. It actually requires a fair amount
of due diligence to go through that amount of information, but
it is very important because it is helping DOT make that link
between these investments and then the actual performance.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, thank all
of you for being here and your testimony. Let me say upfront,
because I am going to say a few harsh words, none of them
directed at you. I kind of think of you as the four good guys
that are trying to help us deal with our problems and help the
agencies manage themselves better, and I appreciate that more
than I can say because I think those are real problems. And
some of the points I am going to make I am going to make
through you to the Department, certainly not at you.
And last point, I almost never do prepared statements, but
I have one issue at least that I want to do that on. And so let
me just read this for the record.
HUD Section 184 program supporting mortgages for Native
Americans. This program is really important to me. Before I was
in Congress, I actually sat on a Tribally-owned Bank Board and
saw how important these programs are and how much benefit they
did. That particular bank, I think, originates more 184 loans
than any bank in Indian country. It works all across Indian
country, not just in Oklahoma where I am from. Section 184
loans are often the only route open to Native Americans to
become homeowners. Unfortunately, HUD and OMB management of the
program over the last few years has left a great deal to be
desired. In the space of about 24 months, we have seen the
program run out of funds twice because of the administrative
errors and the elimination of the mortgage refinancing
component. The most recent funding shortfall, and particularly
the reaction of the administration to it, is simply
unacceptable. Rather than the lenders of an impending problem
work with borrowers and develop contingency plans, the
administration simply cut off all funding. This has left
dozens, if not hundreds, of families around the country in a
lurch not because of the sequester or any budget woes that we
are so familiar with in Washington, D.C., but because of what
surely looks to me like incompetence and simply neglect and
indifference. I ask for consent, Mr. Chairman, to submit for
the record a few brief summaries of the travails of the
families in Oklahoma and elsewhere that have experienced this.
And all the names, all the personal information, have been
eliminated so the privacy of the people can be protected, but
they are real cases. As these stories detail, real people have
been left at the altar by HUD in an unfeeling and unwarranted
decision-making process that I am told, I hope inaccurately,
but I am told comes straight from the Office of the Secretary.
It is one thing to make a mistake and try to correct it. It is
another to willfully and needlessly harm the very people the
Department is charged with helping. We would not treat veterans
this way. We would not treat FHA applicants this way. We
certainly should not be treating Native Americans in what I
consider a rather shoddy and outrageous way. Sorry to be this
strong, but I feel really strongly about this.
Two questions, probably most appropriately directed to you,
Mr. Montoya, but I obviously appreciate any GAO perspective as
well. What is the Department going to do or is it doing
anything to ensure that this never happens again? In particular
I am concerned about the use of an abrupt cutoff rather than a
transition with no warning to the lender. People literally have
let go of one home, have assurance of a guarantee, and then all
of a sudden cannot get the financing. It is a really bad
situation.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Thank you for your question. I will
have to ask for your forgiveness because I am not well up on
this particular issue, but what I will tell you----
Mr. Cole. Somebody listening will be though.
Mr. Montoya. Well, I am listening. I am listening.
Mr. Cole. No, I know you are.
Mr. Montoya. But what I can tell you is that certainly
contrary to my discussions with the Secretary and with a lot of
his senior staff is we still deal with the aftermath of the
robo-signing or loan origination servicing piece where the push
for HUD has been to try to mitigate and work with these
homeowners, giving them advance notice, to save the homes, to
save the families, and the financial burden that they will
experience. So, quite frankly, I am concerned about what I am
hearing, and I certainly will commit to you to get back to you
once I get back. But outside of that, sir, I cannot give you
any specifics and I apologize.
Mr. Cole. That is fair enough. Now I know you will take the
time and look into it and others will as well. And I would love
to be wrong, but this is the information that I am getting both
from families that are dealing with the situation and more
importantly from people who administer the program through the
banking system.
Second question, when you are----
Mr. Pastor. Tom, could I just jump in real quick?
Mr. Cole. Yeah, please.
Mr. Pastor. When the CR was being developed, this issue
came up. And this anomaly--is that what they called it? And I
was concerned like you because obviously we represent in
Arizona a number of Native Americans, and I brought up the
issue of why this was happening. And much to my surprise, I was
told that the administration was going to shut it down. But
then in continuing to want to stay informed, I am told that the
Senate has, I guess, corrected it and possibly--but I would
agree with you that a program like this, you just do not stop
midway because there are people who are going to be affected
and as they are working their way to getting a home or whatever
they are achieving with this program, just to abruptly cut it
is the wrong thing to do. And so I join you in that because I
think that is the wrong way to go.
Mr. Cole. I appreciate that very much, Ed, and I have heard
the same thing about the Senate working on it. And we have not
seen the language yet, but I know there is a serious effort
underway.
But the other thing if you would, Mr. Montoya, when you are
looking into this, I would love and the GAO as well any
recommendations on how or whether the law needs to be changed
so that, again, Native Americans are not singled out for some
different sort of treatment than other loan categories. And,
again, I do not think we would let this happen to VA loans or
FHA loans and to me these are all specified categories of
borrowers that we are doing certain things for. It should not
happen here either. It ought to be pretty consistent treatment
across the board. So if you could look into that; and, again,
if GAO particularly had any recommendations on what to do, I
would love to hear them.
Mr. Scire. If I could just add that we have previously done
work looking at management of credit programs and the authority
levels for those and made recommendations about informing the
Congress and others in sufficient time to be able to provide
additional funding, if you will, or to adapt to what is
happening with the demand for that particular product. That was
the case in the HUD Multifamily Loan programs, so I would be
glad to work with the Committee on looking more deeply into
these questions.
Mr. Cole. Well, that would be extremely helpful. Mr.
Scovel, one for you, if you would. And, again, I am using not
just parochial, but I guess this is my day to be parochial. As
you may be aware, the state of Oklahoma--and there is no reason
why you would be--we have six FAA contract towers and three of
those are actually in my district. And from testimony and
reports that the office of the IG has done in the past, it is
clear to me that you clearly understand the cost savings and
the value and large impact that these contract towers can have.
It concerns me the FAA when it made a decision as part of the
sequester, so I do not want to put this all off on them. Let us
congressionally take some responsibility here, but they shut
down as I understand it 78 percent of all the contract towers
across the country. That seems a really disproportionate hit to
me on what is supposed to be an across-the-board kind of cut.
Do you have any sort of rationale or have you looked at this in
any way where you could explain to us why that decision was
made for that particular piece of their budget, to take that
level of a hit?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Cole. I do not know that I can
go all the way to the final answer for your question, but let
me tell you what we do know. Thank you for your acknowledgement
of long-term efforts of our office regarding federal contract
towers. We do know contract towers. We have been doing this
work since the late 1990s. In fact, when we contacted your
office before the hearing today, your staff was kind enough to
inform us of your own interest and the fact that you had three
federal contract towers facing shutdown in your district. So we
were able to pull some numbers on those specific facilities,
too.
We have found--twice in the late 1990s, early 2000s, and in
the most recent audit that we completed in 2012--that federal
contract towers represent significant cost savings over FAA-
operated towers with an equivalent level of activity. These are
low activity towers where we are comparing contract to FAA
towers. On average, it costs $1.5 million per year less to
operate a contract tower than an FAA tower. We have said all
along the same level of safety, but, in fact, our 2012 audit
found a lower number and a lower rate of safety incidents at
federal contract towers than at FAA-operated towers. Comparing
these for acceptance, virtually transparent to the flying
community; in fact, we talked to pilots who said, ``You know, I
cannot tell the difference these days between a contract tower
and an FAA-operated tower.''
When it comes to sequestration, what we have found--and
this is not by way of an audit, so I want to qualify my remarks
with that--it appears to us that when FAA was looking for ways
to make their target of $637 million cut due to sequestration,
they were looking to identify and safeguard their core
functions. Contract towers they deemed could be an area where
cost reduction measures could apply. The methodology that they
chose was to take 150,000 operations, take off one operation
per year over 2012, and use that as a threshold and match that
up against another threshold of 10,000 commercial operations--
air taxi, air ambulance, regional jet, or whatever it might be.
Those are commercial operations. Towers, whether they are FAA-
operated or contract towers, that fell below those thresholds
were to be considered for closure. It turned out that 189
contract towers, including all three in your district and one
just outside your district, fell under those thresholds. In
addition, 59 FAA-operated contract towers fell below the
thresholds. A total of 248 towers nationwide are facing
closure, and 61 federal contract towers would survive, making
those thresholds.
That is my understanding of the methodology and the
rationale.
Mr. Cole. Thank you very much.
Mr. Scovel. When I look at it and look particularly at the
timing of decisions and analyses, clearly the earlier you begin
planning for an event like this, the more options you are going
to have. As you close in on the deadline, which ultimately
turned out to be March 1, options inevitably fall off the table
and you are left sometimes with a very bad set of alternatives.
That may have been what was facing FAA by the time they got
late on the calendar.
Mr. Cole. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. You are welcome.
Mr. Ryan. It is good to be here. Good to be on this
Committee. Very excited about being with you all. Just quickly
from the IG, how is sequestration affecting your office and
some of the priorities that you have had over the last several
months and years?
Mr. Montoya. Thank you for the question, Mr. Ryan. With
regards to my office, I have been in office for about 15 months
now. So upon my arrival, we were addressing some concerns this
Committee had had about a number of facilities and space issues
that I had that were quite large. So we have basically spent
the last year at downsizing the number of facilities we have,
the size of them, looking at our contracts and cutting back on
those, lowering our staffing because of supplementals that we
had that were going to be ending in 2012. So we were on a road
towards downsizing, if you will.
Mr. Ryan. Where were you when you first got in 15 months
ago, employment wise?
Mr. Montoya. Employment wise? We had about 712 when I came
on in December of 2011. Now we are down to about 630. So we
have come down further than we would have liked. But because we
knew that sequester was looming and potentially a continuing
resolution, we elected to go ahead and go below the threshold
we thought we would be comfortable with our appropriations. And
by having done that, we are positioned quite well and as of
now, we do not believe we will have to furlough anyone and will
be able to keep up with our oversight efforts. Now, that does
not come without pain points. I mean we still have lost too
many people and so that impacts not only the work we are doing
on the number of issues I mentioned, but, of course, on Sandy
oversight and some of the remaining disaster monies that were
on the Gulf Coast. And, quite frankly, disasters will come with
the summer months coming. So it does not come without its pain
points, but I think we are positioned well and we are certainly
positioned well enough to get through this. And then once we
do, then we will hopefully get back up to more safer, more
normal, numbers for us. But for now, we have just been
adjusting and prioritizing as necessary, taking those things
that are more critical first.
Mr. Ryan. I am new here, so bear with me for a second. So
you go from 712 to 630. What are the programs that have to go
on the back burner because of that?
Mr. Montoya. Well, most of my appropriations come in
salaries and expenses. So really it is bodies because that is
what we do. We do oversight. So whether it is audits, reviews,
evaluations, investigations, that is really what my core
mission is, I think for most IGs. We have very little money in
travel and training and these other things. So really for me to
cut back to the numbers I need to, it has to come from bodies,
people. So having done that, really what it means that is less
audits that will be completed this year, certainly prioritizing
what----
Mr. Ryan. How many less do you think? Ballpark?
Mr. Montoya. I think last year we did about 180 is what we
put out. We are on path now to put out maybe 140 this year. And
a lot of that was not just on our downsizing, but it was on the
amount of work we have been doing on the loan origination loan
servicing that we saw as the aftermath with the financial
crisis. So that certainly impacted. Let me correct you. For
2010 and 11--correct myself, excuse me--it was about 196 audits
that we had done. So for 2013 we are looking at about 140 that
we will do. And investigations I could not tell you. What we
will do there is just prioritize the type of case we will look
at. That means sort of the lower end type of case we just will
not look at or we will give to a local authority, and we will
look at the higher dollar, more expensive if you will, type of
financial fraud that we could see in the Department.
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Ryan. Greatly appreciate your
interest in how sequestration has affected our office. We are
fortunate, like Mr. Montoya, in that we have been taking steps
for a long time now to try to position ourselves, and we do not
see the need in fiscal year 2013 to furlough any of our staff.
Here is the situation we were in, and I want to make full
disclosure because my office did receive some amount of extra
funding to carry out our Recovery Act responsibilities, plus we
also received some extra funding to oversee FTA in their Sandy
relief efforts. We do have that, but had we not taken the
stringent cost reduction measures that have been underway in my
office now for over 20 months, we would be facing furloughs
this fiscal year. As I mentioned, we will not have to.
FY 2010 we were at 418 on our staff base budget. Today, the
effect of sequestration on our budget has allowed us to staff
only to 373. That is almost an 11 percent reduction in staff
over the last three fiscal years. Like the office of Mr.
Montoya, we are salary heavy as well. We do not have hardware.
We do not have acquisitions and contracts and programs and
grants; 75 percent of my budget goes to pay salaries and
expenses for our staff. We were going to have to take a hit
against staff and probably go to furloughs had we not done
things like a staff hiring freeze since August 2011. We took
that knowing that we were facing a tough situation in fiscal
2012. In August 2011, of course, the Budget Control Act passed
and we had to plan against the possibility of sequestration. We
were well positioned to do that, and we buckled down on it.
We reduced our staffing level by letting go our rehired
annuitants and term and temporary employees that we had brought
on for the Recovery Act. We have reduced our footprint, and we
let go of some leased space, both investigations and audit
related, outside the Washington area. We have limited our
technical expertise contracts. We had a buyout for early
retirements and separations in the summer of 2012 and shed 14
more staff that way. We suspended our student loan repayment
program, which was quite modest to begin with. I told my staff
we would be recycling paper clips before we sent anybody out
with no pay due for a low status, so the student loan repayment
went. We also cancelled our participation in the Department
Honors Attorney program and saved $95,000. In the view of some,
it is not big money, but in the view of staff who have to go
home perhaps with no pay, that counts. It all counts.
Mr. Ryan. Are there any innovations within both of your
offices where we could use technology to help cover more
ground, where you can find some baselines of programs or work
that people are doing? And then finding through technology or
through them having to log in certain numbers, certain
variables, that may pop up that would say hey, this is a
priority or something weird is going on over here? I do not
know your business well enough to know what that even would be,
but are we exploring these kinds of options with technology to
try and broaden your scope and deepen the work that you can do
in areas that you would find necessary?
Mr. Montoya. Thank you for the question, Mr. Ryan. It is an
excellent question, and I am really glad you asked that. One of
the first things I did when I came onboard was to look at our
data mining analytical capabilities, and we had a limited form
of that. And what I have done over the last 15 months while we
have been downsizing is some of the critical hires that we have
made have been in our IT sort of arena. We have hired a
statistician. We have hired a specialist in data analytics,
predictive analytics. I oversee a program that is a $40 billion
a year program, and so my hope is that as we develop the
capabilities to do not only data analysis, data mining, but to
analyze the information. Kind of like what Mr. Herr said
earlier; it is great to get all this data in, but if you are
not looking at it, if you are not analyzing it, mining it,
seeing what it tells you, then it really does not mean
anything. So we are on a fast pace to be able to do not only
the data mining portion of it, but the predictive portion.
Mr. Ryan. Do you do that yourself or do you contract that
out?
Mr. Montoya. We have been doing that ourselves. It is far
cheaper to do it ourselves. And we have specialists that
understand the programs. They understand the intricacies of how
the programs work and where the funding comes from and these
sorts of things.
So, quite frankly, to your answer, yes, we are building on
our capacity and it is my hope that if we get this right, I do
not necessarily need to have another 712 staff, not that I
would not deny that if you offered it. I am just saying that my
hope is that with these data analysis predictive capabilities,
it sort of drives where we need to be, where we need to be
looking. And to the extent we can do that, we can become a lot
sharper at the tip of that spear, if you will, to get to where
we need to be than to wait for it to happen and then come back
in to pick up the pieces if you will. It is more of a
preventive sort of thing or as one person had said it, it is
sort of skating to where the puck is going to be, if you are
into hockey. You want to skate to where the puck is going to
be. You do not want to really wait until the last second
because you are never going to get there. So that is what we
are focused in on.
Mr. Scovel. We have done some of that as well on the
investigation side. We have worked to develop our own
predictive data analytic capability, and it has proven to be
fruitful for us on investigations.
We have also made good use of what is called the Operations
Center over at the Recovery Board. They have some very capable
and sophisticated databases that they were able to mine, not
only for my office, but for any IG in the community these days.
They have opened the door for cases and allegations that do not
even need to be recovery related, but that may help us in the
rest of our work.
On the audit side, we are able by the nature of our work to
do less of that. My concern is simply making sure that we are
able to update the computer systems and connections that we
have, particularly between headquarters and the field, so that
we are able to move back and forth the significant amounts of
data that we have to in order to bring the analysis to bear on
it. My office has about two-thirds located in Washington and a
third located in field offices across the country. To the
extent that we can better communicate, it will certainly make
for a better product for us. Right now we are hampered on the
IT front by just the hardware and the communications links that
are a generation or two behind.
Mr. Ryan. Great, thank you. I will submit a question for
the record with regard to the pipeline and hazardous material
safety administration oversight. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. We have totally blown to Hell my 5 minute rule.
Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, Mr.
Chairman, when I was lucky enough to be appointed on this
Committee, I started talking about transportation. And my
predecessor put his arm around me and said, by region you mean
Chicago, right? But I am sure he would appreciate my asking you
a little bit about the oversight of the Federal Railroad
Administration on the Railroad Rehabilitation and Improvement
Financing program. I understand your office is starting to look
at that. They were authorized to provide up to $35 billion in
loans and loan guarantees to railroads and other entities, and
they have gotten less than 5 percent of this money out. Could
you let us know how a system like Metra who is curious about
this how your inquiries on this are going?
Mr. Scovel. We will. I'm not in a position to advance a
most general answer to you at this point. We have just
announced an audit into the RRIF Program. Your numbers are
absolutely right, $35 billion authorized, five percent or so
actually used by systems throughout the country.
It's been a point of consternation and concern for the
Department as well as for the Congress because it's an avenue
to--we hope everyone does--to get money out to systems that can
best use it. Yet no one has been able to put their finger on
why it's so underutilized. We have a very small team of
economists plus some auditors in my office who are going to
study it and see what the impediments are. What are the reasons
why it's not being used more extensively? We'd be happy to
speak with you further, sir.
Mr. Quigley. If you could, what's a typical timeframe?
Typical's probably a tough word for something like this to be
completed?
Mr. Scovel. Sure. We shoot for 10 months. In all candor, we
rarely make it. Often it's more 12 to 14 months, but we'll do
all we can on this one knowing your interest.
Mr. Quigley. And I appreciate your following up with us.
Let me ask Mr. Montoya first about something else, cyber
security issues. Can you speculate or give us your best
information about cyber security issues at HUD?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. We recently completed an audit of
Ginnie Mae and just generally some of our other audit work on
their IT system. And there have been a number of concerns that
have been raised with just the security of the systems and
their oversight. It can range anywhere from their failing to
lock out an individual who's left the organization, for
example, to generally on most computers if you try to log in
and you hit the wrong password three times it locks you out,
well in the case of Ginnie Mae there was no such thing. You
could have been doing this forever and it would never have
locked you out.
So, those types of vulnerabilities we've been looking at
and recently provided that audit. I specifically have spoken to
Ginnie Mae's senior staff about that. Certainly issues that
they're going to be looking at. But we have not had any
indication that we've had any serious breaches per se, but
there are definitely vulnerabilities and it all goes back to an
earlier statement I made about how poor their IT infrastructure
is and how old and dated it is and the trouble that they're
having getting this stuff more robust and real time if you
will.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Scire, do you want to join in on that?
Mr. Scire. We haven't done any work on cyber security at
Ginnie Mae.
Mr. Quigley. Okay. Mr. Herr, the same questions that
relates in your testimony, you talked about the fact that DoT
has to improve its workforce planning and hiring for cyber
security personnel. You see this an issue government-wide with
your experience?
Mr. Herr. Yes, our team at GAO that focuses on IT has
highlighted this is an issue across government. In the case of
DoT in particular, they are near the bottom of agencies that
OMB ranks in terms of compliance with the FISMA standards.
That's a troubling development we've seen. I'm happy to follow
up if you have some additional questions.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. Any other panelist on the issues of
cyber security within the realms they cover?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you sir, just very quickly my office does
the annual FISMA audit for DoT. Mr. Herr is absolutely correct.
DoT has been near the bottom for a number of years. However,
both with secretaries and deputy secretaries in the past
administration and in this one, it's had their full attention.
Their best intentions have been largely hamstrung not so much
by funding constraints but by prioritization. In order to keep
systems up and running and fully operational on a day-to-day
basis, that's where funds and limited manpower have needed to
be prioritized.
In their estimation cyber security, not only at DoT but
across government often takes a second row seat.
Mr. Quigley. Priorities aside, why is it so difficult to
retain the personnel needed?
Mr. Scovel. I speak from experience because last week we
lost a very capable IT security person who, in fact, went to
the private sector. That's where they often go. More
flexibility, more money, all of those kinds of reasons. To talk
about your interest in cyber security, he led our penetration
testing of the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy, and we found then
that the systems that the Academy relied on to protect student
data, medical data, application data, social security numbers,
all of that was wide open. We got into it within a couple of
hours. We presented those results to the Department, and
they're working on fixing it.
Mr. Quigley. Well, thank you all for keeping us up at
night.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Quigley. Mr. Joyce, did you have
any question? I think you're----
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, I was wondering as
far as in a letter sent to Secretary LaHood on March 7th by the
transportation infrastructure chairman Bill Shuster and Senator
Thune, it was noted the yearly travel budget for FAA employees
is approximately $179 million? Could this be an area of
potential waste?
Mr. Scovel. Possibly. I must put that in quotes and
italicize it because we haven't audited that. I can't even
verify that that number is correct. I have no reason to believe
that it's not. From my experience trying to run my own office,
which is a vastly different kind of operation and a much
smaller scale, there are typically cost saving measures that
can be taken around travel. We've put them in place to
beneficial effect in my operation and that level of scrutiny
may well bear fruit for FAA as well.
Mr. Joyce. Certainly possibly inefficient at least?
Mr. Scovel. Yes, perhaps.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much. I think on this round
we've--well, we're going to quit at least by noon but we will
actually enforce the five minute rule on this round, okay? Some
really good stuff here but I wanted to go to the earlier
testimony, Mr. Montoya, about FHA and the fact that, you know,
they have a negative one point four four percent and you'd said
the sixteen point three billion negative?
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir.
Mr. Latham. Okay. And you say they're hard to audit. They
should have quarterly reports. They're paying claims that they
shouldn't be paying apparently.
Mr. Montoya. Right, sir.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Big question. I mean how soon, are they
going to have to go the Treasury to ask to get money or?
Mr. Montoya. We won't know that, sir, until the President
puts his budget numbers out. So, I couldn't tell you that. I
don't think anybody knows at this point.
Mr. Latham. You have any comment here?
Mr. Scire. We'll know a lot more when the budget is out
though we get some indication through the financial statement
audit which indicates that there would likely be a $16 billion
upward re-estimate. So, the budget would need to show that the
new book of business and any policy changes that FHA might
implement would bring in a similar amount or more.
Mr. Latham. But if it's hard to audit how are you going to
base anything on real information, real data?
Mr. Scire. I don't question that it's hard to audit. I
think that the actuarial review actually gives you useful
information, what they've done with the actuarial review in
moving toward this technique of stochastic simulation, we think
that gives you more accurate estimates of the value of the
mutual mortgage insurance fund. So, I think that is a real
important resource for information about where FHA stands and
that is what we have right now. It's telling us that
considering expectations for loans going forward that the fund
has a negative value.
Looking ahead, once the budget is presented then one would
need to drill into the assumptions that are used for coming up
with the estimates. Those assumptions are different than what
is in the actuarial review. And so, that is something that one
could definitely take a look at, how reasonable those
assumptions might be.
Mr. Latham. You testified about the claims situation. How
is this happening that they're paying claims that they
shouldn't?
Mr. Montoya. Well, our concern, much of what we've been
doing with regards to our review of lenders and services and
the claims that they put in, the falsities they created, it
might----
Mr. Latham. Intentionally? I mean, is fraud?
Mr. Montoya. Hard to tell. A lot of it was fraud. Certainly
the Robo signing piece was fraud where they were signing
documents that they had not actually overseen or notarizations
that they weren't present for, those sorts of things.
Mr. Latham. Have they been referred to criminal?
Mr. Montoya. Most of what we've done on those particular
cases, the Department of Justice hasn't taken any of those
individuals per se criminally. We've looked at the company as a
whole to reclaim some of those monies as we've been doing over
the last year and a half.
A lot of what we have been doing with regards to reviewing
these loan files, loan file reviews is what we call them, is
really a programmatic issue. And what we've been stressing to
HUD is that they really need to be a lot more robust on this
and not just depend on the work we've been doing. But the
reality is the way the FHA insurance fund is setup is 100
percent of the claims will get paid right after a claim is
made.
So, really in fairness to HUD it's always an after the fact
scenario where they're coming back to look at the loan file.
And if they believe that it was poorly underwritten only then
do they go back after the money. So, it is kind of a catch-22
for them. So, it's difficult for them but we keep stressing is
that they do more of that review and kind of along the lines
that we did but we used data analysis, if you will.
We used statisticians to pool statistical representations
of these loans that had gone either into default or to claim to
identify a universe, let's say 100 and then we looked at those.
So, those kinds of things is what we're stressing HUD to do
and it kind of goes along with the question Mr. Ryan asked
earlier about using data analytics to be able to do this stuff
for us.
Mr. Latham. But if you get garbage in I mean, you testified
earlier you're not getting good information to begin with.
Mr. Montoya. Right, right. Correct and that's the concern.
I think really from the standpoint of when you have a hundred
percent guarantee quite frankly, you're going to get garbage in
because there's really no financial stake, right, not to make a
loan, if you will, if you know that on the back end if it goes
bad you're going to be made whole. So, that therein lies the
inherent problem with, I think, that sort of idea.
Mr. Latham. I was handed a piece of paper, four and a half
minutes.
Mr. Montoya. I'm glad to see, Mr. Chairman, that you as
well are being held to that.
Mr. Latham. I will stop myself.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Pastor. If you need additional time I'll use----
Mr. Latham. Come on!
Mr. Pastor. Thank you. Multi-housing Association, one of
their concerns is as the economy is starting to improve as they
see it, and now you see the apartments and multi-housing, that
that industry is beginning now to show some growth and people
want to invest and you have--and they're very concerned about
FHA. Not so much about the problems you bring to us today but
that it continued to exist and be able to participate because
in many cases this is where they're going for the funding
because in the private sector either is not lending or is
lending at such high fees that it makes it unprofitable to--
And so, they're worried about the economy and their
particular industry. And they're concerned if there is reform,
if we do have reform in the future where FHA will be. I really
couldn't assure them of where it's going to be but they're very
interested what FHA has been able to do and what it can do for
their industry. Yet, with the problems they have what do you
anticipate?
Mr. Montoya. Well, sir, I certainly couldn't comment on
where reform will go.
Mr. Pastor. Sure.
Mr. Montoya. I'd be as interested in that as anybody. So,
it's hard to tell. Quite frankly, FHA is well beyond its
original mission on the amount of exposure they have. So, my
discussions with them are as they are pulling back, trying to
get back closer to their original mission. How that will impact
what was available before, there will be, I'm sure, some
impact. But where the Congress and FHA will take reform I
couldn't tell you.
But I think at the end of the day with FHA pulling back
from where it is and the sheer size it has become, there are
going to be impacts to single or multi-family.
Mr. Pastor. Probably negative?
Mr. Montoya. Well, you won't have as much absolutely.
Mr. Scire. What I would point out is that it's inextricably
linked with the resolution of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
because they also serve part of this market. There is also a
connection here with the low income housing tax credit which is
the biggest federal support for production of affordable
housing.
So, I think moving forward and looking at what the role of
FHA will be, it will be very important to consider the
companion roles of these other ways of supporting housing
finance.
Mr. Pastor. In reading your report and I can't remember
which one, we talked about the inspectors. The FAA and how
we're contracting more to private companies and the inspectors
seem to be utilized not as well as it should be in terms of
where they're at and what they're doing.
In the past we have added more inspectors and we're not
doing a good job with what we have. With sequestration coming
what do you anticipate's going to happen to this whole safety
of the aircraft due to the problems it will have to the
inspectors?
Mr. Scovel. Thank you, Mr. Pastor. Certainly this committee
and the Congress face that dilemma of how much to fund when it
comes to a priority like safety. Some will say you can never do
too much. However, in today's environment, clearly we're at
that place, and the Congress needs to look to the Agency to do
all that they can to use everything that they have already been
allocated.
Our work with regard to FAA and aviation safety inspectors
shows that the staffing model is not yet a useful tool for
driving budget and plans. I see your book is open to a graph
showing the wide fluctuations in the number of recommended
staffing positions that FAA's own staffing model has presented
it. It's gone all the way from the 300s up to the 900s in the
space of about 20 months. It's not because inspectors are
walking out the door but rather it's some deficiency with the
staffing model that FAA and the Volpe Center, which produces
the model for them, need to work out.
In the meantime, for you and for my office, it does show
that those numbers are unreliable. To take that a step further,
the Agency has not yet taken, fully absorbed, and applied all
of our recommendations with respect to basing inspectors' work
assignments on the basis of risk and targeting those scarce
inspector resources to areas where they're most needed.
We have an audit underway, and I mentioned it in my opening
statement, concerning repair stations, both domestic and
overseas, performing contract maintenance for our airline
carriers and the degree that FAA applies oversight to those.
They're sending inspectors out on a rote basis. You've got to
hit every station every year. They rarely make that. There's no
effort to quantify and analyze the risk that's presented at
specific stations to make sure that they get the oversight and
the degree of scrutiny that they need.
Mr. Latham. Thank you. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Just for the record I will always yield you time,
Mr. Chairman, when you're up against the five minute rule. It's
one of my jobs. I just have one question, Mr. Montoya. As I'm
sure you're probably aware, this Committee has historically
been and appropriately been very concerned about unobligated
balances in NAHASDA, the Indian housing program. And with this
fiscal climate that we have now, undoubtedly we're going to be
looking at that even more intently.
As you may be aware, tribes receive their funds through
NAHASDA generally have a significant amount of bureaucratic red
tape to go through. They have NEPA statements and compliance,
environmental impact studies and the like and that's all before
they can obligate any funds. At the same time, it appears to
me, I used to hear a lot about the tribes coming to the office
and this was their point of view. That HUD takes an inordinate
amount of time to award the dollars that are part of program.
HUD just last month, just got around to awarding the fiscal
year 2012 dollars for the program. And that puts the tribes
like 18 months behind the eight ball in terms of being able to
move through the process in a timely fashion. Do you know or do
you, have you thought of any reforms that HUD can and should
take to ensure that there's a more timely dispersal of the
funds and the tribes have enough time to plan and actually use
the resources they've been given?
Mr. Montoya. Well, sir, I'll have to admit to you we've not
had a lot of body of work done in Native American country. And
I recognize how important that is. I was with the IG's office
at the Department of the Interior and so very familiar with the
Native American country. But we haven't had a lot of work but
I'll tell you after having heard your two concerns here today
I'm beginning to wonder why we haven't done more work and I'll
be looking to do more of that because it sounds like your
constituents are bumping up against some pretty long waits, if
you will, which for me the rest of HUD doesn't seem to be
bumping up against.
So, I will certainly add that to my list of items to look
at and get back to you, sir.
Mr. Cole. I really, really appreciate certainly seeing a
lot of the housing on reservations and it's a very difficult
and challenging situation.
Mr. Montoya. Yes, sir. I will get back to you.
Mr. Cole. Thank you so much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Cole. Mr. Quigley do you have
any questions?
Mr. Quigley. No, sir.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Joyce? Okay. Mr. Herr, earlier you talked
about the unmanned aircraft systems and the challenge that has
for the FAA. And they're supposed to be integrated into the
system, national system by 2015, is that correct?
Mr. Herr. Yes.
Mr. Latham. Do you know--noted they're challenged in this
effort by limitations and its ability to share data with the
DoD?
Mr. Herr. Correct.
Mr. Latham. It's got to be a high priority both for the
research and commercial airspace industry. Can you elaborate as
far as the data challenges that they face and maybe suggest
ways that they could improve access to the processing of the
data.
Mr. Herr. Yes. Thanks for the question. It terms of this
issue it's FAA getting data from DoD in particular. And what we
found in some earlier work was that there was a, for lack of a
better word, data dump. They were given a lot of information by
DoD. It wasn't necessarily readily usable by FAA to help make
some of the determinations about safety and performance.
My understanding is they've entered into an MOU now with
DoD and have brought in a contractor so they can help have a
better sense of data needs. MITRE is the contractor to do the
work, and identify some of the key data fields. From that,
it'll be important to develop the standards, procedures, rules
and then roll that out, train the controllers and also do
certifications as warranted for the people that will be
operating these. Then, hopefully have it ready for the next
steps.
Mr. Latham. It's going to take a multi-Agency effort with
FAA, the DoD, DHS. Do they have the organizational leadership
structure in place to do this?
Mr. Herr. A lot of this is being done out of their joint
planning and development office, which we refer to as JPDO.
What my colleagues who that focused on this work at GAO have
reminded me is that they're focused on the safety side, the
avionics. But I think that as Mr. Pastor mentioned when he came
in in a light comment about the drones, there's a lot of other
concerns beyond just the integration into the civil airspace
that is part of this.
FAA has its piece but it's also going to be challenged to
work with these different parties. I think consistent with the
conversation we had earlier about demonstrating progress, there
are also milestones in the FAA re-authorization bill that they
still are working to meet. And they need to be doing that in a
timely way as well.
Mr. Latham. Okay, thank you. Mr. Scovel, do you think they
have the proper organizational structures in place to meet the
mandate and then also have you identified any weak links or
vulnerabilities that they have?
Mr. Scovel. Organizational structures as the Committee well
knows, FAA has established a UAS integration office. It's
tasked with pulling together air traffic equities in this
matter as well as flight standards, meaning aircraft
certification, pilot training and medical concerns. As the
Committee's hired skeptic, we'll have to say the jury's still
out on how well this integration office will function.
We have seen FAA struggle in the past particularly in the
NextGen area where interests of air traffic, flight standards
and airports have all needed to be woven together. Whether it's
been under the JPDO or under the newer organization that FAA
still is putting into place, it hasn't been fully successful. I
think we have to hang a question mark yet on whether this
integration office can actually do it.
To follow up on Mr. Herr's observation that FAA's interest
is safety and efficiency of the NAS in many respects: in the
past, FAA has been quite good at that. Yet this is an entirely
different beast when we encounter UAS integration because of
the privacy interests. Everybody recognizes that there is
potential for this country economically speaking. My numbers
show perhaps $89 billion in the industry over the next 10
years, thousands of jobs. It's a race that's ours to lose at
this point because we're that far ahead with the military
aspects of UAS technology. Yet on the civilian side it's much
different when we see filibusters in the Senate, and we see
communities right here in Virginia legislating, attempting to
ban drones in that community's airspace. FAA is going to have
to wrestle with all of that, and they're not well-equipped to
do that right now. It's reflected in the fact that in the
solicitation that they sent as invitations to participate in
the six test site areas. They inquired of the applicants,
``Tell us what you think your priority or your privacy measures
ought to be.''
Rather than stating that as a requirement up front, they're
looking to get all the input they can, which is not a bad
strategy given the dearth of experience and expertise that
exists in FAA on this point right now.
Mr. Herr. Mr. Scovel's comment prompted me to remember
another point. They were looking up to staff up the office, our
understanding is they have about 20 people in the UAS office.
So, they were just beginning to get the people involved. So,
it's a long term effort.
Mr. Latham. You are not instilling confidence. Mr. Pastor?
Mr. Pastor. Well, I'm going to go and just ask a question
on TGen. I think I've been living with TGen now for about eight
years I guess. And I guess it was moving forward but deja vu
all over again, they have the problems. Now we have the
sequester and the capital program will be reduced by $137
million.
Obviously, that's going to have ramifications and what do
you project some of the problems it's going to cause as we try
to develop this system and get it in place one of these days?
Mr. Scovel. Thanks, Mr. Pastor. It will have ramifications
in the development of some of these capital projects that are
part of NextGen or closely allied to it by way of foundational
programs. While we can safely say it will have effects because
of gaps in FAA's ability to project those effects down the line
of NextGen programs all the way to full program implementation,
I don't know that we or FAA can say exactly at this point.
This would get me back to a point that I made earlier about
the value of our integrated master schedule recommendation to
FAA and to the Congress. When events like sequestration come up
and cuts needs to be made to specific programs or there are
technical difficulties that become an impediment to quicker
execution of a program, FAA is unable to see how that will
influence the timing and sequence down the line. A master
schedule may well help them do that.
FAA, to be totally fair to the Agency, has accepted that
recommendation. They have embraced it and they are working to
produce that master schedule by the end of this year.
Mr. Pastor. What is the probability that they're going to
have it done?
Mr. Scovel. Fair at this point. I'd say at least 50/50.
Mr. Pastor. So, that probably means it's not going to get
done.
Mr. Scovel. I can't prejudge as the IG, even as the hired
skeptic.
Mr. Latham. If you say 50/50 that looks pretty darn----
Mr. Pastor. That's pretty darn good by our experience for
sure. You know, I remember when this whole thing got started we
were going to be working with NASA and bringing in the airlines
and we had the air traffic controllers and everybody going's to
be involved. And then we were having problems coordinating it
and then it just got further and further behind. In your
opinion, what is the status of it today?
Mr. Scovel. Of NextGen?
Mr. Pastor. NextGen.
Mr. Scovel. ERAM, for instance, is going to get done by the
end of 2014.
Mr. Pastor. Four years late?
Mr. Scovel. It will be four years late at that point. It
won't be the same ERAM that was advertised to be completed at
the end of 2010. It'll be a somewhat reduced and shrunken
version of ERAM. It'll need to be plussed up with technological
improvements for the rest of the decade at least and probably
into the '20s.
Other programs haven't been fully fleshed out by FAA yet.
Programs like terminal modernization, ADS-B, SWIM, and DataComm
have been identified in segments and funded and baselined in
smaller segments, which gives us some assurance that at least
that segment may stand a chance of getting done on time.
However, they haven't projected what the programs will deliver
all the way, and they haven't linked it all together in terms
of timing and sequence yet.
You'll remember, sir, FAA's original prediction was that
NextGen would be complete, bought and paid for--$20 billion for
government, $20 billion for the industry--by 2025. This is not
going to happen. It's going to be 2035 perhaps. Our estimate
and other knowledgeable sources say 2035 at the earliest and
perhaps after that and cost figures double or triple the
original $20 billion for government.
Mr. Herr. I would just underscore the importance of these
integrated plans. There are tools to help manage these complex
systems and looking at the risk and cost analysis is an
important way that agencies like FAA can better manage the
risks of these kind of purchases. The dollars are big, and it
gives rise to some of the terms people use, ForeverGen not
NextGen because the timeline is so long, which I think is
unfortunate. Mr. Scovel referenced the timeline that his office
is considering. These are complex endeavors but they're also
having to maintain the existing infrastructure while this is
rolling out.
One of the things I identified in my statement is a $310
million backlog in maintenance for these older facilities.
You're going to start to get into the position of having to
maintain these old radar systems. We're going to maintain these
old buildings until NextGen happens. Those are good, important
oversight questions for your committee.
Mr. Latham. I'm going to enforce the one minute rule on
you. And I would invite everyone, you know if you have more
questions submit them and we'd appreciate very much your
response to those. The NextGen thing I'd go back, if I'm not
mistaken the Bush Administration when they shut out basically
the air traffic controllers from any part of input on the
system I think delayed the whole thing a lot. And it really got
off to a rocky start because they didn't include the people who
were going to be running the system and the experts in the
system.
Mr. Pastor. You remember though right in the middle of a
contract negotiation, remember they were having those----
Mr. Latham. Right. Let me just say thank you for the great
job that you all do for us and we want to continue to rely on
your expertise and your great work in the communications.
Okay, one question, for each of you very briefly, is there
anything in each of your Departments that you see as a
potential problem that nobody is looking at today?
Mr. Montoya. That no one's looking at?
Mr. Latham. That no one's even thought about. I mean are
you concerned that there's something, see signs of something
popping up here?
Mr. Montoya. Yeah, I'd be afraid of what I don't know. No,
I don't know that the problems, the major issues that we have
we haven't already teed up. Part of what I think my data
analytics, predictive analytics capability will do is hopefully
find those anomalies that none of us ever knew about. So,
that's really my hope with where we're going with our IT
oversight capability, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Herr.
Mr. Herr. The area that's not hidden but it's one topic I
mentioned in my oral statement that's on our high risk list:
surface transportation financing. We've had the Federal Gas Tax
at the same level since 1993. It's well-known we're looking to
go to the General Fund. It makes it very difficult to fund
infrastructure with this kind of arrangement and so, I'd be
remiss if I didn't mention that issue as it's something we
highlight.
Mr. Latham. I don't think anybody knew that that was an
issue.
Mr. Herr. Well, it's not a hidden issue but it's also one
that----
Mr. Latham. It's absolutely critical and we got to find an
answer to it.
Mr. Scire. Yes, I would just highlight two. They are known
but they're very important issues that really need resolution.
One that we highlight in our high risk update is modernization
of the housing finance system. And so, there's still a lot of
work yet to be done to figure out where we'll end up at the end
of the day.
The other is, and we do highlight this, is the idea of
overlap fragmentation and duplication across the various tools
that the federal government uses to support housing. From tax
expenditures to grants to loans and so forth and I know there's
been some attempt here particularly in the multi-family arena
to try to bring together and to make more uniform some of the
requirements that all the different programs operate under. But
we think there's more that can be done. And there's a lot more
that can be done in the single family arena in trying to look
for opportunities for consolidation across agencies.
Mr. Latham. You've transmitted those suggestions or
you're----
Mr. Scire. Yes, we have and I'd be glad to provide those.
http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-554.
Mr. Latham. Authorizers and everything also?
Mr. Scire. Yes.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Yes. You have the last word.
Mr. Scovel. I will try to keep it short. Really nothing
new. Surface financing and cyber security haven't been
mentioned, but those are perennial concerns. I'm with Mr.
Montoya. I worry about what I don't know.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. Scovel. Because the question always is, testifying
before any committee, ``Mr. IG, where were you on this?'' When
we're unable to get to it, that's what keeps me up at night.
Mr. Latham. Very good. I appreciate your testimony and we
will be in touch and keep up the great work. Thank you.
Adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.026

Friday, March 15, 2013.

OVERSIGHT HEARING: SANDY DISASTER RELIEF AND RECOVERY

WITNESSES

JOHN PORCARI, DEPUTY SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
FRED TOMBAR, SENIOR ADVISOR FOR DISASTER PROGRAMS, DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
MARION McFADDEN, CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER AND LEAD COUNSEL, HURRICANE
SANDY REBUILDING TASK FORCE, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
Mr. Latham. The subcommittee will come to order. I want to
welcome everyone to a rare Friday hearing. Thank you, everyone,
for being here.
This is an oversight exercise on the work and the funds
going into the recovery from the devastation of Hurricane
Sandy. Our witnesses today are the Honorable John Porcari,
Deputy Secretary to the Department of Transportation; Mr. Fred
Tombar, Senior Advisor to the Secretary on Disaster Recovery at
the Department of Housing and Urban and Development; and Ms.
Marian McFadden, Chief Operating Officer of the Hurricane Sandy
Recovery Task Force. Welcome, all of you.
Hopefully today we will learn a bit more about how the
Departments and the task force will take responsibility for
these activities and these dollars. Overall the Congress
provided $50.5 billion, with the Transportation/HUD
subcommittee making up $29 billion of the funds. That is a
staggering amount of money, and by sheer volume there is a lot
of oversight to be done.
In hindsight, looking at the funds and the results of what
was provided after the Gulf Coast storms, I don't know if the
Federal Government has shown that it knows how to plan,
oversee, or implement the strategy for how the CDBG dollars
will be used effectively. There is no emergency CDBG program
authorization to follow, or formula to use, to determine the
best and appropriate response for the scale of such a response.
I think we can all agree that the way we have gone about
addressing disaster recovery in this country has been
inconsistent. Speaking for many thousands of counties and
families in the 43 States with a declared disaster in 2011, I
can tell you we didn't see a Sandyesque response from the
administration. There wasn't a $50 billion request or response
that year. The members of the--THUD Subcommittee managed to
carve out a total of $400 million in CDBG for all those
affected by the 2011 disasters, roughly 33 cents on the dollar
of damage. Ironically, New York was the big winner that year,
receiving most of the money after Hurricane Irene.
Hurricane Sandy comes, and in no way am I downplaying the
damage caused by the storm, but the CDBG request comes in at
about $4 to $5 for every dollar of damage. It is kind of hard
for me to explain that discrepancy back home to the communities
that were under water, or completely blown off the map,
receiving pennies or nothing at all to rebuild.
So in addition to how we got to this number, I have some
questions on how the Departments will allocate those funds, how
they expect the grant recipients to use the funds, and what
specific roles the task force will play in this recovery.
We welcome our witnesses, and we look forward to your
testimony and your answers to our questions. I will recognize a
few people here for their statements, and then the witnesses,
and we will move on.
First of all, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Good morning.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you very much.
I'd like to welcome all the panel members. I look forward
to hearing your testimony.
This is an important oversight hearing. Passing the
supplemental appropriation bill in January was the right thing
to do by providing relief to the communities that were
destroyed by Hurricane Sandy. The ranking member of the full
committee Mrs. Lowey, who will join us a little later, knows
firsthand about the damage that occurred in New York.
We must make sure that the Sandy funds first are
distributed efficiently and effectively to repair the damage to
the transportation and housing infrastructure, and, secondly,
that critical improvements are made to help prevent damage to
these facilities in future storms.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for the time, and I
turn back my time to you so we can get back to the questions.
Mr. Latham. Okay. I don't know if there are any other
Members here that wish to make any kind of a statement at this
point. No, okay.
We will hear from our witnesses now. Please summarize your
remarks, and your full written testimony will be included in
the record.
So we will start with Mr. Porcari. Welcome.
Mr. Porcari. Thank you, Chairman Latham, Ranking Member
Pastor, and members of the committee. We appreciate the
opportunity to discuss the Department of Transportation's
accomplishments implementing the Disaster Relief Appropriations
Act of 2013. And let me first thank the subcommittee for its
critical role in appropriating these funds. We know that we are
stewards of these funds, and it is something that we take very
seriously.
When Sandy hit, the damages didn't just take a tragic human
toll, it also dealt a devastating blow to the regional
transportation system. As soon as the storm was identified for
potential landfall along the east coast, DOT staff began
working with FEMA to monitor the storm's progress and prepare
to assist where needed. We activated our emergency response
team and embedded response team members in local emergency
operations centers.
Fifty-eight DOT employees were deployed to the joint field
offices in New York and New Jersey to help restore
transportation and infrastructure immediately afterwards and to
provide FEMA with additional assistance in the immediate
aftermath. As a result, the Federal Highway Administration was
able to provide $59 million in quick-release emergency relief
funds just days after the storm hit to New York, New Jersey,
North Carolina, Rhode Island, and Connecticut, and help start
repairs on damaged roads and bridges.
Despite substantial damage to its air navigation services
equipment, the Federal Aviation Administration restored normal
air traffic operations quickly by working around the clock to
repair and replace equipment. Our Maritime Administration
provided ships that fed and housed 968 emergency responders and
ensured that 11 vessels were able to carry more than 2.7
million barrels of petroleum products into the affected area.
Our Federal Transit Administration worked with the General
Services Administration to procure 250 buses that replaced lost
commuter rail and transit service in New Jersey.
All of these immediate response efforts helped restore
affected transportation systems as quickly as possible. And,
again, thanks to this committee, the Disaster Relief
Appropriations Act of 2013 provided $13.1 billion to the
Department of Transportation and has allowed us to continue
efforts to support our State and local partners with long-term
transportation recovery and restoration efforts.
This will go a long way toward rebuilding from Hurricane
Sandy. However, let me be clear. Sequestration will cut over
$650 million from funds recently provided through the Disaster
Relief Appropriations Act of 2013. The brunt of these cuts will
be felt in our work to strengthen our critical transit and rail
infrastructure in the face of future natural disasters.
DOT has make significant progress in implementing the
Disaster Relief Act. On February 6th, the FTA published a
notice in the Federal Register about the availability of the
first $2 billion in funding for repair work, and we have
already received several grant requests. FTA has allocated more
than $390 million to date as the first installment of Hurricane
Sandy relief funding, and next week we anticipate announcing
more than $150 million in additional grants to States that
include New Jersey and New York. These reimbursements were
carefully vetted and will begin to alleviate the financial
burden on the hardest-hit transit agencies.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) has been using
its well-established emergency relief program to provide
Hurricane Sandy funding to address highway repairs. FHWA
allocated $489 million in funding to the States affected by
Hurricane Sandy. Amtrak has spent $17 million on recovery work
to date, which includes repairing tunnels and signals, draining
flooded areas, and removing debris. The Federal Aviation
Administration continues to address Hurricane Sandy damage at
LaGuardia, JFK, Newark Liberty, and Teterboro Airports. Most of
this damage was at FAA facilities, and includes repairs to
roofs, walls, navigation systems, power and equipment.
We are ensuring that funds provided in the Disaster Relief
Act and are managed properly and with the same strong internal
controls used to administer other reimbursable funds at DOT.
As we continue our Hurricane Sandy response efforts, we
recognize our success is due in large part to our effective
relationships with State, regional, local--and local partners.
They have been critical to our understanding of local needs and
continue to be important as we continue our recovery and repair
work.
With that, let me thank you again for inviting me here
today, and I will be happy to answer any questions.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much for your testimony.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.034

Mr. Latham. Mr. Tombar.
Mr. Tombar. Chairman Latham, Ranking Member Pastor, and
members of subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today regarding relief and recovery from Superstorm
Sandy, particularly with respect to the actions of the
Department of Housing and Urban and Development. As Senior
Advisor for Disaster Recovery to HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan, I
have been deeply involved in those activities. And I am joined
today by Marion McFadden, who is currently serving as the Chief
Operating Officer of the Hurricane Sandy Task Force,
established by President Obama and chaired by Secretary
Donovan. We will both be pleased to answer any questions for
you.
Superstorm Sandy and a nor'easter that followed had an
immense and varied impact. The storm directly affected more
than 17 million people, and Superstorm Sandy caused tens of
billions of dollars in damage and is estimated to be the second
most costly storm in American history.
The Federal response to Sandy continues to involve
unprecedented cooperation among Federal, State, local and
tribal authorities. HUD, FEMA and other parts of the Department
of Homeland Security, as well as Departments of Transportation
and other Departments and agencies, are all working together in
coordination with State, local, and tribal officials.
HUD's response to Sandy built on our experience from past
major storms and disasters. I have addressed these efforts in
my written testimony and would like to briefly summarize them
now.

HUD'S RESPONSE

Immediately after the storm, HUD provided help to storm-
displaced families to find temporary replacement housing, gave
direct assistance to persons living in and owners of HUD-
assisted housing damaged or destroyed by the storm, worked to
encourage the private sector to help displaced families, and
deployed HUD personnel to help staff FEMA disaster recovery
centers and do other storm-related work.
HUD made several regulatory changes to benefit those
impacted by the storm, including providing foreclosure
protection for storm victims with FHA-insured mortgages through
a mandatory 90-day moratorium on foreclosures. On January 31st
of this year, we extended that moratorium for an additional 90
days. We are also offering assistance to storm victims who must
rebuild or replace their homes.
HUD is providing help to affected State and local
governments in the form of technical assistance to HUD
grantees, waivers of existing rules so that existing Federal
CDBG and HOME funds can be used for disaster relief, and work
with State and local governments and tribes to develop interim
housing plans and to provide loan guarantees for housing
rehabilitation. These efforts are ongoing.
I would like to turn now to the longer-term Sandy recovery
and rebuilding efforts, including the recent supplemental
funding provided by this committee and the whole of Congress,
and the work that the Hurricane Sandy Task Force--Rebuilding
Task Force is doing.
As you are aware, on November 15th, President Obama
announced that HUD Secretary Donovan will provide coordination
in support of rebuilding efforts, and issued an Executive Order
on December 7th providing that Secretary Donovan would serve as
the chair of the Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force. The
Secretary's responsibilities are in accord with the National
Disaster Recovery Framework and involve cooperating closely
with FEMA and the 20 other agencies already involved in
recovery efforts.
The focus of this task force is on coordinating Federal
support as State, local, and tribal governments identify
priorities, design individual rebuilding plans, and, over time,
begin implementation. The Secretary is the Federal Government's
primary lead on engaging with States, tribes, local
governments, the private sector, nonprofit community and
philanthropic organizations, and many others on long-term
Hurricane Sandy rebuilding.
On January 29th, President Obama signed the Disaster Relief
Appropriations Act of 2013. The supplemental funding bill funds
FEMA projects; is support for Small Business Administration and
its disaster loan program, and HUD Community Development Block
Grant money. These funds will be provided to communities as
well as for a range of other critical projects.
Federal agencies and departments have already begun the
process of making this money available to State and local and
tribal governments in the region. HUD announced the first round
of allocations of CDBGDR funding, totaling $5.4 billion. This
represents fastest-ever allocation following the signing of an
appropriations bill.
The role of this task force is not to dictate how funding
is used; it is to find ways to leverage and maximize the impact
of Federal dollars, and to help communities access this funding
and use it in support of their development priorities.
The Disaster Relief Appropriations Act also provides
funding to help impacted communities effectively mitigate
future risk of disaster and prevent losses of this magnitude.
Both HUD and the task force look forward to continuing to
work with this committee; subcommittee; others in Congress; and
our Federal, State, and local and tribal partners to help make
local rebuilding visions a reality and to support communities
that are rebuilding in a way that makes them stronger, more
economically competitive, and better prepared to withstand the
next storm.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. Ms.
McFadden and I will be happy to answer any questions you have.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.041

Mr. Latham. Ms. McFadden, did you have a statement?
Ms. McFadden. I do not, sir.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Again, thanks to everyone.
We will be operating under the 5-minute rule. We are
actually going to enforce it today. We will have some votes
here within an hour, so we need to keep moving.
I will start with the task force itself. It was created in
December. It is a new player in the disaster recovery business.
I am not sure if we are totally aware of what its role is.
Ms. McFadden, I am just wondering, are you planning on
utilizing the entire $8 million for the DRF, and how many
people have you hired? How many more you expect to hire? Are
there people detailed from other agencies? If you could, give
us the number and where those people are. Is there an
organizational chart for the task force?
Ms. McFadden. Okay. Thank you for your questions. Be happy
to make an organizational chart available to you.
We currently have 48 members on board, which represents 29
new hires under the Stafford Act; one volunteer on an OPA from
a nonprofit organization; and the balance are detailees, the
bulk coming from HUD. We also have DHA-FEMA detailees, and
Energy and NOAA detailees to the task force.
We are expecting to use the almost $8 million provided to
us through an IAA with FEMA. We have about eight members in New
York and eight members in New York--excuse me, in New Jersey,
and the balance in Washington.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Have you convened or presided at meetings
of the task force so far? And, if so, who all attended? If
there are some examples about how you have worked with FEMA, or
is there a schedule for the rebuilding strategy?
Ms. McFadden. Yes, sir. We have convened meetings of the
Cabinet members. We have virtually the entire Cabinet
participating. We have also had designees provided from 20
different agencies established in the Executive Order, and
informal meetings. We are meeting with different working groups
essentially weekly.
I am sorry. Please tell me the rest of your question, sir.
Mr. Latham. Well, working with FEMA--and is there a
schedule for the rebuilding strategy?
Ms. McFadden. The Executive Order asked for a rebuilding
strategy to be submitted to the President within 180 days of
the first convening, which was February 5th. So we took that
out to August 2nd.
And, yes, we are working very closely with FEMA, both here
in Washington, and in New York and New Jersey, close
coordination with the joint field offices.
Mr. Latham. Okay. If the task force, I guess, is supposed
to disband after 60 days when the strategy is completed, how
are you going to monitor the progress and have accountability
at that point?
Ms. McFadden. So we have established the project management
organization function which grows out of the Recovery Act as a
way of ensuring transparency and the spend across the Federal
Government. And we are very much cognizant of the fact that we
will be gone by the end of the fiscal year and the need to root
that function, as well as all of the various policy issues and
areas that we are looking at, a need for permanent owners
across the interagency.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Can you tell us how much has been
expended on travel, and what is the plan for future travel
expenditures? The plan we have seen includes $295 per night for
hotels, which is above the per diem. Explain to us how you can
circumvent the per diem rates.
The plan also includes $3.3 million for contract services
to include strategic counseling and stakeholder management
consulting. If you could tell us how those contracts were
competed, and who was awarded the contracts, the period of
performance, and a copy of the 180-day work plan for the
contracts. If you could provide those, actually, outside.
Ms. McFadden. I would be happy to provide you with
everything that you have requested, sir.
We have no intent of going beyond the per diem, so I am
not sure where that----
Mr. Latham. Two hundred ninety-five is in your spending
plan.
Ms. McFadden. I will look into that. It may be that it is
an estimate based on New York rates and New Jersey rates. But I
will get back to you with that information.
In terms of the period of the performance for the
contracts, we are not expecting to use contractors throughout
the entire duration of the 180 days. The period of performance
was stacked at the beginning of the task force during start-up
phase. When we were unable to fully staff the task force, we
relied on contracts, one contract that had been competed by the
Department.
Mr. Latham. So it is all under one contract?
Ms. McFadden. The bulk is under one contract, sir. We did
request funding for the ability to do stakeholder management
contracts, but we have not utilized that authority yet. And we
also have one staff member who is provided under contract for
secretarial services. But the bulk is the strategic contract.
Mr. Latham. Okay. My time is up.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield to the
ranking member.
Mr. Latham. Yes. If you would like an opening statement. We
welcome Mrs. Lowey.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you so much. And I would like to thank
Chairman Latham and our witnesses and congratulate my friend
from Arizona from becoming the new ranking member of this great
subcommittee. And I thank the witnesses for appearing before us
this morning.
Whether it is a low flood insurance estimate for homeowners
or a small business disaster loan with less than ideal terms, I
have heard numerous complaints from my constituents that the
assistance has been inadequate, and resources aren't
comprehensive.
Mr. Tombar, I applaud the Department for recently
allocating $5.4 billion of the $16 billion Community
Development Block Grants that you received in the Sandy
supplemental. I hope you will spend some of your testimony--and
I hope I didn't miss all of it--elaborating on what methodology
HUD used to calculate this initial allocation, and how HUD made
the determination to prioritize certain counties over others.
The Sandy relief bill also included almost $11 billion for
the newly authorized Public Transportation Emergency Relief
Program, which will repair and prevent future damage to transit
systems. As you know, numerous subway tunnels flooded; took
months to restore full service to all areas. And since New York
and New Jersey depend heavily on public transportation in their
daily lives, it is incredibly important that these repairs and
improvements are advanced in a timely manner.
So I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I will save my
question for when it is my turn.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Pastor, do you have questions?
Mr. Pastor. I have some questions, but--
Mrs. Lowey. You want me to ask questions?
Mr. Pastor. I will yield to her. I will get my 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lowey. You are so kind.
Mr. Pastor. She started with CDBG. I am also interested in
how they got to that number and how they are going to allocate
it.
Mrs. Lowey. Okay. So after many months of touring my
district and speaking to hundreds of small business owners and
homeowners affected by Sandy, I have determined that both
Rockland and Westchester Counties suffered roughly equal damage
from Hurricane Sandy. I have reviewed FEMA's unmet individual
assistance and SBA's disaster loan program data. They confirm
my on-the-ground experience. Yet Rockland is categorized as a
most impacted and distressed county, while Westchester is not.
So can you please explain to me what estimates and
methodology were used for determining the most impacted and
distressed counties designation in the initial round of
allocations, and should I be concerned that Westchester will
not get all the support it needs through the CDBG program
because it lacks this designation? And how will HUD allocate
the remaining two-thirds of the funds? And, like Rockland,
could Westchester also be designated a most impacted and
distressed county in future awards?
Mr. Tombar. Thank you, ma'am, for your question.
Let me first say that we have a very detailed description
of the methodology that we use for allocations that we will
provide to the subcommittee following. But I will try my best
to summarize the procedure that we use, without embarrassing
the statisticians and economists who worked on this back at our
headquarters office.

UNMET NEEDS

Essentially you pointed out two sources of data that feed
into what we call an unmet needs analysis. The methodology that
we have used for HUD disaster recovery funds is to try, to the
extent possible, to meet the unmet needs, if not totally on a
pro rata basis. So we will look across the damaged and impacted
areas to determine unmet needs based upon FEMA registrations
and their analysis of the extent of damage. And subsequently
and especially for business losses, we will look at the SBA
applications and their estimates of damage, and what is covered
by both of those agencies, and what is estimated to be covered
by private insurance. And that gives us a sense of what the
unmet needs are.
I should say that this first allocation focused
specifically on the needs of--the unmet needs from housing and
from business loss. They did not take into account what it
usually is, the largest driver of an unmet needs analysis, and
that is infrastructure damage. And the reason we did not take
that into account is because it typically takes FEMA much
longer to arrive at determinations of what the overall
infrastructure damage to disaster-impacted areas is. They go
through an extensive process through--their project worksheet
process, they call it--and based on that, will identify what
those needs are.
You asked about subsequent allocations. There are a couple
that you can expect. One is Congress directed us to use the
money that was provided in disaster CDBG supplemental funding
not only for Hurricane Sandy-impacted areas, but also to go
back and look at those areas impacted in calendar year 2011 and
other disasters of 2012. We have not made the allocations to
those impacted places yet, but we will plan to do so sometime
in the near future.
There is also a requirement in the appropriation that we
make funds available for disasters that occurred this calendar
year. And, obviously, we need to wait until December 31st to
know conclusively the impacts of disasters this calendar year.
So we will make that allocation for 2011 and 2012
disasters. There will be another one for 2013 disasters
sometime subsequent to this calendar year. And once we have a
better understanding of the infrastructure unmet needs, we will
make an allocation based upon that. And it is very likely that
the determination about the most impacted counties will
broaden, change in some way, and we will make our allocations
accordingly.
Mrs. Lowey. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
Ms. Granger.
Ms. Granger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I don't know whether this question is to Ms. McFadden or
Mr. Tombar, because you both talked about the task force. But
do you plan to provide progress reports as you develop the
plans?
Mr. Tombar. That is hers.
Ms. Granger. Ms. McFadden.
Ms. McFadden. We are providing those reports to the White
House, and to the NEC and NSF staff, and the Domestic Policy
Council.
Ms. Granger. So we could have that access also?
Ms. McFadden. I believe so.
Mr. Tombar. Yes.
Ms. Granger. Okay. And I have another question, and this is
for Mr. Tombar. And it has to do with the supplemental $16
billion for community housing. For Sandy and other eligible
disasters for 2011 through 2013, could you give me an example
or some examples of the past natural disaster projects, and
also how you are handling concerns that monies for those would
take away from money for Sandy's efforts?
Mr. Tombar. Thank you, ma'am. It is a very good question.
As the chairman mentioned, there are places that were
impacted by disasters last year, in calendar year 2011. In
fact, it was one of the worst disaster years on record. I think
there were some disasters, major disasters, in 48 States
totaling over 80 in total. And the chairman mentioned that this
subcommittee provided $400 million in disaster CDBG that we
have allocated to those places that were most impacted.

DISASTER MITIGATION

The language, as you point out, in the disaster
supplemental that was just provided by Congress directs the
Department to go back and I call it ``plus up'' those places.
The $400 million, while a very generous allocation,
appropriation to us, wasn't enough for us to allocate to the
total estimates of unmet need that existed. So what we are
doing is taking into account the allocations we have already
made, the details on the unmet needs that remain, and making a
subsequent allocation that will be forthcoming, I would
imagine, within 2 or 3 weeks that will give additional
resources to address those unmet needs that remain.
For 2013, I would like to tell the Secretary that we
canceled all disasters for 2013 so we don't have to worry about
that, but I am not as good of a predictor of the future as I
would like to be. So the plan is to hold back some of the
appropriation that you all provided to the Department to
address those as, in fact, we have been directed to do.
Ms. Granger. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Could I just use some of your time here?
Ms. Granger. You may, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. What was your request for 2011? Four hundred
million was greater than what you requested, wasn't it?
Mr. Tombar. I cannot remember the details of that request.
I don't recall.
Mr. Latham. How did you come up with $17 billion this time,
and you way undershot what it was in 2011, where the 33 cents
on the dollar of damage, and this is about a $4 to $5 per
dollar of damage?
Mr. Tombar. Sure. The way we arrived at the numbers from
one year to the next I cannot answer with complete certainty
now, but we can follow up with a question on that. But I will
say that we do recognize that $400 million, given the extent of
the damage last year----
Mr. Latham. You don't know what the request was from the
administration?
Mr. Tombar. I don't recall it was. It was made several
months ago, and I am sorry, I can't remember the details. I
don't want to make something up without full recall.
I should say about the $16 billion that has been provided,
one of the things that we know is that it is--and in your own
State, actually, Cedar Rapids proves this point--that it is
very important to, as States and communities recover from
disasters, to do projects that will mitigate against future
disasters. The mitigation, unfortunately, is a lot more costly
than building back as it was. And so you will see in the
principles of the requests that we put forward this time from
the President----
Mr. Latham. That was in 2008.
Mr. Tombar. Yes, sir, I understand. But what Cedar Rapids
did with the funds in 2008 puts it in a better position should
another disaster of that type happen in that community. By
moving everyone out of the Time Check neighborhood, it assures
that, as floods have happened in that community before, that
when it floods again, that there will be nothing for it to
destroy.
Mr. Latham. You are out of time, Ms. Granger.
Ms. Granger. You used it very well.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
D.C. can be a very isolating place. I haven't toured the
sites, as Mrs. Lowey and many others have, but I think it is
fair to not confuse activities and organizational charts with
effectiveness. When will things get fixed? Now, we can't
control everything that local governments do and how quickly
they move even in coordination with us, but for the things we
can control, as with the FAA, what is the time frame? When will
most of these things be repaired? When will they all be done?
Mr. Porcari. It is an excellent question. Starting with
aviation--and, again, we had four airports that were
essentially closed, LaGuardia, JFK, Newark and Teterboro. The
work on the navigational aids, we had, first of all,
prepositioned supplies and personnel before the storm hit. We
had generators with a week's worth of fuel ready to go. Given
the intensity of the storm, some of the navigational and other
facilities were actually destroyed. So in the case of an
instrument landing system, for example, that had to be
replaced, we had the spare parts in our depot in Oklahoma City.
We built it there, built it in a trailer there, transported it
to the site. And we had partial openings at several of the
airports within the first 24 hours.
I should also mention before the storm hit, working with
the airlines, they pulled down their schedules in advance so
that aircraft, crews, and passengers were not stranded at the
airports.
At the same time, the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey, they operate the four airports, was repairing their
portion of the equipment, which included the landing lights,
taxiway lights, and other air-side equipment.
We were very pleased that as the water levels receded, we
were able to remove debris, get the NAV aids back up, and have
partial service very quickly in the airports.
With transit, because most of the tunnels flooded, it was
more difficult. The recovery started with bus bridges, for
example, using buses instead of heavy rail and commuter rail
systems. I had mentioned in my testimony that with the General
Services Administration, we had procured up to 250 buses that
were privately procured to use on a temporary basis for New
Jersey Transit. In New York and Connecticut, bus bridges were
used as well.
From our perspective, there was an extraordinary level of
cooperation with the transit systems throughout the storm event
and afterwards in restoring service. I would point out that
there are portions of the transit system that are still not
reopened because of the damage, but the bulk of the regional
system is operating.
On the highway side, for the Federal-aid-eligible highways,
our long-established emergency relief program in New Jersey,
New York, and Connecticut in particular moved very quickly to
get that ER funding out to the recipients. We have a day-to-day
working relationship through our division administrators with
those State DOTs. As they identified damage, they had
contractors in place through preapproved contracts, got the
work done, and in some cases we got the emergency relief
funding on the highway side out to them within hours of their
request.
Mr. Quigley. Given the limited time we have, can you give
me your best guess on when the balance of things would be
repaired to the extent you possibly can tell.
Mr. Porcari. In general terms, most of the highway work is
done. The aviation work is largely done. Rebuilding our spares
inventory and doing mitigation, raising and hardening some of
the aviation structures, some of that still needs to be done.
The real work is on the transit side. There are cases in
some of the flooded tunnels where the entire signaling system
was ruined because of the saltwater, and it will be 24, 36
months or more in some cases before full restoration of those
facilities.
Again, the systems are operating on a stop-gap basis. The
permanent repairs and the mitigation work, which will harden
the system in the future, will take much longer; in some cases,
a matter of years. I would say that we already have allocated
on the transit side about almost $400 million. We actually have
outlays on the highway side, and we are working on a daily
basis with our partners on the local and State level.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
Ms. Herrera Beutler, do you have any questions?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. No, thank you.
Mr. Latham. All right. Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I commend you for
holding this hearing on this very important topic. And I also
thank the witnesses for their testimony and the good work that
both Departments are doing.
As the ranking member on Homeland Security, I want to focus
in both the case of HUD and DOT on the intersection between the
FEMA efforts and your Departments' efforts and the way this
coordination is taking place going forward.
So I want to start with HUD. As Mrs. Lowey already noted,
HUD has been required to make initial awards of 33 percent
within 60 days of enactment of the supplemental, and those
allocations have taken place. Her focus was on what determined
the allocations in the initial round. I want to focus on the
uses to which that money is being put, and particularly on the
intersection with FEMA's housing efforts, both the immediate
response and the longer term.
I visited New York last week with Chairman Carter of our
subcommittee. We were able to go to lower Manhattan as well as
to the Rockaways and some of the beach areas that were most
affected. One of the things that is immediately striking,
certainly in lower Manhattan, but also across the region that
we saw, is there are no FEMA trailers. For better or worse,
that is a problem we don't have.
One of the reasons there are no FEMA trailers, as I
understand it, is there is no place to put FEMA trailers in
many of these areas. But, more seriously, there has been a
decision to handle emergency housing, short-term relief, in a
different way. And as I understand it, that was a decision in
which you participated and where some CDBG money has
facilitated this solution. People are being put back in their
homes much more quickly. And there are emergency repairs going
on, as I understand it, even when there might be some questions
in some cases about the long-term habitability of that home.
People are being put back in their homes, where possible,
through emergency repairs. And then, hopefully, many of those
places can be more extensively repaired, and people can stay in
their neighborhoods.
In other cases, they won't be repaired. Some of those areas
may be cleared. There will be mitigation efforts to rebuild
back more soundly and, in some cases, to clear areas that are
just going to be vulnerable no matter what we do.
So I know that there has been a blending of CDBG and FEMA
efforts in this endeavor. I am not sure that I understand the
division of labor every step of the way. I know the CDBG monies
are being used to provide matches in many cases.
But I wish you could elaborate. I would appreciate your
elaborating what the mix of funding, the mix of efforts has
been here. And then maybe also reflect on not just the positive
sides, but some of the possible downsides of this approach,
because do you have to wonder in some of these cases where this
housing has been very severely damaged whether we may be
creating facts on the ground, so to speak, that actually will
make long-term mitigation, long-term rebuilding more difficult,
or at least that is one conceivable outcome, of course, that we
want to avoid. So I wonder if you could just, first of all,
outline the effort and then address these issues.

HUD/FEMA FUNDS

Mr. Tombar. Sure. Thank you, Congressman Price.
As you pointed out there is an intersection, in fact a
pretty considerable intersection, between the work of HUD and
FEMA. It begins, actually, before the storm even hits the
shores of the United States, we work together on coordination,
on responses. As I pointed out in my testimony, we actually
deployed HUD staff to work in FEMA's disaster recovery centers,
and did a wholesale inventory of our portfolio of properties
that had units available, and made those available to disaster-
impacted families. This is something that we routinely do, and
certainly was done in the case of Hurricane Sandy.
As Congresswoman Lowey's question pointed out, there is a
reliance on FEMA data as well as SBA data in our allocation
decisions about where unmet needs exist. And so it is based
upon those data that we actually made the allocation, the
initial allocation, of the $5.4 billion, as you pointed out.
You mentioned the emergency repair program. This is a
program that FEMA did under its authority for the first time,
and that was to address, where there are opportunities, the
low-hanging fruit, if you will, homes that could be repaired
rather briefly, quickly with minor repairs of less than $10,000
to get people back in their homes.
Mr. Latham. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired. We
are trying to get around to everybody this morning.
Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Chairman. And I would certainly give
any of my 5 minutes to you if you had follow-up on the question
that you ran out of time on.
Mr. Latham. No.
Mr. Joyce. Okay.
Thank you for coming.
Mr. Tombar, if you would, do you know, is there any
significant data that shows that due to the Hurricane Sandy,
that buildings have been abandoned?
Mr. Tombar. There indeed are some buildings that have been
completely destroyed by the storm in places. So, yes, they have
had to, because of safety reasons, been abandoned.
Mr. Joyce. Will a significant amount of the money that has
been appropriated to you be used to demolish those buildings?
Mr. Tombar. The demolition is typically covered by FEMA
public assistance. So we don't expect that HUD CDBG dollars
will necessarily be used in demolition since there is already a
source of funding in the Federal Government for that. But there
could be projects for which there is a gap in the FEMA
assistance that HUD may come along, and HUD's funding may come
along and match the FEMA assistance to help with some of those
projects. It is conceivable. But by and large, FEMA's
assistance covers those types of things under public
assistance.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Chairman, I yield my time to the ranking
member.
Mr. Latham. The Gentlelady is recognized.
Mrs. Lowey. I just want to thank the Chairman and the
generosity of my friend Ranking Member Pastor.
It is true that my district has experienced the one--what
do they say, once-in-100-year storms twice in the last 2 years,
with Hurricane Irene and Sandy. And as I visit with my
homeowners and business owners, you see that they are really
making some very critical decisions: Should they repair? Should
they relocate? So getting this information early and the
assistance they need is so very important.
I wanted to follow up with you, Mr. Tombar, because HUD
announced $5.4 billion for the initial round of CDBG
allocations. And the allocated funds were made to address the
unmet housing and economic revitalization needs for Hurricane
Sandy. However, the allocation does not reflect unmet needs
from Hurricane Irene or Tropical Storm Lee, even though
grantees like New York State plan to address these needs in
their proposed CDBG action plans.
So for my homeowners that are trying to figure things out,
who have unmet needs from both hurricanes, it would be very
helpful if they had received all the funding at once so that
they can really plan, enter into contracts to repair their
homes.
Why didn't HUD include unmet needs for these past storms
into its calculations for this allocation? And I just wonder
how that decision was made. I guess you were concerned that you
would be taking funds from Sandy if you dealt with the other
unmet needs, but very often one builds upon the other.
Mr. Tombar. Certainly. And let me say I can appreciate the
pain and the anguish that you go through just seeing the impact
on your community. I am a New Orleans native and actually had
the experience of going back to New Orleans after the storm and
running the housing recovery program for the State of Louisiana
following that storm, hurricane Katrina, and know that this
is--the work that you are talking about has a real and human
impact.
But to get to your question about the allocation and its
use not only for Hurricane Sandy victims, but for Hurricane
Irene and Tropical Storm Lee victims, we have given the State
of New York the ability to use its portion of the $5.4 billion
allocation to address the needs from last year's disasters as
well.
The truth of the matter is, as I said in my initial answer
to your first question, is that we will be coming behind and
giving additional funding to the State of New York primarily
driven by the needs that will arise from infrastructure damage
yet unseen. I will tell you from my own experience, the $1.8
billion that has been allocated, while the needs are great,
recovery is hard, and it will take a while for them to spend
all of that money.
And so knowing what the needs are and what the plans were
for last year's disasters, what we suspect will happen is that
those will be addressed first and foremost because they are
already, if you will, in the pipeline. So I would expect that
your constituents would see immediate assistance given to them
from this initial allocation. And given the fact that there
needs to be planning and infrastructure capacity, if you will,
put in place to address the more current needs from Hurricane
Sandy, we would expect that that money would start to spend a
little bit later.
Mrs. Lowey. Perhaps I will just ask one more, couple of
minutes left, of Deputy Secretary Porcari.
In February, the FTA issued a notice soliciting
applications for the first $2 billion in recovery funding, and
less than $500 million has been awarded for repair and recovery
thus far. Is there anything you are doing that could speed up
the remaining $1.5 billion? And could you update us on how the
Department intends to allocate the remaining funds?
Mr. Porcari. It is an excellent question. First I need to
again thank the committee for the appropriation for Sandy
relief. We are trying to move both quickly and carefully, and
so, for example, we have set up a financial stewardship task
force as part of this and brought in our inspector general as
part of the process, so as the funds are expended, we know we
are doing it right.
But of the first $2 billion, the intention with that for
the Federal Transit Administration is to reimburse as quickly
as possible for work already done to alleviate some of the
cash-flow issues for the transit systems. That $390 million--
and you will very shortly see subsequent awards on that--has
been doing that. We have been working, literally, on a daily
basis with the transit agencies. And as we go past the $2
billion mark, the interim final rule which establishes the
emergency relief program for the Federal Transit Administration
is well along, it is under review right now, it will be
followed by guidance very shortly. We expect that that rule and
guidance will be in place before the allocation of the full $2
billion. So there will be no interruption to the transit
systems, Amtrak, or the regional rail operations. We are trying
to balance moving the money out the door to the agencies
quickly with the need to make sure that we have the proper
controls in place.
I should also mention it started immediately in the
aftermath of the storm with the mission assignment that FEMA
gave us for project management oversight, where we used our
project management oversight contractors to look at the damage.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much.
Mr. Porcari. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you. I appreciate you all being here today.
Sandy, obviously, was a big issue for me. I had a half a
million people in my congressional district, half a million
people out of power. Thankfully the storm, the brunt of the
storm, did not hit my constituency as we had anticipated by the
modeling. Sadly, for our friends in the East, in New Jersey and
New York, they took the brunt of it and paid a very heavy
price. That said, we had some real impacts in the Eastern
Pennsylvania.
But my main concern today is about the--I guess, some of
the housing programs. I think the first round of allocations
for CDBG disaster relief was about $5.4 billion, if I am not
mistaken.
What is the interaction between the existing CDBG funds and
many of these relief funds that you are overseeing?
Mr. Tombar. Thank you, Congressman, for your question.

EXISTING/SUPPLEMENTAL CDBGS

The existing CDBG funds, as I point out in my testimony,
and HOME funds that are existing, immediately after the storm
declaration of disaster we make those funds known to our
grantees that they have the ability to request waivers from us
to use those funds for disaster recovery and relief efforts
should they choose. While we made that offer, none of the
existing grantees actually executed in this particular case a
decision to do that. We had no requests for waivers there.
The supplemental CDBG funds really in a substantial way
provide enough resources to address the needs that are there.
That which these grantees typically get on an annual basis in
terms of appropriation usually is--far outweighs the needs that
communities have that are directly hit by major disasters,
major catastrophic disasters like Hurricane Sandy. So what the
subcommittee did this time is what we have seen happen in the
past to help address those needs that we know are unmet by
existing resources.
Mr. Dent. I know you have allowed for waivers for CDBG HOME
dollars. Are the relief funds, are they being firewalled at
all?
Mr. Tombar. In what way, sir?
Mr. Dent. Well, firewalled from--you know, I'll say the
CDBG funds and the relief funds. Is there any firewalls there?
Mr. Tombar. Well, those funds have to be used specifically
to address impacts of the disaster. That is what the Congress
directed us, and that is certainly what we are providing in a
way of our notice as guidance to the grantees, that their plans
must be tied to the impacts of the disaster, and that the
funding must be used in that way.
Mr. Dent. Okay, because we have had some issues where I
have seen some communities I will say misappropriate CDBG
funds. I saw one of those in my own community actually, and it
is just an issue that has been a concern to me, that the CDBG
funds are--they are being used for the purposes for which they
are intended. And I had written the Department about this
previously. And I just wanted to make sure that there is no
abuse of these funds, particularly in the aftermath of the
storm. Again, my constituency was hit extremely hard by this;
more wind damage thankfully, very little--no flood damage in my
areas. But that is my main concern.
I thank you for your attention, and I will yield back to
the chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman.
HUD published a notice of requirement that any rebuilding
must include a green standard. Is there a statutory requirement
for this under the block grants?
Mr. Tombar. No, sir, there is not a statutory requirement.
Mr. Latham. Is there a requirement in the supplemental?
Mr. Tombar. The supplemental request that the President
made, as I was saying in an earlier answer, said that we--we
were requesting the funds in a supplemental to--in addition to
just addressing the needs that exist, to mitigate against
future disasters and to build back, quite frankly, smarter,
safer, and stronger than what existed previously. And knowing
that----
Mr. Latham. So there is no requirement.
Mr. Tombar. Excuse me?
Mr. Latham. There is no requirement from the supplemental?
Mr. Tombar. No, sir. No specific requirement for the
standards that are there. But there is the flexibility for us
to make policy determinations.
Mr. Tombar. But there is the flexibility for us to make
policy determinations about what, in fact, would be----
Mr. Latham. Where do you get that authority?
Mr. Tombar. From the supplemental.
Mr. Latham. There is no mandate, so you are doing just
whatever you want to, any requirements you want to with the
money. No authorization.
Mr. Tombar. Not at all, sir. What we are doing is taking
advantage of what is an opportunity. Unfortunately,
catastrophes like Hurricane Sandy both present us with a
challenge and with an opportunity, and the opportunity there is
to build back, as I say, smarter, safer, and stronger than what
existed previously.

REBUILDING SMARTER

When a home is substantially destroyed, and it may be an
existing home with old windows and doors and things like that,
it makes sense to build it back in a way that is more--that
would be more economically feasible going forward and offers
better energy efficiency for the residents, especially since
the money, as you know, is directed by and large to low- and
moderate-income people. Having the ability to put in high-
efficiency windows, or high-efficiency HVAC systems that would
lower their ongoing energy costs, that is something that, you
know, that the Secretary made a determination.
Mr. Latham. You have the checklist and standard. How much
additional is this going to increase the cost of the repairs?
It is already a very expensive area. And also, is there an
abundance of certified materials and contractors in the area to
handle all this?
Mr. Tombar. I am not sure about the supply chain for the
materials in the area, but I will say that the cost of doing
these type of things when there is a substantial rehabilitation
or an overall complete rebuild are greatly diminished by doing
it otherwise, if you were just to do a rehab on a home that did
not require a huge level of rebuilding or rehabilitation.
Mr. Latham. What is the payback?
Mr. Tombar. There are studies that speak to that.
Mr. Latham. Do you have those?
Mr. Tombar. We can certainly provide those to the
committee.
Mr. Latham. I mean, it would take decades. I mean, these
people are sitting out there right now, and you are increasing
the costs dramatically, slowing down the whole process of them
getting into a home again. On a commercial building, you could
maybe see the benefit. But the payback on a lot of these is not
going to be in these homes for that long. This to me is
pretty----
Mr. Tombar. I can say from personal experience, I did----
Mr. Latham [continuing]. Amazing.
Mr. Tombar [continuing]. Gut rehab on my home about 5 years
ago, and it was a 1923 home that had beautiful stained-glass,
wood-frame windows, but they didn't hold anything in or nothing
out. And we took advantage of the opportunity of doing a gut
rehab to put in better windows, and my utility bills have gone
down considerably. Put in high efficiency HVAC systems in place
of the window units, and the oil-furnace heat, and have seen a
return on investment.
When you are doing the type of repair and rebuild that
homeowners are going to have to do now to get back in their
homes, it makes sense to do these things that will in the
future----
Mr. Latham. Where do you get the authority for the mandate?
Mr. Tombar. Well, the authority comes directly from the
supplemental itself.
Mr. Latham. Is there a mandate that you do green projects?
Mr. Tombar. No, sir.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Mr. Tombar. No mandate, but the authority.
Mr. Latham. Right. There is no mandate.
Mr. Tombar. No, sir.
Mr. Latham. Right.
My time is expired.
Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Tombar, the question I asked earlier, to
the best of your ability, in the end what people want to know
is when will things be fixed? Given the time frame and how the
sequences are going for funding, again, in this case some of
this is out of our hands, but the opportunities are there for
things to get done. If we had this hearing in 6 months, a year,
2 years, at each point what would you tell us percentagewise
how much has returned to normal, how much has been rebuilt?

SPENDING RATE

Mr. Tombar. So, there is a requirement that the Congress
put on this money that from the time the money is obligated,
that the grantees have 2 years to spend it. So we would expect
that there would be a pretty rapid spend-down rate for this
money. How does that translate in terms of percentage of
overall rebuild? I really couldn't tell you. I will tell you
that it is difficult recovering from a disaster like this. It
is difficult and often slow and incremental. And so----
Mr. Quigley. Well, in the Gulf Coast there wasn't enough
money, and it didn't come soon enough, right, to help everyone?
Mr. Tombar. Some people's judgment is that, yes, that there
was----
Mr. Quigley. Well, years later things weren't done, right?
Mr. Tombar. There are still needs that remain in the Gulf
Coast.
Mr. Quigley. And how long ago was that?
Mr. Tombar. Hurricane Katrina was in 2005.
Mr. Quigley. I am aware you understand this, but in the end
that is the final analysis, sort of the grade we get as a
country, how quickly does a community come back. So it had to
have been one of the two: Either there wasn't enough money, or
it didn't get to them soon enough that it took that long to
restore and rebuild. Will those issues exist after Sandy?
Mr. Tombar. Well, I will tell you, it is rather complex. We
have grantees. For example, the State of Louisiana, in a year
prior to Hurricane Katrina and the resources that were provided
by the subcommittee to that State, they received around $30
million in CBDG funding. They went from $30 million to $13
billion. There was a need to create an infrastructure capacity
for the spending of that money.
That is going to be the challenge in all of the places that
are looking to recover now. The money is provided to them, but
they have to work to build that capacity to implement their
programs and provide the assistance.
Mr. Quigley. Let me put this another way. I have only been
here 4 years, but you can feel like Bill Murray in Groundhog
Day. I have been through this hearing before sort of scenario.
You can appreciate that.
Mr. Tombar. Certainly.
Mr. Quigley. So to spare those here in the future having to
ask the same questions, maybe this is the best way to ask the
question. When we look back, what are the questions when we
say, why didn't it get done sooner? So if we are here in 3
years, and everything is not done, and, heaven forbid, as long
as it has been since the Gulf Coast, you know, the questions we
are going to ask is why did it take so long? Why does it take
so long, and what are the pitfalls that we need to overcome to
get this done quickly?
Mr. Tombar. I will tell you, part of the difficulty is at
times the Federal Government, quite frankly, gets in the way. I
know from my own experience on the ground working in post-
Katrina recovery, housing recovery, that the agency I work at
wasn't always a good partner.
The President made a directive to the entire Federal
family, and that was, find ways to cut through red tape; find
ways to help these communities recover as expeditiously and as
thoroughly as possible. It is the main justification, I would
say, for the Hurricane Sandy Rebuilding Task Force, which
forces all of the Federal agencies to come together, come up
with a comprehensive plan working with the State, local, and
tribal communities to find out how we best can assist them and
cut the red tape. I think that more than anything else this
will have a positive impact on the speed of recovery and how
well the recovery goes overall.
Mr. Quigley. I appreciate your candor and your efforts.
Mr. Tombar. Thank you.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
I yield to the gentlewoman from Fort Worth.
Ms. Granger. And I will give my time to Mr. Dent.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Granger.
Just a couple of things. As relates to Sandy supplemental
funding for the FTA, $10.9 billion, I know, for new emergency
relief programs, up to $5.4 billion can be directed to
mitigation efforts. I know on February 6th, you put out a
notice of availability for $2 billion, and you targeted those
funds for local repair projects, grant requests for various
transit agencies, including $390 million to SEPTA, Southeastern
Pennsylvania Transit Authority.
My main question is since you had this transfer authority
up to $5.4 billion, these projects to reduce risk of damage
from future disasters in the areas impacted by Hurricane Sandy,
I am concerned that these precious emergency relief dollars
might be diluted on the, say, nice to have but nonessential
infrastructure projects. Can you elaborate a little bit on
that?
Mr. Porcari. Congressman, it is a great question. We can't
afford to put any of these funds toward the nice-to-have
projects. We are going to be very hard pressed, given the
mitigation needs for the transit in inner-city passenger rail
program, to even cover most of the critical funds. We are
working through the task force--this is one of the values of
the task force--to make sure that we have an across-the-board
understanding of mitigation. We have been communicating
directly with the transit agencies and Amtrak on some of the
preliminary minimum qualifications for that mitigation.
But in general we know that, because we have been through
two of these storms in the same metropolitan area in just under
2 years, that we need to rebuild to a stronger standard. This
is the cost-effective thing to do rather than to rebuild to the
same standard every time. We are confident that we can cost-
effectively use these mitigation dollars. While we are in the
early stages of identifying projects, it is very clear that
there will be more eligible projects that will be cost
beneficial than we will have available funding.
Mr. Dent. All right. And you are going to be awarding these
grants on a rolling basis.
Mr. Porcari. Yes, we will.
Mr. Dent. Okay. And how is the Department of Transportation
assessing the priority of the grants being issued? Is it on a
first in, first out regardless of magnitude of damage, or how
are you doing this?
Mr. Porcari. Well, on the $2 billion that we have already
noticed for award, that is for work that has already been done
either internally through what are called force accounts at the
transit agencies, the work that they contracted for
immediately. So we are essentially reviewing invoices and
documentation for work already done and reimbursing. As we go
forward, it will be on a rolling basis, and we will
competitively, on a merit basis, rank projects for mitigation
eligibility.
Mr. Dent. Thank you. I yield back to Representative
Granger.
Ms. Granger. I yield back my time.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentlewoman.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tombar, I want to give you a chance to finish your
answer to my question. Of course, in the meantime questions are
swirling around here about how quickly we can build back,
whether we should build back to sounder standards, whether we
should pay attention to mitigation and containing future costs
and so forth. But all of this, of course, went into this
decision I was focusing on to bypass some of the normal
temporary housing steps, and to try to get people back in
immediately to their homes with temporary repairs, sometimes as
a prelude to longer-term repairs, sometimes not.
But I know that it involved a combination of FEMA and CBDG
funds, and you are envisioning, of course, a CBDG world going
forward. So I still needed to get to the transit issue, but I
do want you to finish up the overview you were providing.

REBUILDING RATE

Mr. Tombar. Sure. I will try to make it quick.
Under the National Disaster Recovery Framework, there is a
process by which we engage the Federal Government, led by HUD
and FEMA, with the States through what is called the State-Led
Housing Task Force. That task force actually makes the
determinations about what will be the best forms of assistance
given the impact of the disaster, given what the availability
in resources are in the impacted area, of the types of
assistance that will be provided.
And so the absence of trailers, as you pointed out, in New
York State was a decision driven by local governments and by
the State and worked through with the Federal Government. We
tried to find other sources of housing for people and have been
successful in most cases. In New Jersey, we fortunately had a
vacant military base that we were able to provide some repairs
to units that were there and house a number of families there.
There are trailers some of the communities in New Jersey have
decided that they would want, and so those exist. Other people
are being housed in apartments with their FEMA assistance.
The FEMA assistance, though, is capped at $31,900. That is
both for their rental assistance and for the repair cost of
their home. And so the extent to which that money gets used to
pay for rental assistance, it defrays from the amount of money
available for the repair of the home. This is where CBDG comes
in to help close that gap that exists between private
insurance, the assistance that someone may have received from
FEMA or SBA, any unmet needs that remain.
Mr. Price. So the near-term use of the CBDG funds is
heavily directed toward matches of that kind to close those
gaps.
Mr. Tombar. Well, typically the near-term assistance that
you see the Federal Government giving is usually through FEMA
and its resources out of the Disaster Relief Fund. HUD's
assistance can be used in cases if a State determines that--a
State or local government determines that there is a need for
it. But the immediate temporary housing assistance, that is
authority and resources given to the Administrator of FEMA, and
they are used in that way and have been in this particular
instance.
Mr. Price. So just to clarify, in this instance now, at
what point do the CBDG funds enter the picture?
Mr. Tombar. Typically for the rebuilding efforts. So it
would be to rebuild and not for temporary housing.
Mr. Price. But what about the short-term rebuilding to keep
people in place temporarily?
Mr. Tombar. Again, that was done with FEMA assistance.
Mr. Price. All right. But the longer-term rebuilding is
where the CBDG comes in and fills the gap?
Mr. Tombar. Yes, sir.
Mr. Price. All right. Mr. Porcari, the Transit
Administration within your Department has received the bulk of
the transportation funding, almost $11 billion, and you have
been required to complete, which you have now completed, a
Memorandum of Understanding with FEMA, and to develop interim
regulations before the bulk of the funding can be awarded.
Can you give us an update on that memorandum, the state of
the interim regulations, when they are going to be finalized;
and what kind of share at the end of the day you and FEMA are
going to have for this work on the damaged transit
infrastructure?
Mr. Porcari. It is a great question, sir. It has been a
very good working relationship with FEMA. As you pointed out,
the Memorandum of Agreement between FEMA and the Federal
Transit Administration is already signed. Before that, working
under a mission assignment from FEMA, we had our project
management oversight contractors out there evaluating the
damage for both FEMA and FTA. FEMA personnel were deployed with
us as part of that.
We expect that the interim final rule which is required by
the appropriation will be in place well before we go through
the first $2 billion of funding and into the next tranche of
funding. The interim final rule in draft form will be out in
the next several weeks. Draft guidance will immediately follow
that. Mindful that this interim final rule and guidance will
affect our response to future disasters as well, it needs to
encompass the entire country and all kinds of emergencies that
it might be used for, so we are trying to make sure that it is
broad enough to incorporate all that. We are confident that we
are well ahead of the curve in terms of having that interim
final rule ready and the guidance that would be behind it.
Mr. Price. My time is expired. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Joyce. Did you have another question?
Does anyone have another question for the record?
Mr. Pastor. I will submit a question.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Price, did you want to continue?
We are about to vote on the floor, so Members may have
additional questions to submit for the record, to which I would
hope you can respond.
I just was going through the draft anyway of the green
building retrofit checklist, which is several pages here, but
you have got down to what kind of light bulbs you can put in,
what kind of water systems can be installed. Any carpet
products used must meet the Carpet and Rug Institute's green
label or green label-plus certification for carpet pad and
carpet adhesives.
One thing, I would ask for the record what the request was
for the storms in 2011.
Is this stuff available? I mean, you are going to keep
people out of their homes. When you go through the checklist,
it is unbelievable that is the case--and I would hope that we
could streamline the situation.
A lot of people are very much in need that need to get back
into some type of shelter, and without any kind of authority to
do this type of thing, I am concerned that we are not going to
be using a lot of money to the best use long term.
So anyway, with no other questions, we will adjourn the
hearing. Thank you all very much.
[Questions for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.054

Thursday, March 21, 2013.

FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

PETER M. ROGOFF, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Mr. Latham. Okay, the hearing will come to order. I
apologize to the witness for having a little delay with votes
this morning, but I think we are going to skip our statements
here and go right to your opening statement, and then to
questions if that is okay.
Mr. Rogoff. Very good.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Administrator, you are recognized for your
statement.
Mr. Rogoff. Thank you, Chairman Latham, Ranking Member
Pastor, and members of the committee. Thank you for inviting me
here today to highlight the Federal Transit Administration's
progress towards implementing key provisions of MAP-21, which
made many bold policy changes the administration has fought
for. These changes come at an especially critical time for
public transportation. But for Hurricane Sandy's impact on
transit systems in the Northeast in 2012, the United States
would have recorded its highest annual level of transit
ridership since 1957 with 10.5 billion trips taken. We are
seeing transit ridership increase across the board, whether it
is bus, light rail, commuter rail, or bus rapid transit. We
have transit agencies that are experiencing double-digit
ridership increases without any expansion in service.
So despite facing an array of funding challenges, it is
vitally important for the FTA to make progress toward
implementing MAP-21. Nowhere have we made more aggressive
progress in implementing MAP-21 than in standing up our new
Emergency Relief Program. Hurricane Sandy was the worst public
transit disaster in the history of the United States, affecting
more than 40 percent of the Nation's transit ridership at the
height of the storm.
The Obama administration first proposed the establishment
of an Emergency Relief Program for transit in its FY 2012
budget, and fortunately, MAP-21 put that program in place prior
to Hurricane Sandy. The Disaster Relief Appropriations Act
originally granted $10.9 billion to FTA to reimburse transit
agencies for response and immediate recovery, and to mitigate
the impact of future disasters. That amount was subsequently
reduced by $545 million as a result of the sequester. Still, we
are very grateful to this committee for providing that level of
assistance for our most transit-dependent region of the
country.
In just over 6 weeks since President Obama signed the
Disaster Relief Bill into law, the FTA has responsibly
allocated more than $500 million to reimburse the hardest hit
agencies in New York, New Jersey, and elsewhere. We are on
track to allocate the remainder of the first $2 billion of the
disaster aid by the end of March, as this committee stipulated
in the Disaster Relief Act.
At the Obama administration's urging, Congress granted FTA
historic new authority to provide long overdue Federal safety
authority for public transit, and we welcome this
responsibility. Our goal is to implement a safety management
system approach that improves safety using commonsense
standards that will add value without adding a great deal of
cost or burdensome regulations.
We recognize that a one-size-fits-all approach to safety is
not the best approach for the unique needs of individual
transit agencies. FTA will set a national framework and then
work with each transit agency to develop a safety system that
targets their greatest safety vulnerabilities, and even between
like-size systems, those safety vulnerabilities may be
different. Meanwhile, we have begun to work closely with
affected Governors, our Transit Rail Safety Committee and other
stakeholders to embark on a rulemaking and widespread education
process.
Keeping our transit systems safe goes hand in hand with
bringing our aging systems into a state of good repair.
Following on the administration's budget proposal, MAP-21
established a needs-based formula program for rail, ferries,
and busways and initiates a new National Transit Asset
Management Program that will cover all transit systems.
This program will help the industry tackle deferred
rehabilitation, replace outdated transit assets, and support
ongoing maintenance efforts that are key to maintaining a
transit network that continues to provide reliable and
desirable service for the American public. We see this
initiative as central to our ability to make sure that the
investments that this committee has made in transit in the past
are well looked after, and that the ridership is getting
quality service for the investments we made.
I appreciate this committee's support for the policy goals
in MAP-21; however, I want to remind the committee that FTA
faces several budget challenges that hamper our ability to
address all of these goals. Overall, the sequester struck $656
million from FTA's budget. It reduced program funding for our
Capital Investment Grants Program by just less than $100
million. This will mean that few, if any, additional New Starts
construction projects will be fundable in the real future. Even
more troubling is the fact that ongoing major New Starts and
Small Starts projects will experience increased borrowing costs
as FTA will now be required by sequestration to slow its
scheduled grant payments to projects for which we have already
made written financial agreements.
Even without the sequester under MAP-21, our capital
investment program was authorized to receive 10 percent less in
funding when compared with amounts available to carry out the
projects in recent years. These are just some of the
significant challenges that directly affect our programs and
the record number of transit riders we are serving.
FTA will continue to do all we can to make progress to live
up to the promise of MAP-21 with the resources made available
to us. Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions
you have.
[The statement of Mr. Rogoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.060

Mr. Latham. Thank you very much. MAP-21 made a number of
changes in the bus formula program. Some call it streamlining,
but it really is a massive shift of national funds to the large
rail systems, leaving just pennies for bus-only systems. Iowa
has one of the oldest operating fleets in the country. Our
state of good repair needs are great. Over 54 percent of Iowa
buses are operating beyond their useful life, and yet the
return on our contributions to the trust fund is minimal.
Under SAFETEA-LU, Iowa could replace about 41 buses a year.
Under MAP-21, it will only replace about 22 in the first year.
That is almost a 50 percent decrease.
Can you explain what happened to the formula in MAP-21
shorting the bus-only transit systems like we have in Iowa? How
would you propose to make it more equitable for the allocation
of funds under the formula? Specifically, how would you address
state of good repair in a state like Iowa?
Mr. Rogoff. I can, Mr. Chairman, and I have heard this
concern from a number of regions around the country. Just to
provide a very brief bit of history, the administration did
propose that the Bus Discretionary Program that was available
for years under SAFETEA-LU and prior authorization acts be
folded into a formula program for state of good repair.
However, the administration's proposal proposed that new State
of Good Repair Program be available for the bus-only operators,
and it also proposed sizeable funding increases for the
program.
So when I went around the country advocating that this
policy change take place, I also assured the bus-only operators
in multiple public statements that they would certainly get no
less than they were getting before.
MAP-21 went a different way. The Congress took some of that
money for the bus discretionary program, put it in the State of
Good Repair Formula program, limited that State of Good Repair
program only to what we called ``fixed guideway'' operations,
mostly rail, and then used a smaller amount of money, really
less than half, for the bus-only operators.
So there is no question that they took a hit here. And I
think it is something that needs to be revisited in--I don't
know if you call it MAP-22, but whatever the next
reauthorization is. When we proposed this policy, the dollar
level for the program was more than $1 billion more than what
MAP-21 provided, and that would have provided plenty of money
for the bus-only operators and others, but MAP-21 went a
different direction.
Mr. Latham. The administration submitted a proposal.
Mr. Rogoff. The administration submitted a budget.
Mr. Latham. The reality is that for the first time since
Eisenhower, an administration has not had a proposal.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, I will put it this way: The
administration, through its budget proposals, showed what
programs that we would consolidate and I did testify before the
Senate Authorizing Committee on this specific proposal.
However, no, we did not formally submit a legislative message
on that.
Mr. Latham. There is not one.
Mr. Rogoff. There was not one, no, sir.
Mr. Latham. It has come to my attention that the Department
asked for and got a provision added to MAP-21 that transit
systems serving areas of 50,000 to 200,000 population will no
longer be designated a designated recipient of the FTA funds.
What was the reason for the change in status, and can you tell
me if the FTA consulted any of those affected communities
before insisting on that provision? Is there any thought of the
impact on those communities?
Mr. Rogoff. In your last question you pointed out that we
did not have a proposal, so I don't think that we could have
proposed this either. But I think more importantly, we sought
clarity in who the designated recipient would be. We did,
obviously, and we do have regular consultations with
communities. I think this has worked better in some
communities, than others. We are currently working, if you
will, on a one-by-one basis to make sure that it is understood
who the designated recipients are, and that local
decisionmaking is determining how funds are suballocated.
Mr. Latham. You still have all of the regulations in effect
for those communities, but they are not getting any funding?
How do you keep the regulations in place?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, if I follow you correctly, they are
certainly getting funding through the suballocation from the
designated recipient. It is not like they were cut off from
Federal funds. It is really the process of who is doing the
local decisionmaking as to how funds are allocated.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome.
Last week we had GAO and the Inspector General from the
Department of Transportation, and we talked specifically about
some of the programs within the agencies, but one of the things
that I talked about with them in terms of the hearing was the
capacity of the agencies to be able to collect data, evaluate
the data, and then use the information available so that you
could have better practices and find out what is happening.
You now have a new assignment through MAP-21, and less, at
least administrative moneys, I don't think are there, and with
sequestration added to that, and so as you collect, how do you
see your IT in terms of collecting the data from the local
agencies, bringing them up and evaluating them, and then using
them as management tools to continue either supporting, or you
know, changing things as things are not working out?
Mr. Rogoff. I would say Mr. Pastor, we do robust data
collection, but the methodologies we use and the questions we
are asking I think need to be reformed and updated. Every
transit agency that receives Federal funds is required to
submit data to the National Transit Database. Some of that data
is used to run our formula programs, using data including
ridership, miles that they operate, et cetera.
The new safety responsibility brings a considerable new
data-collection effort, but it is not really just on FTA's
part. You heard me say in my opening statement that we are
really committed to trying to do this new safety responsibility
in a way that adds value, but does not add a lot of cost and a
lot of burden. One of the ways individual transit agencies do
that is by establishing a safety management system where they
have to collect data on their own operations, and use that data
to identify their greatest safety vulnerability. And for one
agency it may be the skills of their operators, and how many
minor accidents are happening that should not have happened
with appropriate training. For another agency it may be the
condition of their equipment. And they will get that
information through data collection.
So we are looking for ways to expand this for the purpose
of safety, and to do it in a cost-effective manner. As someone
who finances a large portion of the transit agency's expenses,
in these times it is not in my interest to issue huge
burdensome new requirements, but it is actually through the
data collection that transit agencies can do this much more
efficiently and much less expensively than hard and fast
regulatory one-size-fits-all rules that some other DOT agencies
have done in the past.
Mr. Pastor. The other point that kind of stuck out with me
was that just the equipment that is available to your people,
or in--I don't know about FTA in particular, but it seems that
at least through the whole agency, that the equipment itself
was greatly outdated and needed to be modernized. Do you have
that same problem in your agency?
Mr. Rogoff. We do. There is no question that no one would
argue that DOT is on the cutting edge of IT. So let me give you
an example, and it is a very big game changer for us. We are
working on, we have a computer interface with every transit
agency, and the way we cut grants is through our so-called
``TEAM'' System. That system is very old, very user unfriendly.
My 15-year-old would laugh at it if I showed him what one has
to go through to communicate between the FTA and its grantees.
We are, even with scarce funds, developing a new open-
architecture system. We are years behind in getting it
launched, but we hope to get it into play in the next couple of
years.
Mr. Pastor. The question that I have, your Capital
Investment Grant reduced by $100 million?
Mr. Rogoff. Yes, sir.
Mr. Pastor. And we were out there with the City of Mesa as
they were cutting ribbons for the expansion of the Metro 3
miles further east, but what is going to happen to that
particular segment of the extension, of the transit extension
as an example how sequestration is going to slow things down or
require a new way of thinking in terms of funding and getting
things done?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, as I mentioned in my opening statement,
the combination of the CR with sequestration means that for the
first time in a very long time the agency will have less money
than we need to fully accommodate the amount that would be
required to fulfill all of the funding commitments made for
2013 in each of the full-funding grant agreements that we have
signed.
We have not made any decisions yet in terms of how we will
apply that against individual grants, but it is going to slow
our progress on the entire New Starts program until we can get
a funding level consistent with the signed commitments, of
which Mesa is one.
Mr. Pastor. Yeah. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Good morning.
MAP-21 increased funding for the TIFIA program from $122
million to $1 billion a year. This funding increase plus a
change in the law allows project costs under TIFIA loans to
increase, I think, from 33 to 49 percent. Have these changes
been effective in tracking more loan applications in State and
local governments and public-private partnerships?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, I cannot speak to the impact of that
particular policy change. Obviously, TIFIA is one program where
there has been extraordinary growth in interest. Prior to being
nominated for this position, sir--I worked on the Senate
Appropriations Subcommittee on Transportation, and there was a
time when we were actually rescinding TIFIA funds from lack of
interest and lack of use.
That has completely turned itself around, especially as the
financial markets have changed and the demand for TIFIA is now
far exceeding even the increased numbers authorized under MAP-
21.
TIFIA is doing great work, not just obviously for transit
projects, but also for highway and other projects, port
projects, where the credit subsidy is having a real impact on
people gaining access to private capital at very affordable
terms. So yes, DOT has a considerable demand and MAP-21 did do
us well by providing considerable additional authority.
Mr. Dent. And as you are aware, too, MAP-21 streamlines
some of the project development processes that were established
limits on environmental reviews and consolidated steps that FTA
has got to take in the project process. What are the impacts of
these changes having in practical terms for the FTA and the
grantees?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, they are very positive in that we just
recently--jointly with the Federal Highway Administration--came
out with a rulemaking to expand the number of categorical
exclusions. You know, a great many, almost all transit projects
are inherently environmentally beneficial, so it has always
been a frustration if they have to go through a very painfully
long environment approval process. So this mad effort enables
us to get projects through the pipeline more quickly, and it
enables the taxpayers and the transit riders to get the
benefits of the improvements more quickly.
Mr. Dent. Yeah, and another issue with respect to MAP-21
and that new formula grant program for buses, it is really
going to bus rapid transit, what I have seen in my reviews of
this infrastructure development is that BRT systems seem to
have a forward leaning, or forward leaning alternative to light
rail in terms of flexibility and economic feasibility,
especially. This concept of BRT, as you are probably aware, is
getting a lot of attraction in other countries. How does BRT
fit in FTA's vision for modernizing, expanding, improving
transit options in our communities?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, we are an advocate for BRT in certain
corridors where it makes sense. You know, in certain corridors
based on the density or other factors, only rail is going to
make sense. But BRT, if you can give it a designated lane, if
it does not have to co-mingle with other traffic, it can move
an extraordinary number of passengers at a very affordable
cost. There are other tools that BRT can use like signal
priority where every time a bus approaches a traffic light it
is always green. If you are selling the fare media to
passengers not as they board the bus, but before they board the
bus, you can move a lot of people very efficiently.
It works in some corridors, not others, but we are funding,
especially through our Small Starts program, a number of very
successful BRT projects.
Mr. Dent. And on the issue of Sandy, which established a
new Emergency Relief Program within FTA, FTA's new Emergency
Relief Program was authorized under MAP-21 and it appears that
the Sandy funds were used, Sandy funds were the first infusion
of funds, I think, used for that program.
Mr. Rogoff. Correct.
Mr. Dent. What is the process for deciding which
applications receive funding?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, consistent with the Disaster Relief
Appropriations Act, those dollars are limited just to those
impacted by Hurricane Sandy. At present we are taking
applications. We just did our first tranche of allocations for
response and recovery. In the next few months, we will be
coming out with guidance on how we will handle applications for
mitigation, an important investment that this committee made in
seeing to it that there not be a recurrence of these disasters
in terms of their impact on transit agencies.
Mr. Dent. Are you getting requests in a complete package,
or on a piecemeal basis?
Mr. Rogoff. We have invited the applications on a rolling
basis. We did one solicitation for the first tranche of money.
We established a deadline of March 8. Consistent with the
direction that was in your appropriations act, we will at the
end of the month allocate the first $2 billion. At that point,
the window will be open for people to come to us with eligible
response and recovery costs as they are ready to come to us.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Greetings,
Administrator, glad to have you here.
Mr. Rogoff. Good to see you.
Mr. Price. I want to commend you. I don't remember an
Administrator of your agency that has had a more hands-on
approach than you have had. It seems to me that your experience
as a staffer in this institution has served you well. You are
hands on, you do master details, and you are a good
communicator. You have paid attention to Members' needs to
understand the program, understand the process, and you have
communicated well with the local communities who are involved
in that, so I commend you for that.
Mr. Rogoff. Thank you.
Mr. Price. I think you have opened up this agency in a very
positive way, and I think you have modified the processes in
positive ways as well, administrative means, and also from the
MAP-21 legislation. You have reformed the evaluation criteria.
You have streamlined the process for New Starts. Cost-
effectiveness is still a criteria, but the administration has
begun to evaluate projects in a more robust manner, land use,
increased mobility, economic development, and we have been
looking for that for a long time. So I commend you for that as
well.
I wonder also, I will ask you three questions in rapid
succession here. I wonder if you have also thought about what
the Federal share might be? I know it is already down to 50
percent from 60, but are there variable kind of Federal shares
that could be significant enough to get a new project off the
ground and would help you stretch the funding and add yet more
flexibility to the program?
I think a lot of communities would settle for a lesser
Federal share in exchange for more rapid approval, and more
flexible criteria.
Secondly, I wonder right now what the balance looks like,
and what kind of balance you are trying to maintain between the
expansion projects, and the new New Starts. There are a lot of
promising expansion projects around the country, I know that.
They meet the needs of our Nation's largest metropolitan areas,
but of course, there are a lot of communities wanting to get
going with transit systems. And I wonder what kind of balance
you are aiming for there, and what you have been able to
maintain.
And then finally, of course, we are concerned about the
effect of sequestration, and the current budget situation more
broadly on all of this.
In your testimony, you noted that sequester would take $100
million from New Starts. You expressed concern about your
ability to fund projects in the pipeline. I assume that means
the payment schedule for New Starts that already have a full
funding grant agreement. I wonder what it might also mean for
putting projects in the pipeline, putting new projects in the
queue, so to speak.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, let me take each of those in order. As
far as variable Federal shares, this is something that we have
talked about. This committee has been very clear through its
direction that we should not consider or bring forward New
Starts with a Federal share more than 50 percent. I have been
concerned at times, especially during the recession, that
communities would struggle because of the downturn in sales tax
revenue to be able to leverage that 50 percent. Yet they are
communities very much in need of a transit improvement. I worry
a little bit about New Starts becoming a program of ``haves''
and ``have nots.'' Especially when you consider a city like
Detroit, which ranks 109th in its available transit service,
but probably 9th in terms of the demand for transit services.
It is very hard to get there because of their local financial
circumstances. We have been working on ways and fortunately
there is a private investment that will serve as the local
match for some of their BRT improvements, but that arrangement
required special legislation.
You asked about expansion versus new New Starts. I have to
admit, we have not really come at it from that perspective. We
have considered the projects as they have been brought to us by
local sponsors. Some of those are cities brand-new to the New
Starts program. Others are expanding. Some of those expansions
in busier cities will generate more ridership than some of the
new ones, and the law we have does not make a distinction
between how we approach them. We have been trying to advance
the local vision really of everybody that applies to the
program.
On the impact of sequester it is notable. The result of
sequester in combination with the CR means that the final
number for New Starts this year will be some $400 million less
than what the President proposed. Now, the President proposed
those increases not just because we are supportive of these
projects. We also requested the increase in this program to
accommodate the pipeline that we knew was growing.
So we are now in a situation where we will not have enough
funds, at least this year, to fully fund all of the collective
agreements that we have signed. We hope that that will change
next year. We always, when there is a decrement to an
individual project, we add it on at the end, so someone whose
payment schedule may end in 2017, the amount that they may not
get in 2013, we would customarily add on in 2017, and that has
been the precedent of the agency for several years.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
so much for being here. I have a few questions, and some of it
is going to kind of follow-up on what you were just talking
about. I am going to try and--I want to put all of these
questions out there, because I would like answers to all of
them, but forgive me for a moment if I give you a little bit of
a list and then perhaps we could discuss it. Your testimony
mentions streamlining efforts to the New Starts program which
was, as mentioned, reauthorized in MAP-21. These streamlining
efforts do not include changes to project qualification or
requirements, do they?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, those are pretty broad terms.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. The requirements for the grants. I
mean, specific requirements. It does not propose changing or
altering the requirements that you are supposed to follow to
make a grant, right?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, it does propose changes to the process we
hope to streamline, so let me give you an example if I could.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Yeah.
Mr. Rogoff. Earlier under SAFETEA-LU, there were two
separate processes at the beginning. You had to do a separate
alternatives analysis to qualify for the FTA, and yet a
different alternatives analysis, similar, but slightly
different, to get through the environmental process through
NEPA. We eliminated the separate FTA process because we thought
there was----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Redundancy.
Mr. Rogoff. It was redundant and we were able to work with
the NEPA alternatives analysis and move forward.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Okay.
Mr. Rogoff. And that just saves people money and saves
people time.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. New Starts that required, and I think
you were talking, you mentioned at 50 percent. New Starts
requires a local match, a stable and reliable capital financing
plan, and the sponsoring agent to display the ability to fund
the O&M before the grant is approved, correct?
Mr. Rogoff. That is correct.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. New Starts program is designed only to
pay for a portion of the initial cost of building a transit
project. So is it safe to say that once a project is, and this
is where I would like your clarification, that once a project
is complete, the Federal Government will pay, or will not pay,
or will not have a financial role in going forward. To be more
specific, if the cost estimates of an operations and
maintenance are incorrect, heaven forbid, and the real costs
are higher to the local communities, they are the ones on the
hook for the excess, right? They cannot come back to the Feds?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, not for operations. And for capital
funding, we normally, when we sign a full funding grant
agreement, the Federal contribution is capped.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Okay.
Mr. Rogoff. And if there are cost overruns, we do not
provide additional Federal funds for them. I think it is
noteworthy, however, that we have gotten a lot better as an
agency at cost estimation----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. On the capital piece.
Mr. Rogoff [continuing]. And evaluating risk. Well, also on
the operating piece.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Okay.
Mr. Rogoff. But we don't fund grants for the operations of
a New Start project. That is generally derived from State and
local sources. Sometimes operations come in higher, sometimes
they come in lower, sometimes agencies choose to actually
increase the frequency of service. So there are a number of
cities, light rail in Charlotte, in Mr. Pastor's backyard into
Phoenix, where ridership has far exceeded on light rail what
was initially expected.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well, and I think, and just so I can
get the rest of these in here.
Mr. Rogoff. I am sorry.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. That is the goal, right? That is a
good scenario.
Mr. Rogoff. It is a good scenario.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Back to the local match. What is the
maximum percentage amount New Starts can fund transit projects?
If the transit project is part of a larger capital construction
project, like light rail on a six-lane bridge. Are New Starts
eligible to pay for the non-transit portion of that project?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, since we are going to speak specifically
of light rail on a six-lane bridge that I think we are both
familiar with, you need to recollect that there is special
legislation that was enacted for that project that said the
State contributions to the highway portion would count as the
match for the transit portion. So in the case of that unnamed
project, sometimes referred to as the Columbia River Crossing,
this language enables us to provide $850 million for that
project which was more than----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So wait. Let me ask this in a
different way.
Mr. Rogoff. Sure.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So the New Starts, so there was
special legislation that allowed the New Starts grant----
Mr. Rogoff. There was.
Ms. Herrera Beutler [continuing]. To provide more than the
50 percent match?
Mr. Rogoff. The way it was structured was to basically
recognize that this is a unique project. It is not just a
transit improvement. It is obviously a $2.5 billion highway
bridge as well for one of the most congested highway bridges we
have got. And the way that legislation was structured allows
basically the contributions of the States toward the highway
portion to count as the local match for the transit portion.
There are similar things----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Wait a minute.
Mr. Rogoff. I am sorry.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. But does that mean that the New Starts
program is giving more than 50 percent?
Mr. Rogoff. Of the transit costs?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Of the transit costs.
Mr. Rogoff. Yes, it would be.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And we allowed that in special
legislation?
Mr. Rogoff. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Because that seems contradictory to
the way that New Starts grants are.
Mr. Rogoff. These special provisions were not unheard of in
years past. There were several done, whether they were for New
Jersey, or Utah, or other places.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Okay. I think that is all for this
round. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, and I had a
chance to look through your testimony, and I appreciate what
you have been able to do the last couple of years. I know it
has been an up and down, I guess would be a good way to put it.
One of the issues that I want to ask you about is the
alternative fuel vehicles, and some of the research that is
going on there coming through MAP-21. The Clean Fuel Bus Grant
Program was eliminated and a competitive deployment program was
created to advance low or no emissions vehicles and facilities,
and the research program was authorized at $70 million. But
under the CR and sequestration, it is going to go down to about
$42 million. And coming from an older industrial area in Ohio,
Youngstown, Akron, I think part of creating an overall economic
renaissance to try to bring young people back, these are the
kind of things that we need to be looking into.
So what will you not be able to do? What activities are you
going to have to pare back because of the sequestration and
some of the cuts, and if you could just let us know what some
of the benefits have been from the research that has gone on.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, the FTA has over decades, really, played
a leadership role in advancing the state of the art on clean
fuel buses. We now have in commercially available form zero
emission buses. One manufacturer in particular, who really
started as a grantee just at the very birthing of the clean
fuel zero emission bus program, and now those are being sold in
increasing numbers across the country.
You are correct. We do have a new research program under
MAP-21. The funding was reduced. It is going to slow our
progress to try and get the next generation on the ground. We
are still going to implement the program with whatever
resources we have, but in terms of the number of participants
that we can accommodate, and how quickly we can advance the
science, is going to be hampered.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you. So this is a public-private endeavor?
Mr. Rogoff. It is a public-private endeavor because we
obviously are not going to develop the ``Federal bus.'' I hope
we never do. It is really about trying to provide some seed
capital for innovative science-oriented developers to get a
commercially viable bus. So there are really two challenges.
One is the science, and then when we have that commercially
viable bus, how do we get the price down such that it is really
competitive?
A lot of bus agencies now are buying hybrid-electric buses.
The cost penalty to buy a hybrid-electric used to be, you
really had to be sort of cutting edge to decide that you were
going to go that route because they did not provide a pay back.
Now, the fuel savings on purchasing a hybrid-electric bus pays
itself back and if you can put up the capital up front, it is
in your financial interest to buy it.
Mr. Ryan. And how long will it take to pay off and get your
money back?
Mr. Rogoff. Depending on how intensely the bus is used,
somewhere between 8- and the usual 12-year service life, but
you should certainly make the money back by the end, the end
being 12 years.
Now, you have got situations like Mr. Latham's where you
have a great many bus operators that are operating buses beyond
their useful life. In that particular case, the gas savings,
assuming that the equipment can be kept up, will pay itself
back year after year. You will have long since gotten your
return on investment.
Mr. Ryan. I just think there is a lot of opportunity here
given----
Mr. Rogoff. I agree.
Mr. Ryan [continuing]. The research, the opportunity for
the businesses to benefit from this, but also the whole energy
independence idea. And here in eastern Ohio, and western PA,
and New York with all of the new developments with natural gas,
it seems to me this would be a prudent way for us to proceed to
continue to make these investments, and also which would not be
necessarily your end, but incentives for public transit in
cities, and you know, different regional authorities to have
the ability and businesses to benefit from incentives to move
in this direction. And it could be a job creator in so many
different ways, cleaning the environments. A lot of these
cities, we all know what the pollution is like in some of these
cities as well.
Mr. Rogoff. Absolutely. You know, I would add that there is
a second piece to that, and that is our aggressive enforcement
of the Buy America Act.
It is not just about funding the research. It is also
making sure that the fruits of that investment result in
domestic manufacturing jobs. When we first came in, the number
of Buy America waivers issued by the FTA was about 47 a year.
We are now down to three, and we are not happy about those
three. So we have been very aggressive in insisting that the
taxpayer dollars that this committee puts forward for transit
be invested in U.S.-made products to the maximum extent the law
allows. And that will be a key part of the new low-emission bus
program--to make sure that we get the benefits of that research
here in the United States.
Mr. Ryan. Great. Amen.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Ryan.
The CR extends the funding level for the New Starts program
for fiscal year 2012 level at $1.955 billion, with a 5 percent
cut for the sequester.
How are you implementing the sequester on the Full Funding
Grant Agreements?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, I don't have a complete answer for you
yet, Mr. Chairman, but we will certainly keep you advised. The
final amount between the House and Senate on New Starts was
just finalized in your concurrence of the Senate amendment on
the last vote. So with that now final number, and the impact of
the sequester, I will be going to the Secretary and talking
about how we try and shoehorn these commitments into the
available funding, but we do not have a methodology established
just yet.
Mr. Latham. Are you providing funds for any project not
under the full funding agreements, and if so, why? How can you
justify cutting the projects under agreement and funding other
projects?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, respectfully, sir, you are asking me
about the details of a plan that has not been developed yet.
But the priority of the agency has always been for the Full
Funding Grant Agreements we have signed. But until we have a
complete methodology, I will need to come back to you on that,
and perhaps the Secretary and I can visit you after that
decision is made and just explain it personally in your office.
Mr. Latham. Okay. We got introduced to the new MAP-21
program rather quickly this winter with the Transit Emergency
Relief Program. The supplemental provided a total of $10.9
billion to repair transit systems damaged in the hurricane and
other transportation needs.
I would like to commend FTA and the Department for working
with the transit authorities to get everyone moving again. I
understand that the Memorandum of Understanding with FEMA as
required by MAP-21 and the supplemental, has been signed. Can
you tell us in a nutshell what is FEMA's responsibility, versus
what is FTA's responsibility in the aftermath of the event? Is
it straightforward what your roles are?
Mr. Rogoff. It is. It is particularly straightforward if we
have available funding in the FTA Emergency Relief Program. And
this committee also was able to answer the call there and get
us funding promptly so that we could put it to work. I will
say, our partnership with FEMA has been a very positive one,
one that I think some of us might have questioned could be so
positive and successful going in. But right after the storm,
FEMA gave us a mission assignment so that FEMA and FTA staff
could work side by side up in the region doing cost validation
even before we had a President's budget request, and before the
committee had acted.
So one of the reasons why we have been successful in
getting money on the street quickly is we had done a lot of
that cost validation work in advance. Once the President put
forward his request and made it clear that that funding would
all go to the new FTA Emergency Relief Authority, and then the
Appropriations Committees followed suit, it was clear that the
funding would go through FTA with FEMA assistance. And our
principal role there is just making sure that there is no
duplication, that there is no double dipping, if you will, that
someone somehow got reimbursed for something from FEMA and also
for the same expense from the FTA. And we have good procedures
in place to make sure that does not happen.
Mr. Latham. The transit emergency funds of about $2 billion
was to go out for immediate needs, and then about $5.4 billion
is really for anything authorized under Titles 23 and 49, which
pretty much covers everything under the sun at the Department,
and another $3.5 billion is for the regular Transit Emergency
Relief Program.
Who will make the decisions on the $5.4 billion for the
general transportation money? Will it be you, the Secretary, or
a task force?
Mr. Rogoff. In terms of the transfer to other agencies, I
expect it to be the Secretary because it is transferred--right
now the only transfers I know being contemplated are transfers
within the Department of Transportation, and this may be there
to bring some resources to bear on Amtrak's infrastructure. As
you know, sir, up in the New York, New Jersey region, the
infrastructure is shared by Long Island Railroad, Metro North
Railroad, Amtrak, and New Jersey Transit. They all have a lot
of shared infrastructure, some of which are Amtrak assets, and
if we are going to address the needs of the entire system, we
need to be able to get some money to--Amtrak, who is not an FTA
grantee. Amtrak is certainly part of the mix up there that
needs to be dealt with. So any of that transfer authority would
be dictated by the Secretary.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Do you know what factors will be brought
into determining the allocations? Particularly, for the
mitigation part of it.
Mr. Rogoff. Well, mitigation is an eligible expense under
the FTA program, so that would not necessarily require a
transfer. But we are looking at the mitigation investments as
sort of the next step. There are going to be some smaller
mitigation investments so when you are making the investment in
the restoration of an asset, you can also make that investment
strong enough to mitigate the possibility of the flooding
recurring next time.
There are also some big-ticket mitigation investments being
looked at up there that we are going to be----
Mr. Latham. Such as?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, there are investments that will do a lot
to protect water encroachment on things like major rail yards
and other shared assets. It is a very complicated picture
because as some people have pointed out, if you protect one
railroad's asset, one tunnel of one railroad, you could, in
protecting the Metro North, worsen the impact on the Long
Island Railroad or Amtrak. So this really needs to be a
regional discussion. And we are leading a regional discussion.
The Deputy Secretary and I met with all of the general
managers up there with Secretary Donovan some weeks ago, and we
are going to insist on regional cooperation and regional
solutions on these bigger ticket items.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
Mr. Joyce, do you have a question? Excuse me. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Chairman, we are going to submit our
questions for the record in the interest of time.
Mr. Latham. God bless you.
Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. No, Mr. Chairman, I apologize for being late
though.
Mr. Latham. Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. One more.
Mr. Latham. Sure.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Just for my curiosity because this was
a little bit before my time. Going back to the issue you were
talking about of the special legislation, did you have a hand
in writing that special legislation when you were on staff
prior to your role as Administrator?
Mr. Rogoff. I don't recall if I was on the subcommittee
staff at the time of that legislation. I am trying to remember
now.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you. That was it.
Mr. Rogoff. I could get you more. I will just have to
research what year that was and get you a more definitive
answer.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. That would be great.
[The information follows:]

Upon further review, Mr. Rogoff was nominated to serve as
Administrator to the FTA on April 8, 2009, at which time he recused
himself from all FTA beusiness with the Senate THUD Appropriations
Subcommittee. Mr. Rogoff was confirmed by the Senate on May 21, 2009,
and began work at the FTA immediately thereafter. The legislation in
question was not reported by the Senate until August 5, 2009.

Mr. Latham. I think I just have one more.
FEMA is reporting that another $545 million will be paid by
the DRF and backfilled for the sequester's effect on transit
disaster money. Is that true that the DRF if is backfilling
sequester?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, let me put it this way: I would be
surprised in the following respects. Yes, we did lose $545
million as a result of the sequester, and I will have to look
into this. But we also made clear that that $545 million would
not come off of the response and recovery funding. It would
come off the mitigation funding. Mitigation funding is
something that is eligible under the FTA program.
I am not sure it is eligible under the DRF, so that
observation puzzles me, but I will certainly look into it.
Mr. Latham. Well, FEMA is giving us the impression that
they need to make $545 million available to FTA for the
disaster costs. You are not aware of it?
Mr. Rogoff. I am not, sir. I will say this. There may be
certain costs that FTA will not be able to reimburse for under
our program that FEMA would, but as I mentioned earlier, we are
going to make sure that it is not duplicative payments for the
same item. There is going to be a clear accountability and
eligibility chain before any of those payments happen.
As of now, FEMA was about the business of getting started
on making some payments for transit, and once we worked with
FEMA, and got the appropriation, those payments did not happen.
They literally handed their worksheets to us, and we picked
them up and brought those expenses to bear on the FTA program,
so there has not been any duplication to date, and I will have
to look at that other observation. That is the first I have
heard of it.
Mr. Latham. Is there any loophole that says a recipient, if
they ran out of money, then they could go to FEMA?
Mr. Rogoff. Well, there is. On the overall observation of
running out of money, we are optimistic that we have plenty to
handle response and recovery for Hurricane Sandy.
Mr. Latham. Do you have extra?
Mr. Rogoff. No, I would not call it extra. It is the money
for mitigation. And we consider it unfortunate that we lost
that $500 million for mitigation due to sequester. Like I said,
it is the first I have heard of FEMA proposing to backfill it.
And I am not sure they could for mitigation. We are very
confident we have enough money for response and recovery.
Mr. Latham. Any member have any more questions?
Okay.
I think we will conclude in the interest of time here,
because there are members that are going to be leaving town
shortly. You can all submit questions for the record, which we
will be doing also.
But with that, we thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Rogoff. Thank you for your time, sir.
Mr. Latham. All right, very good.
Thank you, the hearing is adjourned.
[Questions for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.069

Tuesday, April 16, 2013.

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION

WITNESS

HON. RAY LaHOOD, SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION
Mr. Latham. The Subcommittee will come to order. Today we
welcome Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood to testify on
behalf of DOT's fiscal year 2014 budget request.
I know this may be the last time that you testify before
us. We wish you the very, very best. I look forward to your
testimony.
This year, the department is requesting authority to spend
$77 billion in fiscal year 2014. This represents an increase of
$6.5 billion, or 9.2 percent from last year, which is a healthy
increase in the current environment.
Once again, the budget includes $50 billion for ``immediate
transportation investments.'' This is a proposal we have seen
three times before and is structured similar to the fiscal year
2009 stimulus package. Also similar to the stimulus package, it
is not paid for or offset by reductions elsewhere.
The President assumes a total of $214 billion to pay for
two reauthorization programs and to shore up the Highway Trust
Fund, which the CBO expects to have financial solvency issues
in 2014. The budget proposes to pay for this with anticipated
savings in the Overseas Contingency Operations fund, which is,
for a lot of folks, is a dubious source, at best.
While the Highway Trust Fund is having financial difficulty
paying for its current obligations, the administration's budget
proposes to reopen the recently passed MAP-21 and fund rail
programs from the trust fund.
And just when you think it can't get worse for the
struggling trust fund, the budget proposes a 330 percent
increase in rail funding, the largest increase in this entire
budget.
To put it in perspective, the budget request would increase
the entire transportation budget by $6.5 billion; rail would
receive $5 billion of the $6.5 billion increase. We are moving
from one tight budget year to another.
This is an expensive proposal to put forth in this
environment, especially with no realistic way to pay for it
all. Moving transportation funds to the ``mandatory'' side of
the ledger will only exacerbate our challenges, as mandatory
programs are the largest contributors to our budget problems.
And using OCO funds is not a realistic option.
Many members hope that the drawdown of our forces in Iraq
and Afghanistan will provide an opportunity to reduce the
spending and the deficit and not serve as an excuse for even
more spending. We have the difficult job of determining how to
allocate a limited pot of funds among the programs within our
jurisdiction. I am looking forward to hearing more details
about your budget.
Again, we welcome you, Mr. Secretary.
Before I recognize you, I would ask Mr. Pastor for his
opening statements.
Mr. Pastor. Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Secretary. And thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for the recognition. I also want to welcome Secretary LaHood
this morning. And since this is--as you said, this may be his
last appearance before this subcommittee as Secretary of
Transportation, I want to thank him for his service to our
country as the Secretary of Transportation. He truly has been a
champion of safety and also a champion to invest in our
transportation infrastructure. And so I want to thank you again
for your service.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor. And wish you the best.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Secretary, a few weeks ago, we finished our
work on the fiscal 2013 appropriation process where many
transportation programs were put on auto pilot at the funding
levels below the fiscal year 2012 funding level. In addition,
Department of Transportation must absorb nearly $960 million in
cuts due to sequestration that went into effect in early March.
While not fully implemented and as of yet, these reductions
will hit the operations of the FAA most dramatically and will
significantly lower the base line for many transportation
programs. President Obama has submitted a robust funding
request for the Department of Transportation. With two small
exceptions, the fiscal year 2014 budget fully funds the
authorized levels included in MAP-21 for Department of
Transportation's highway, transit and safety agencies.
The budget also proposes a significant increase in rail
programs and includes funding to continue to modernize our
aging air traffic control system. These investments are
important to our economy and necessary to maintain and improve
our nation's transportation system. I look forward to your
testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
After the Secretary has given his opening statement, we
will alternate and proceed with the 5-minute question rounds.
And with that, Mr. Secretary, invite you to present your
opening statement; your full written statement will be included
in the record. And you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Pastor,
and other members of the committee.
I always look forward to the opportunity to come back to my
old committee that I served on for 8 years and talk about our
Fiscal Year 2014 budget. Since day one, President Obama and all
of us at the Department of Transportation have been committed
to putting people back to work, rebuilding and repairing our
infrastructure. We have also worked tirelessly to ensure that
our aviation, highway, rail transit, and pipeline systems are
the safest in the world. The President's 2014 budget provides
the necessary resources to continue and expand these efforts.
The President is requesting $77 billion for the Department of
Transportation for fiscal year 2014, a 6 percent increase over
2012 funding levels.
The President's budget also includes an additional $50
billion for immediate investments to support critical
infrastructure projects, such as improving America's roads,
bridges, transit systems, boarder crossings, railway, and
runways. Together, these proposals will help us create jobs and
invest in the 21st century transportation that business needs
to compete.
Inner city passenger rail continues to be critical to our
efforts to improve intermodal connectivity and increase travel
options--Four years ago, President Obama laid out his vision
for high-speed rail. That vision has not been blurred or
diminished, and we are working hard to fulfill it. Today, we
have trains hitting 110 miles per hour in the Midwest, and the
initial segment of Nation's first 220-miles-per-hour high-speed
rail network is set to break ground in California this year. We
have invested in multi-modal train stations in communities
across the city, creating jobs and revitalizing downtown
districts in the process.
The President's 2014 budget continues this effort with a
bold rail reauthorization proposal that will provide $40
billion over 5 years to invest in projects that strengthen and
enhance rail services. As part of this proposal, $6.4 billion
is included to significantly improve existing inner-city
passenger rail service, develop new high-speed rail corridors,
and strengthen the economic competitiveness of the freight rail
system.
The President's 2014 budget also fully supports the
authorized funding levels contained in MAP-21. We are proposing
$53 billion for our highway transit and highway safety programs
in 2014. The President's budget also includes increased
investment in highway traffic safety. The President is
proposing over $560 million for NHTSA to support state highway
safety initiatives. These grants will help us save lives and
reduce injury. In addition, the President's budget includes
increased funding to expand our bus and truck safety programs.
President's budget requests $255 million for Pipeline Hazardous
Material Safety Administration, most of which will increase
pipeline safety. And, finally, the President's plan provides
$15.6 billion for the FAA to continue to support the safest
aviation system in the world. This includes furthering our
commitment to NextGen. Through NextGen advancements, we are
improving safety, capacity, and the efficiency of air travel.
The President's budget requests includes $1 billion to continue
to advance critical NextGen investments.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member, and
members of the committee, why don't I just conclude and answer
your questions. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.072

Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. And again
welcome. Thank you for the great job that you have done at the
department.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. After 7 years of short-term extensions, the 2-
year surface authorization act, MAP-21, was recently enacted.
Although the DOT budget request would fund the highways, motor
carriers, and safety programs at the MAP-21 levels, which is
$55 billion, it also reopens MAP-21 midstream to pay for a 5-
year, $40 billion rail package from the trust fund as mandatory
spending. The fiscal year 2014 costs exceed $6 billion, which
is a hefty increase compared to the $1.5 billion in rail
funding for fiscal year 2013. As we are all aware, Congress
didn't receive a surface transportation reauthorization
proposal from the administration. I just wonder when we can
expect the proposal from the administration about the official
rail reauthorization package that has your 5-year, $40 billion
proposal.
Secretary LaHood. Well, as you know, Mr. Chairman, the
President has been focused since he was sworn into his second
term on sequestration, on guns, and on immigration. And I
believe that when you all finish working on, certainly, guns
and immigration, you will see a bold plan put forth by this
administration, which will include funding.
Mr. Latham. Well, we would like to continue to know what we
are paying for before we appropriate the funds, obviously. As
early as possible, I would really like to see the legislative
text that you are proposing. I assume that is forthcoming.
Secretary LaHood. It will be a part of the President's
vision once he is not busy with these other matters.
Mr. Latham. So it is contingent upon getting----
Secretary LaHood. It is contingent upon you all taking
action on three things that you all have been paying a lot of
attention to, guns, immigration, and sequestration.
Mr. Latham. Okay. The Highway Trust Fund will begin having
problems meeting its current obligations on the transit side in
2014. The budget proposes to augment the trust fund with a
total of $214 billion from the Overseas Contingency Operations;
$40 billion of it is from rail, $89 billion from surface or for
surface transportation, and $85 billion to make the trust fund
solvent.
Given that paying for your budget proposal in the OCO was
equivalent, really, to putting the expenses on the credit card
and even the administration has admitted that, is there any
other way of funding the request? Or, if not, what programs are
you ready to----
Secretary LaHood. Well, for 2 years, the first 2 years that
I was in this job, you all criticized us for not coming up with
a way to fund transportation. So you can't have it both ways
here. I know you will have it both ways, but you shouldn't have
it both ways. For the last 2 years, after receiving criticism
for the first 2 years for no funding, we have come up with a
funding mechanism. Now, there really is an account with this
money in it. And what the President proposes is to take half of
the money and apply it against the deficit and take the other
half and give part of it to the Department of Transportation to
fund our programs. This is not made up. This is not a fiction.
There really is an account where this money exists. And that is
how the President proposes and this administration proposes to
do the pay-for, which you asked us to do for 2 years in a row.
And for the last 2 years, that is what we have intended to do.
Mr. Latham. There is money in that account?
Secretary LaHood. Yes, sir, there sure is.
Mr. Latham. Has it been appropriated?
Secretary LaHood. $600 billion in savings from Iraq and
Afghanistan.
Mr. Latham. Has it been appropriated?
Secretary LaHood. That I don't know, Mr. Chairman. I assume
this high-powered staff that you all have sitting behind you
knows the answer to that.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. Money in the account.
Secretary LaHood. Then you ought to appropriate it because
it is there, it is savings.
Mr. Latham. Isn't there a problem with converting all the
transportation funding to mandatory and without providing any
kind of a long-term revenue source?
Secretary LaHood. Well, as I indicated a few minutes ago,
the President will have a bold vision and a pay-for once he is
able to persuade all of you to do something on guns and
immigration. And hopefully fix sequester.
Mr. Latham. My time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to deal with the airport improvement program. You
propose $450 million reduction to the FAA's airport grant
program, AIP, bringing the funding to the--in the 2014, down to
$2.9 billion from a 3.43. Entitlement funds would only be
preserved for small- and medium sized-primary airports;
nonprimary airports would lose their annual entitlement of
$150,000 per year. The large-hub airports will lose their
entitlement funds but will be eligible for discretionary funds
and will be allowed to raise passenger facility charges from
$4.50 to $8 per passenger.
Mr. Secretary, changes to the passenger facility charges,
the PFC, are typically handled through the authorization
process. If the PFC is not increased, how much, if any, does
the administration request change.
Secretary LaHood. Well, the Airport Improvement Fund, AIP,
is funded at $2.9 billion. And the proposal uses the Federal
money to support small- and medium-size airports. It also lets
airports raise the passenger facility charge from $4.50 up to
$8. This way, the larger airports have the flexibility to use
the funding as they think best. That really is what this
proposal is about.
Mr. Pastor. But I--the question I have is, if you don't
have the authorization process, and the PFC is not increased,
what do you do with the reduction in funds? Are you going to
relook at it and make another determination if we don't have
the passenger--the PFCs? Because this, I think, was brought
about a year ago, same idea.
Secretary LaHood. It was.
Mr. Pastor. And nothing happened.
Secretary LaHood. It was proposed a year ago. Sylvia tells
me we go back to the current funding at $3.35 billion.
Mr. Pastor. Okay.
Secretary LaHood. Yes. I should have mentioned that Sylvia
Garcia is our Acting Secretary for Budget and Programs and
Chief Financial Officer.
Mr. Pastor. You have a great person.
Secretary LaHood. I agree with that.
Mr. Pastor. I have had a--well, she many times has me on my
knees begging for requests. Now that she is in a higher role,
my respect continues with her. And I am very happy that she
will continue the funding at last year's level.
What was the rationale for eliminating the annual
entitlement of $150,000 for the small, nonprimary airports?
Secretary LaHood. I will have to get back to you for the
record on that, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. The other one is, what benefit do the small,
small, non-primary airports get out of your proposal, if any
benefit?
Secretary LaHood. I will get back to you for the record on
that.
Mr. Pastor. Okay.
We recently had the FAA announce closures of some control
towers. I think it was 149 that were scheduled, and now that it
is delayed to June 15th. Do you think there will be further
revisions on the towers that have been already named to be
closed by the June 15th date?
Secretary LaHood. Well, this brings up the point about how
dumb and difficult sequester is. It is a dumb idea because it
is a meat-ax approach to budgeting. And there is not much logic
involved in it. And there is not much consideration given to
really looking at the merits of certain programs and really
making judgments where to cut or whether a program is a good
program or not. So that, for starters, sequestration has made
it very difficult. We have to come up with a billion dollars.
At the Department of Transportation, we have 55,000 employees;
47,000 are FAA employees. The lion's share of the billion
dollars, over $600 million, has to come from the FAA. So we
have just sent letters to our employees telling them that they
may be furloughed up to 11 days. Now, these are Federal
employees. Federal employees don't make a lot of money, but
they serve the American people. At the FAA, their primary
mission is safety. And so the decisions about closing airports
has been very, very difficult. I represented for 14 years 20
counties in Illinois. And I had a lot of small airports. And so
I know the difficulty in announcing that an airport is going to
be closed, particularly in rural America or an area outside of
a metropolitan area. These are not decisions we wanted to make,
but we had to make. And our plan is to continue with the
announcements that we have made. The reason for the delay and
the reason that we asked the court for the delay till June 15th
is to make sure we get it right. And to make sure that we can
do what we say we are going to do.
Mr. Pastor. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor. Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you for your time. You
probably--you might have an inkling as to what I am going to
ask you about. It is about the Columbia River Crossing Project
in Portland. We have talked about this. You were recently out
in my State Leg talking to the State lawmakers about whether or
not to fund this project. And you have made it clear it is an
Obama Administration priority. I understand that there are
about three New Starts programs that have not received full
funding grant agreements but is still a priority; they are
still receiving money, even though they haven't had the grant
signoff. This is one of them.
And I wanted to point out a couple of things and get your
take, because I have some real concerns with how this project
is moving forward. And having just heard you talk about the
negative impacts as you see on--because of sequestration, I
think it is really--these are salient points for you to
consider as you are promoting this project in its current form.
One of the things that--and I have just asked the project
sponsors about, you know, in Seattle, the big controversy over
this bridge is that--and the administration is promoting this--
is the light rail piece. You know, a lot of us are beginning to
call for a bus rapid transit instead because it more cost
effective. Everybody knows the bridge--it is a Federal--I think
it is a Federal responsibility. It is on I-5, connects Canada
to Mexico. It is the last drawbridge on I-5. So the fact we
need to change it and make it save I don't think is the
argument. It is what it looks like.
And seems like a lot of folks from outside our region keep
promoting the light rail piece. We are starting to say bus
rapid transit is more cost effective, and the numbers seem to
bear out. In the last about 5 years--the average per-mile cost
of light rail nationwide is about $35 million. There has been
about two projects in our neck of the woods that have
significantly exceeded that; one is in Portland, where it is
$179 million per light rail mile; and one is--the latest one is
in Portland, which is $204 million per light rail mile. These
are really expensive, partly because of the soil and there was
elevated pieces, and they had a tunnel, significant
environmental or--there were a lot of challenges. So it is not
usually this expensive.
However, the plan that the administration is promoting
right now would be the most expensive in the Nation at $293
million for a 2.9-mile expansion. So it is $293 million per
mile for light rail on this bridge. My biggest concern is my
constituents and whether they are going to have to pay the cost
overruns here, because there is no justification for these
numbers. In fact, if you look at how this money is going to be
spent, $7 million would be spent on a Hood River Channel
restoration 60 miles east of the facility; $10 million for a
curation facility, also known as a museum; $3 million for
Oregon's mass transit organization, TriMet, in South Portland.
So, as you can see, there a lot of stuff built into this cost
that this administration is still promoting. And I hear you
talk about cuts and costs and overruns elsewhere. I guess I
would ask, do you think this is all worth it for 1 minute off
the commute time that this bridge and this project would save,
according to the CRC's own documents?
Secretary LaHood. Well, first of all, we are not building
the bridge to get somewhere faster.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Oh, really? That has been one of the
reasons that has been sold.
Secretary LaHood. DOT has never promoted building anything
to get anywhere faster. We don't promote things to get places
faster. We don't promote building roads or bridges to get
places faster.
What we have promoted is the idea that for 10 years, people
in the region have planned this. The people in the region
decided what this project would be.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So can I challenge you on that, Mr.
Secretary?
Secretary LaHood. You can. But at some point, I would like
to finish answering your question. But if you want to challenge
me, go ahead.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well, just on that statement. Because
this is an incredibly important issue for my biggest county. We
are still hovering around double-digit unemployment; we have
been for 4 years. They are going to pay the lion's share
portion of this cost. And these people just in November voted
down the local matching tax that is required, under my
understanding, for a New Starts grant. So, yes, there are
those, particularly from outside of this county, that have
called for light rail to come into Clark County. But it is
not--I guess--I think you need to understand it is not this
county that has asked for it.
Secretary LaHood. This is not a county bridge. This is a
regional bridge. This is----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So is the department going to pick up
the cost overruns that comes from it?
Secretary LaHood. This is not a county bridge. It is a
regional bridge. It connects two States over the Columbia
River. It is an unsafe bridge. It is a bridge that needs to be
replaced. There is no dispute about any of that. This is not a
one-county bridge. This is a bridge that connects North
America, from Canada to Mexico. This is a regional approach. It
is a two-State approach. It has been in the planning for 10
years.
Now, we didn't make up the idea that there ought to be a
transit line. That was done by the people over a 10-year period
who planned the bridge.
If you all in the region decide that you don't want a
transit line, so be it. But you are going to start over. It is
going to take you another 10 years to plan what you want. And
it is, I think, for the people that have been planning it for
10 years, it is a little bit of a slap in the face. But if
things have changed and the people that planned this over 10
years want to change the design of the bridge, so be it. We
will take our money and go somewhere else. And you can all
start over with the environmental impact statement and take 10
years to plan a bridge that needs to be replaced.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Gentlewoman's time as expired.
Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Good morning.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you for your service.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Quigley. Speaking on behalf of the mayor of City of
Chicago, we will take that money.
When I got on this committee, I talked about the region all
the time, as you are. And, of course, he reminded me that by
the word ``region,'' I mean Chicago. So once I understood that,
I was just fine.
Let me ask you a question relating to something you had
touched on before, but let me ask it in a way that you can give
a very succinct answer to. The president's budget allows for an
increase in the passenger facility charge up to $8 for the
large hub airports, given that they would give some of that
back to FAA so that it would go to the smaller regional
airports for their infrastructure needs. Just how critical is
that increase to smaller airports and the larger airports in
the coming years?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we know that airports all over the
country, whether it is O'Hare or Peoria or other large hub
airports, all are going to need some modernization over the
next several years. Some will need additional runways. Some
will need to lengthen runways. These airports, whether they are
in Chicago or in Peoria, are an economic engine for the
community. They provide jobs. And so we want to recognize that
we are not just going to fund the big airports, but we have an
obligation to work with the smaller airports, too.
Mr. Quigley. Right. And this fund hasn't been--this fee
hasn't been increased since 2000, I believe, if that is
correct.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.
Mr. Quigley. Let me ask you another question about positive
train control. As you know, the Rail Safety Act in 2008
mandated that this be in place by, I think, 2015. We are now
hearing from the Federal Railroad Administration, CRS, and the
GAO of all published reports saying this isn't going to happen.
Your thoughts on whether or not----
Secretary LaHood. It is going to happen. This is our number
one rail safety program. Positive train control is about
safety. Our number one agenda, what we get up every day and
think about at DOT is safety. This will be done.
Mr. Quigley. I am not arguing one point or another. I guess
the question I am asking is, it appears that both freight and
commuter rail are saying they don't have the time or the
resources to get this done in time. So how do we get to this
point by 2015?
Secretary LaHood. Well, I think that--I don't know about
the time part. But this is an expensive proposition.
Mr. Quigley. I want to get it done, too.
Secretary LaHood. This is not something that we made up at
DOT. Congress passed this. And they passed it on the safety
aspect of it.
Mr. Quigley. And I am not questioning that at all, Mr.
Secretary. And I am all for safety. But you would--you raised a
nuance there when you said the timing issue. And I think that
is all anyone is raising now.
I just want to know, is it possible to get it done by 2015,
and what would it take to get it done by that time?
Secretary LaHood. Our goal is to get this done. Obviously,
we need the resources to get it done. And it is our number one
rail priority.
Mr. Quigley. Okay. I look forward to working with you if
there is a--if it is going out to get the resources, fine. If
it is working with my freight and passenger lines that run
through our district and our region, I would be glad to work
with you on those.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Quigley. I guess the only question is not whether it is
getting done; it is, how the heck do we get it done by 2015?
Secretary LaHood. It will be difficult. But we have that as
a goal.
Mr. Quigley. All right. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
I don't like sequester any more than you do. But were you--
and the administration, the White House, the Press Secretary
said it was a White House idea, and they insisted on it because
it would be so horrible. Were you contacted by the White House
before they insisted on this sequester?
Secretary LaHood. Well----
Mr. Latham. About the ramifications that----
Secretary LaHood. We all, obviously, had our input into the
idea that if there was a sequester, there would be shared pain
across the administration.
Mr. Latham. But when they proposed it, you were not asked
about specific----
Secretary LaHood. We didn't take a vote on it.
Mr. Latham. I am sure. And I appreciate that candor.
Question about nationwide investments. There has been a
concern about how we as a government can address transportation
problems obviously that affect us systemwide, nationwide, and
how we resolve moving freight from the West Coast ports inland
and how we resolve the bottlenecks in places like Chicago or
Fort Worth or the choked I-95 corridor. In SAFETEA-LU, the
authorizers tried to create a program for projects of regional
and national significance. But that all got earmarked. And in
the stimulus bill, the Senate tried to address it by creating
TIGER, which seems to hang around forever. And MAP-21 created
1-year authorization for a national TIGER-like program but
didn't continue that authorization for 2014. Apparently, that
was not a priority.
Can you give us any evidence that DOT is using the
discretionary program to address nationwide projects?
Secretary LaHood. Sure.
Mr. Latham. And is there any office or program or anything
at the department that looks at this on a nationwide basis?
Secretary LaHood. Sylvia Garcia, Acting Assistant Secretary
for Budget and Programs runs the TIFIA program.
Mr. Latham. She should. She will do it well.
Secretary LaHood. And that is a program that you all
provided a lot of additional money. The TIFIA program is a loan
program that we have about $750 million this year and over a
billion next year. That money was provided in MAP-21. It was a
way to say that big projects need to have an opportunity to
leverage other dollars. And we just announced that we are going
to consider a loan to completely redo the Riverwalk along the
Chicago River. We are working with New York on a large bridge
project, the Tappan Zee Bridge project. They submitted a
letter.
I think we have about 29 letters of interest for the TIFIA
loan program. Almost all of these, Mr. Chairman, are projects
of national significance. They are big projects. They are
projects that can't be funded out of any one pot of money. They
need private dollars, which is what TIFIA really----
Mr. Latham. Riverwalk in Chicago is a project of national
significance?
Secretary LaHood. Yes. The Chicago River is a natural
resource that can benefit thousands of people.
Mr. Latham. We have of a river walk in Des Moines, too.
Secretary LaHood. Fine, submit a letter. We will be happy
to take a look at it.
Mr. Quigley. Didn't know you had a river.
Mr. Latham. We have got several. We flood all the time.
Why didn't you propose funding the Authorized Projects of
National Regional Significance program? And if we are going to
provide funding in 2014 for TIGER, wouldn't it make sense to go
with an authorized program or a--rather than one that was made
up?
Secretary LaHood. Well look, Mr. Chairman, we don't pass
the bills, you all do that. We now have a TIGER 5 program that
we are announcing $475 million for. We didn't dream that up.
That was passed by Congress. You all like TIGER. Somebody
around here does. We have had five programs. And what it funds
are innovative, creative projects that there is no other place
to get the money from. Some of which are in Iowa, by the way,
which I will be happy to provide you a list of. These are
opportunities for communities to come to DOT with innovative,
creative ideas, and there is no other pot of money. And
Congress seems to like it because you have given us five
different opportunities to----
Mr. Latham. Is it authorized?
Secretary LaHood. No, sir, it is not. We don't authorize
programs; that is your job.
Mr. Latham. Right.
Secretary LaHood. But if you give us the money, there are
plenty of places around the country that are clamoring for ways
to innovate in transportation.
Mr. Latham. How much of that is going to go to, quote,
``high-speed rail''? And it was interesting earlier, you said
the department never looks at speed or time to get somewhere as
a consideration of projects. Isn't high speed rail, whatever
that is, supposed to get people there faster?
Secretary LaHood. We have never promoted high-speed rail on
the speed aspect of it. In Illinois, they invested over $3
billion to fix up the tracks to get trains from Chicago to St.
Louis going from 79 miles an hour to 110. That was their
decision. In California, they have a plan in place that they
have been working on for 10 years where we have invested over
$3 billion. Their trains will go 200 miles an hour. On the
Northeast Corridor, we have invested over $3 billion, not to
get trains to go faster--although Amtrak is working on that--it
is to fix up 50-year-old, aging catenary and infrastructure.
So our investments go where there are Governors or
stakeholders, some who want to fix up infrastructure, some who
want to buy new cars, some who wants trains to go faster.
Mr. Latham. With the announcements you are going to have on
the TIGER 5, is there high-speed rail money in that?
Secretary LaHood. No. There is no earmark for any program,
no. If you look at the notice that will be out on Friday, it
just simply says there is $475 million.
Mr. Latham. $475 million.
Secretary LaHood. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Dent, are you ready?
I am sorry, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Talk about sequestration, I agree with you; it
is a bad idea, and we did vote, and I voted no for it because
it was a bad idea then. So but we have to live with its
ramifications.
I am going to go back to the control towers: 149, in April,
they are going to be shut down, but then made the decision that
we would go into June.
Now, as an example, and what I am asking the question, in
Glendale, there is a control tower that is in very close
proximity to Luke Air Force Base. Luke Air Force Base is
getting the F-35s. And it has always been a high priority for
FAA because you have Luke so close to the traffic coming from
Glendale and Maricopa County that that control tower had some
significance in terms of safety. And so I am going to ask the
question this way: In the determination of going from April to
June, will there be consideration on the different airports
that were deemed to be closed to say because of different
factors we are now going to take this airport off the list? Is
this one of the reasons that you went from April to June or
what is the reason that we----
Secretary LaHood. In the beginning, Mr. Pastor, we did
consult with our colleagues at the Defense Department about
airports that were near military facilities, and we consulted
with our colleagues at the Defense Department when there were
airports that had Air Guard units on those airports. And we
went with their judgment on this. We didn't want to close a
tower if it was going to have an impact on something that the
Defense Department thought would be a serious detriment to the
unit that is there or to an airport nearby.
And the reason that we extended the time was to give our
lawyers, really, more opportunity to answer some of the
concerns that had been put forth by the plaintiffs and also to
give airports an opportunity. Some airports are actually going
to put the money up to keep these open. Because in the
President's 2014 budget, there is money for these airports. And
so some communities are finding the resources to keep the
airports open. Frankly, number one, it was for legal reasons,
but number two, it was to give communities a chance to see if
they could find their own resources.
Mr. Pastor. I am going to yield back and wait for the next
round. Go into a different line of questioning.
Mr. Latham. All right. Thank you very much, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Good morning.
Mr. Dent. Great to see you again.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Dent. Few things. MAP-21, as you know, was an important
step toward improving our Nation's transportation,
infrastructure and systems as well as maximizing efficiencies
within the department. I recognize the department is working to
implement the reforms and promulgate regulations directed by
the new law. I am interested in your prioritization of these
initiatives in the constrained budgetary environment.
Specifically, I want to highlight an issue one of my
constituents has brought to my attention. For a few years now,
a company in my district has voiced serious concerns about the
Federal Motor Carriers Safety Administration Hazardous Material
Safety Permit Program, HMSP, I guess. As you are probably
aware, this is a safety permit program for motor carriers of
certain hazardous materials. It is intended to ensure a higher
fitness standard than is required of regular trucking
companies.
Under the program, a carrier's fitness is based in solely
on limited out-of-service violation history. My constituent's
frustrations are twofold. He believes the standards used to
evaluate carriers do not accurately measure safety; and, two,
current rules do not provide an appeals process prior to
automatically being denied a permit. These seemingly arbitrary
rulings are having real consequences and effect on their
livelihoods, and actually it favors very large companies over
smaller companies. Pursuant to MAP-21, Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration is conducting a study of Hazardous
Material Safety Permit Program. That study should be completed
this summer, as I am told and reported to Congress by an
October 1st deadline.
Mr. Secretary, I want to acknowledge that your agencies
have been extremely responsive to my office when we have made
inquiries, and I want to thank them for their professionalism
that they have always extended to me and to my office. And I
know Administrator Farrell has been personally engaged on this.
I am just looking for your commitment that you will seriously
consider this industry stakeholder feedback in the HMSP study
and pursue recommendations highlighted in that report.
In the meantime, I would simply ask that you utilize your
agencies to the fullest extent possible to review, where you
have authority, to pursue administrative remedies, expedite
interim resolutions as soon as possible. This is a big issue
where I live.
Secretary LaHood. Sure. Of course, you have my commitment
to listen to your constituent and to listen to you and to see
if there is a way that we can be helpful.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
It is a very important issue to us. I just wanted to make
you aware of it.
And the second, obviously, on the issue of the contract
tower program, the administration's decision to close the
contract towers has gathered a lot of attention, obviously.
Since the administration originally slated the first round of
closures of, I guess, 149 towers to begin on April 7th, but I
guess now decided to delay the closures until June 15th, how do
you plan to keep these 149 towers open until June 15th if, as
the administration has claimed, you don't have any flexibility
on those cuts?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we found the money to do it. And
that is why we went to court and asked for the extension.
Mr. Dent. Do you foresee any further revisions to the list
of the 149 contract tower closures now that the FAA will be
funding the towers at least until----
Secretary LaHood. I think the only revision would come if a
community came to us and said we have the money to keep the
tower open. We don't have the money to keep them open. We just
simply don't.
And let me just say, too, Mr. Dent, this has been painful.
As I said to Mr. Pastor, as someone who represented a fairly
rural district, I know how important these airports are. And I
know there is going to be job loss when an airport tower closes
and an airport closes.
Mr. Dent. I just wanted to say, I know in my district, the
one contract tower feels they could--they could manage this
without a closure, responsibly and within budget. I just wanted
to share that with you.
Secretary LaHood. We have told airports, if you can find
the money to keep your airport open, we will make sure the
paperwork gets done so that can happen.
Mr. Dent. Okay.
Secretary LaHood. We will not stand in the way.
Mr. Dent. Thank you. I will deliver that message back to
them. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
And, finally, I know you are familiar with my interest in
pipeline safety. And I certainly appreciated your visit to my
district back in 2011, shortly after that terrible explosion in
Allentown that killed five people. And so I wanted to thank you
for all the work you have done on pipeline safety. Obviously,
it made some positive progress on the issue with the Pipeline
Safety Job Creation Act of 2011. I see that yearly inspections
rose to 46 percent in 2011 to 1,340. And PHMSA has fulfilled
the goal of hiring 135 inspection enforcement staff. I know
PHMSA has experienced challenges in filling vacancies. And I
noted that there was a request for direct hiring authority. I
wanted to see if you could comment on those issues.
Secretary LaHood. Well, first of all, let me say thank you
to you for your leadership and to Congress for passing a very,
very strong pipeline safety bill that gave us the authority to
hire additional people. All of the people that you authorized,
we have hired. And you will see from the President's budget we
are asking for additional inspectors. We think that is the way
to really correct the problem. And we appreciate what Congress
has done.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time has expired. I apologize
to Mr. Joyce. I actually recognized Mr. Dent out of turn there,
since you arrived earlier.
But Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I know you are occasionally fond of pointing
out that we created many of these Frankenstein legislative
monsters that you have to address. Well, here is at least one
more. The pilot program in MAP-21 that helps get programs
through an expedited fashion through development, engineering,
and construction, some of it is through a public/private
partnership. As you know, there is a little provision in there
that says they have to be in a state of good repair to be
eligible for this, which means almost no one who is a large
entity is eligible to qualify for what could be a very helpful
program. Could you comment on that and----
Secretary LaHood. What I would like to do, Mr. Quigley, is
check with some of our administrators and see if that language
has inhibited us from really moving ahead. I don't have the
specifics on that. Obviously, I am aware that Congress wanted
to cut short the time within which we approve projects. But I
need to really look at what we have been doing on that. I don't
have a good answer for you, but I will get it for you.
Mr. Quigley. I appreciate it. It seems to be contradictory.
Here is the agencies that need this most would be the ones
least eligible for those funds. So appreciate it if you would
get back to us and/or our staffs.
Talking a little about core capacity. I believe it's $120
million in fiscal year 2014. Can you comment on the process for
how that is going to be allocated for 2014, whether it will be
a competitive process for those funds?
Secretary LaHood. Again, I will have to get back to you.
Rather than just trying to talk off the top of my head on that,
I would rather get you the specifics.
Mr. Quigley. Okay. That is fine.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Morning, Secretary.
Secretary LaHood. Good morning.
Mr. Joyce. In your 2014 budget, I recognized there was yet
another tax on the commercial aviation industry. As a matter of
fact, there is $100 per aircraft departure tax, which would
cost our Nation's airlines roughly $1 billion annually.
Passengers already pay more than their fair share of taxes,
roughly 20 percent on every fare that is out there, and on a
roundtrip fare. The Future of Aviation Advisory Committee that
you convened in 2010 identified the raising aviation tax burden
as an obstacle to the viability and global competitiveness of
the airline industry, which lost over $50 billion and nearly
one-third of its workforce over the past decade. Are you
concerned about these Federal--the rising federal aviation tax
burden? And, second, did your department conduct an economic
impact analysis on the proposed departure tax?
Secretary LaHood. This is a proposal that the
administration has promoted for 4 years. It is a way to raise
some income. And the answer to your question, whether we did an
economic study, I don't know that we did. But if we did, I will
make it available to you.
Mr. Joyce. That would be great. By chance, did you do--is
there the same type of taxes on the railroad industry?
Secretary LaHood. There is no tax like this on freight
rail.
Mr. Joyce. Is there any other tax on any other industry
similar to what you are doing to the aviation industry?
Secretary LaHood. We will look. We have jurisdiction over a
lot of transportation industries. Rather than just saying no,
let me make sure I know what I am talking about.
Mr. Joyce. I appreciate that. Considering it is probably
the safest form of travel in the Nation, we would certainly
want to make it competitive, wouldn't we? Or keep it
competitive.
Secretary LaHood. We have the safest aviation system in the
world.
Mr. Joyce. Secondly, sir, I apologize because I was late,
but three hearings at one time make it a little rough to be
here.
On NextGen, did you discuss that when you gave your
remarks?
Secretary LaHood. No, I didn't, other than to say that the
President's budget does continue our substantial resources for
NextGen. We have made very good progress on NextGen in
implementing it around the country, and we will continue to do
that. The FAA bill provides significant resources over the next
couple of years to really make progress.
Mr. Joyce. Better integrate those and develop processes for
new performance-based navigation procedures and ensure
stakeholders have needed information on NextGen to facilitate
investment decisions like the GAO had requested, does DOT agree
with those recommendations?
Secretary LaHood. I would have to go back and look and see
what they said.
Mr. Joyce. Well, they said that the FAA should better
integrate NextGen efforts, develop processes for selecting new
performance-based navigation procedures and ensure that
stakeholders have needed information on NextGen progress to
facilitate investments.
Secretary LaHood. I am sure we have done all of that.
Mr. Joyce. Do you think NextGen will be implemented within
the proposing timeline? And what barriers would you foresee?
Secretary LaHood. The one big barrier is sequestration. It
is a big headache for us. It is going to eliminate some of the
resources either for the people--I mean, we are furloughing FAA
employees, and we have told them the furlough would be up to 11
days, some of those people are working on NextGen. So the
process is going to be slowed down by that.
Mr. Joyce. But wouldn't NextGen make the airline or make
the whole issue more efficient, eliminate the need for towers
if everything progressed the way you see it?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we have never said that. What we
have said about NextGen is that it will make flying safe,
guiding planes in and out of airports more directly, save jet
fuel, and relieve air congestion around major airports.
Mr. Joyce. And require major investments by not only the
government but also by the airline industry.
Secretary LaHood. Of course. And we have talked extensively
with the airlines about that.
Mr. Joyce. So it would be fair to them to keep forward with
this investment in their industry? Are we going to be able to
keep ours--end of the bargain?
Secretary LaHood. We are going to keep up. At FAA, safety
is our number one priority, but NextGen implementation of
NextGen is what people work on every day. And we have a good
plan.
Mr. Joyce. I appreciate your work. Thank you very much.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Joyce. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Joyce.
Complete the round here. Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess I am a little baffled to hear all this talk about
concern over sequestration when you are supporting the most
expensive light rail build in the country. And it is most
expensive by over $100 million per mile.
But since it looks like--safety is a huge issue for you all
and for us, whether it is FAA or highways or transit. And you
rightly pointed out this is a regional bridge, and safety is
the issue. It is obviously not to get people or freight moved
more quickly over the bridge; it is safety.
Is the DOT still interested in this regional bridge and the
safety of it if we locally choose to put a different form of
mass transit on the bridge other than light rail?
Secretary LaHood. We will work with stakeholders,
Governors, Members of Congress, elected officials on projects
where we think it is important for the region and for the
safety of the region.
But I want to be clear about this, and this is what I said
when I was in you state recently: If the people that have been
working on this for 10 years, and now there are other people in
place that want to substitute their judgment for the people who
put this plan in place----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. What people are you talking about?
Secretary LaHood. Planners.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Planners.
Secretary LaHood. Previous Governors, previous legislators,
who have passed money in order for this project to go ahead.
Communities.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well, not--my community recently voted
down funding for it.
Secretary LaHood. This is a regional project. I know that
there is one community and one county out of multiple counties
and multiple communities that doesn't want this. I get that.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well, let me clarify. We want you to
invest and make this safer. We believe that is your
responsibility. The problem is----
Secretary LaHood. If you don't like the transit piece of
this, so be it. Start over, though. That is what you have----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I am reclaiming my time on that, Mr.
Secretary. Reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time.
Secretary LaHood. Fine. Go ahead.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. This project has been redesigned two
times in the last 3 years. Completely redesigned. You didn't
pull your funding then. So are you saying that the only way we
are going to get the Federal support is if we have light rail?
Is that the only way that you are interested?
Secretary LaHood. If you take the light rail out of this
project, you take a major component part out of it, you start
the environmental impact statement over again.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. They didn't start the environmental
impact statement over when they redesigned it 2 years ago
because they hadn't designed it properly. Those people you
talked about who have designed for it the last 10 years
engineered a bridge that didn't pass engineering muster. So
there have been some necessary remodifications.
As it currently stands, the Coast Guard and the Army Corps
of Engineers cannot permit this bridge as it is built because
the light rail deck on the bottom makes it too short. There are
companies in my region who cannot pass under the bridge if they
build it as it is. So it is right now not even--it is not even
permitted.
So you are telling me the only way we are going to get this
money if we build this bridge, that is too low with the right
rail on it, that is the only way that you are interested? And
you feel beholden to previous Governors over the citizens in
this region?
Secretary LaHood. We take our cues from the people that are
in charge.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well, guess what? I am one of those
now. And the folks in my region are saying we need to do better
with their money.
And I would argue that they would want us to consider
freight mobility and people moving faster, not just the safety.
Safety is huge; that is the Federal responsibility. But to ask
them to pay tolls and taxes? This one community is going to pay
the lion's share?
And for you to say that there are previous working groups
that we are beholden to, not the American taxpayer, that
baffles me. Are you not concerned about the costs coming out of
this community that has had double-digit unemployment over the
last----
Secretary LaHood. I believe that, having been at a meeting
with the Coast Guard, that the matter of the permit will be
settled. I also know that there are now three businesses that
are being talked to about their opportunities and the way to
mitigate the business that they will lose, and I think those
issues will be resolved.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So, having met with the exact same
folks several times, one of those businesses--one job for them
is a $500 million manufacturing job. So we are talking about a
lot of jobs in our region, manufacturers, workers, on just one.
There is no way to change or mitigate for them. And I know that
you all have been talking to them, because they keep bringing
it up.
In that, are you saying that, back to the original point,
the USDOT is only interested in this project if the
mitigation--say the mitigation is we change the form of mass
transit, we change it from light rail to bus rapid transit. Are
you saying, then, that the DOT wouldn't consider that
mitigation, they wouldn't then also be supportive of putting
that form on the bridge and----
Secretary LaHood. Well, I have never heard any discussions
with any business people where they want to change the light
rail. They are more interested in raising the height of the
bridge, which I believe the Coast Guard is looking at now.
And if you have an objection----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. My time has expired.
Secretary LaHood. If you have an objection to the transit,
and that is a major portion of this project, it changes the
project.
I don't make this stuff up. This is the law. It is Federal
law that was passed by Congress: Start over with another
environmental impact statement that reflects what the project
is going to look like and where the money is going to come
from; hold public hearings so everybody knows.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. May I respond to that, or should I
wait?
Mr. Latham. Go ahead.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I guess they have already redesigned
the project a couple of times without you all requiring them to
start over. And I will provide for your office a list of areas
where you all have circumvented or have at least skirted
current law to move this forward.
So I am very anxious to follow the law in this process, Mr.
Secretary, and I would hope the Department is as well.
Mr. Latham. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
We will start a new round, and we will start----
Mr. Pastor. You want to start?
Mr. Latham. All right.
Mr. Secretary, your rail reauthorization proposal totals
$6.6 billion in fiscal year 2014, which is obviously an
extremely large increase compared to the fiscal year 2013 level
of $1.54 billion.
I found it concerning that it was proposing a shift in
responsibility from the States and private industry to the
Federal Government. For example, the Rail Authorization Act
passed 5 years ago mandated that private rail firms install
positive train control by December of 2015 on their own track.
Your budget proposes that the Federal Government fund the
positive train control on Amtrak routes and commuter rail
lines.
In addition, your budget proposal would transfer $85
million from the States for Amtrak State-supported routes to
the Federal Government. Why are you proposing to shift the
burden to the Federal Government, especially with our current
budgetary concerns?
Secretary LaHood. You mean on passenger rail?
Mr. Latham. Yes.
Secretary LaHood. Because it is----
Mr. Latham. Well, on----
Secretary LaHood. Go ahead.
Mr. Latham. Positive train control, right.
Secretary LaHood. Look this is a very expensive
proposition, and it is also a mandate from Congress, and it is
also a priority.
Mr. Latham. Apparently, it has not been an issue of money.
The private rail firms pay for this. And in August, the FRA's
report indicated the delays were associated with technical
issues, such as spectrum, and not necessarily with any funding
issue.
So I don't understand why we want to shift it to the
Federal government rather than have the original deal, as far
as who was going to pay for it.
Secretary LaHood. We consider positive train control our
number-one rail safety priority.
Mr. Latham. It is huge.
Secretary LaHood. And we believe that in order to implement
it, we have to put some money where our mouth is.
Mr. Latham. Are you saying it is a money issue rather than
a technical issue?
Secretary LaHood. I would say that the technical aspect of
this is not as critical as how do you pay for it.
Mr. Latham. That is not what the FRA is saying, though.
Secretary LaHood. Well, the FRA is resolving the technical
aspects of it with the railroads.
Mr. Latham. Just to go back----
Secretary LaHood. If you are asking me which is more of a
problem, it is the money part.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Again, that is not what they said.
Going back to one of our favorite subjects, the stimulus
bill provided $8 billion for a new high-speed rail program, and
the fiscal year 2010 bill provided another $2.5 billion for
high-speed rail.
After $10.5 billion and 5 years, do we have anything that
looks like a nationwide investment in high-speed rail? And do
we even have one corridor that has been noticeably improved,
either passenger or freight, after the $10.5 billion of
taxpayer investment?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we have invested over $3 billion in
the Northeast Corridor, and we have trains running there very
regularly. Part of that investment is in infrastructure. Part
of the investment is in States where Governors have wanted to
increase service or fix up infrastructure.
In Illinois, we have invested almost $3 billion, all of it
in infrastructure to fix up the tracks. And I have ridden on
those trains from Chicago--the train from Chicago to St. Louis,
and I have seen where the money has been spent.
In California, they will break ground on their high-speed
rail initiative this year. We have invested over $3 billion.
The assembly there voted last summer to sell bonds upwards of
between $6 billion and $8 billion as part of their investment.
We have made a lot of progress in 4 short years--in 4 short
years. It took us 50 years to build the interstate system. And
the idea is that this is a major infrastructure program, and it
is not going to be built overnight.
Mr. Latham. Define ``high-speed rail.''
Secretary LaHood. Pardon me?
Mr. Latham. Define ``high-speed rail.''
Secretary LaHood. Well, the Congress defines ``high-speed
rail'' as 110 miles per hour. That is the way they have defined
it in legislation. California's trains from San Francisco to
San Diego will go 200 miles an hour. In Illinois, the trains,
once the infrastructure investments are completed, will go 110
miles per hour.
It is going to be difficult to get trains consistently to
go 110 miles per hour on the Northeast Corridor----
Mr. Latham. Well, they have to be electrified to be able to
do the high speeds, right?
Secretary LaHood. The California trains will be
electrified.
Mr. Latham. And not----
Secretary LaHood. The one in Illinois is not electrified.
Mr. Latham. The initial operating segment in California
will not be electrified.
Secretary LaHood. The part in Fresno, the reason they are
building it there is so they could put the catenary up and use
it as a test area.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Mr. Pastor. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, the House has passed its budget. The Senate
has its budget. You are now talking about the administration's
budget. But if there be a resolution of all three budgets maybe
way down the road, and, as appropriators, after we finish the
hearings, I am sure we will start the markups, and I would
assume that the allocations that will be given out will be
probably based on the Ryan budget that passed the House.
And the question is, it is going to be hard to accommodate
many of your requests that you have done in this budget. What
would be your priorities in terms of now 4 years of Secretary
of Transportation, what do you think would be the priorities
that you think need to be continued as we go forward in
appropriating the money for fiscal year 2014?
Secretary LaHood. I think we will always have safety as our
number-one priority in all modes of transportation, whether it
is aviation or truck or cars.
Our NHTSA organization is the top safety agency in the
world. People come from all over the world to talk to our staff
on safety. They are the best. They are the ones that rate cars.
They are the ones that implemented, 20 years ago, Click It or
Ticket, and now 86 percent of us buckle up. They are the ones
that work with Mothers Against Drunk Driving, and we have taken
a lot of drunk drivers off the road. They are the ones that got
States to pass .08.
And so it will always be safety, Mr. Pastor. If you are
asking in terms of programs----
Mr. Pastor. In terms of programs.
Secretary LaHood. Yeah, I mean, we have to keep our roads
and bridges in a state of good repair. We do have a state-of-
the-art interstate system, and we have to make sure that we
maintain our interstate system and our bridges so that they are
safe.
But in terms of new initiatives, there is no secret around
here about what the President's vision is for the next
generation of transportation, and that is high-speed rail. That
is the President's vision. He announced it 4 years ago. We have
invested $12 billion.
I have been to 18 countries looking at high-speed rail, and
the common theme in every country is it required a national
government investment, the way that we did with the interstate
system. The only way we are going to have a high-speed rail
program in America is if the Federal Government steps up and
makes the investment.
We have invested a lot in other forms of transportation,
like light rail in your State, streetcars in other communities,
bus rapid transit in other communities. So we try to work with
our partners, whether they be Governors or mayors or planners,
to do what we can in communities to try and meet their needs.
So safety number one; state of good repair for our roads
and bridges, making sure that they are safe. But in terms of
the next generation of transportation, it is high-speed rail.
Mr. Pastor. In that component that you describe as safety,
is that NextGen?
Secretary LaHood. NextGen is a big part of it. We have the
safest aviation system in the world, and NextGen will only
enhance that.
Mr. Pastor. I heard you say that air traffic controllers
were going to be furloughed maybe up to 11 days. And the input
that air traffic controllers, or some air traffic controllers
have in the development of NextGen is very important. And I am
assuming that they are participating in its development.
Secretary LaHood. They are participating. They are on all
of our committees and all of our working groups, and they are
an intimate part. They have to be.
Mr. Pastor. And we have been wanting to implement NextGen
in the near future, but with sequestration in the way, what is
going to happen to that timeline?
Secretary LaHood. It is going to slow down our ability to
meet the timetables that we have set for NextGen.
Mr. Pastor. Do you have any idea to what extent?
Secretary LaHood. Well, we have told employees that they
are going to be furloughed up to 11 days. We hope it is not 11
days, but it is up to 11 days. Some of these people are working
on these projects, but I want to assure you and every member of
the committee, safety will not be compromised.
Mr. Pastor. Well, talking about safety, it is the Homeland
Security who made the decision. Has FAA or Secretary--well,
Transportation taken the comment on bringing the changes in the
homeland security on what can be brought on planes in terms of
knives----
Secretary LaHood. That is not in my----
Mr. Pastor. I understand, but----
Secretary LaHood. That is not in my portfolio.
Mr. Pastor. But safety on airlines, safety on different
modes of transportation is. So does the Department have any
comment and/or--in ensuring that airlines are safe and that
people that work in the industry are safe?
Secretary LaHood. For all of the things that we have
jurisdiction over, safety remains our number-one priority.
[The information follows:]

Comments on TSA Weapons Interpretive Rule

This is a significant change in TSA policy that may have profound
impacts on the safety of flight crew members and passengers in aircraft
cabins (as opposed to flight decks). As TSA is aware, the number of
unruly passengers on planes has increased in recent years, and these
unruly passengers pose serious risks to flight crew members and other
passengers aboard planes. The issue has become such a serious concern
internationally that the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) has taken the matter up. As I have said, safety is our top
priority and I will encourage TSA to consider these risks in
determining whether relaxing the definition of ``weapon'' is
appropriate. At a minimum, TSA should provide a public discussion as to
why this change would not increase the risk to flight crew members and
passengers in aircraft cabins.

Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
Mr. Latham. All right. And I will just--on that subject, on
the NextGen, I think one of the biggest delays that has
happened was the previous administration when they did not
include the controllers in the whole development of NextGen.
Mr. Pastor. Well, they had the contract issue, so that
was----
Mr. Latham. Well, that was, you know--the people running it
should be involved in designing the----
Mr. Pastor. I agree.
Secretary LaHood. Yeah, but look, you all deserve credit
for passing an FAA bill. I mean, we went without a bill for
almost 6 or 7 years. And now, with the passage of the bill, we
have the resources to do it.
Mr. Latham. All right. We digress.
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thanks. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, just one final question. And thanks again
for all the work you have done here at the Department the last
few years. We will miss you. I guess this may be your last
hearing.
Secretary LaHood. Yes.
Mr. Dent. And we will miss you. And thanks for the good
work you have done.
Just one quick question. In 2012, this subcommittee
identified flaws in the NHTSA National Automotive Sampling
System and provided funding to fully modernize the data
collection system. The volume of crash data being input into
the system is coming in at 20 percent of the volume that was
originally intended for the database. Additionally, the quality
of the data has diminished.
If properly implemented and maintained, this database is
going to provide important data to support policy decisions and
be an invaluable tool to all stakeholders by providing feedback
on which technologies truly are improving highway safety and
which ones are not working.
Stakeholders in my district have voiced concern that
NHTSA's plans for modernization are not clearly defined. Could
I please ask you to get back to me the status of the
modernization?
Secretary LaHood. Sure.
Mr. Dent. That is a----
Mr. LaHood. Will do it.
Mr. Dent. Thank you. And how much of the $25 million has
been spent to date?
Secretary LaHood. Okay.
Mr. Dent. And then, how is NHTSA engaging with interested
parties, suppliers, automakers, safety advocates, the medical
community, research organizations, to ensure that we are
leveraging both public and private resources to the greatest--
--
Mr. LaHood. Sure.
Mr. Dent [continuing]. Extent possible?
Secretary LaHood. Yep. Will do it.
Mr. Dent. That is it. I mean, I don't expect an answer
right now----
Mr. LaHood. Yep. We will get back to you.
Mr. Dent. Thank you so much.
Mr. LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Dent. And I will yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To follow up on the last part, when we were talking about
the CRC and the bridge height issue and actions that DOT has
taken to mitigate or hopefully mitigate, one of the things that
I think is important for you all to consider--I know there are
three businesses, and we will see what happens. My hope--this
is the third or fourth, depending on who you talk to, largest
river system in the country. It serves all the way up--
obviously the Columbia River, all the way up into Idaho and all
the four States surrounding. The ag industries use this river
traffic.
Is it wise to look at this project and say, okay, we are
going to mitigate for these two or three businesses that are
there now and we are not going to worry about future growth and
capacity; as long as we can get these three businesses
mitigated, moved over, we are not going to worry about the
bridge height or the cap that it puts on the river? In terms of
impeding the flow of commerce, is that of concern?
Secretary LaHood. We would take our cues on that from the
people that live in the area. I mean, the reason that we became
aware of the height issue is when businesses came to us. And we
recognized that it was a problem, and that is when the
mitigation really began.
Look, if the leadership in the community, the business
community and others say, other businesses are going to be
inhibited or the future growth for the economy, we would
certainly listen to that, of course.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Well, and I don't know if we CC'ed
you, but I know that we sent to the Coast Guard--the Members of
Congress who live up the river in the different districts, sent
a letter in saying just that, because there are public ports
that go up beyond us. That is not my district or my area, but
folks have raised that same concern.
And just to clarify, come back to your interest in this
project and the region, would DOT still be willing to fund a
regional bridge that increases safety, or makes it safe in the
event of a catastrophic earthquake or so on, if the transit
portion were something other than light rail?
Secretary LaHood. Well, that decision hasn't been made. And
until the decision is made, we are operating under the
assumption that the plan that is in place is the one that has
been selected.
And so I am not going to answer a hypothetical, given the
fact that there are 10 years of planning and there is a project
in place, and one State has already passed their local match
and we are waiting to see what the other State does. If your
State decides to do something different and doesn't want to put
up the match, then we will see where that takes us.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So, I guess, I am gauging your
interest in the safety of the bridge irrespective of what mode
of transit is used on it, not whether or not each State
believes the bridge needs to be built or what they want to put
in for it.
Mr. LaHood. Well----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. The controversy is over the mode of
transit.
Secretary LaHood. Let me be clear. We like this project.
This is the one multimodal project in the country of national
significance. If this project is built, you will become a model
maybe for the world but certainly for the country, where two
States and a region that connects North America can build a
multimodal bridge. We like this project.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So can I ask you to consider a few
things? I realize it looks good on paper and it adds to the
talking points, but the really important thing in my mind is,
obviously you all have not drilled down into whether this even
pencils.
Did you know that we have to build parking garages in
downtown Vancouver to meet the density requirements for light
rail? Do you know that it does not pencil in our region? I
mean, what you are bringing over from Portland is actually in
the red, and part of the reason we are rejecting it is we don't
want to have to pay off their debts.
If you were willing to truly make it a multimodal project
that meets--and what you said, works with communities to meet
their needs, you would be flexible and balanced and willing to
help change this into--add bus rapid transit, add something
that we can afford and that meets our needs.
We literally have to build parking garages and assume
people are going to drive to those parking garages for us to be
legal to get the new-starts grant. That, to me, seems like you
are really pounding a square peg into a round hole. Is that----
Secretary LaHood. Well, the idea that we are not flexible
is not accurate at all. When somebody came to us and said the
bridge isn't high enough and it is going to impact businesses,
what did we do? We went to the Coast Guard. And----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. The Coast Guard has not permitted it.
Secretary LaHood. Let me finish. The idea----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. But wait, wait, wait.
Secretary LaHood. The idea that we are not flexible is not
true. We have shown a lot of flexibility.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. You are telling me that unless we do
the bridge as you like it, you won't give me the hypothetical,
yes, that you are still involved.
Secretary LaHood. We are trying to mitigate with the
businesses who asked for a higher bridge so they can
accommodate their businesses. That sounds like a lot of
flexibility to me.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
And I think we are going to adjourn the hearing here.
I ask unanimous consent that Members are allowed to revise
and extend their remarks. And if you would respond to written--
--
Secretary LaHood. I sure will.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. Questions----
Mr. LaHood. Absolutely.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. That they may have.
On a personal note, and I hope Mr. Pastor would join me,
thank you for your service at the Department. We hate to see
you leave.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. We don't always agree on every issue. You
defend the indefensible pretty well sometimes.
Secretary LaHood. Well, let me add my thanks to this
committee for always having transportation as one of your top
priorities. You have all been great to work with. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. And you should be commended for your safety
initiatives. Texting, the distracted-driver stuff is really a
huge step forward.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. And I commend you for that.
Secretary LaHood. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Unless there is anything else, Mr. Pastor, we
will adjourn the hearing.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070A.085

Wednesday, April 17, 2013.

DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

WITNESS

HON. SHAUN DONOVAN, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
Mr. Latham. The hearing will come to order. I want to
welcome Secretary Donovan here this morning. Thank you for your
testimony and for your continued service at HUD, your
competence and hard work at the Department continues to be very
much appreciated. I really appreciate the conversations that we
have. It is very, very important to try to reach the goals that
we all have in mind.
Consideration of the fiscal year 2014 request must be put
in proper context, as anomalies like FHA receipts and sequester
make fair comparisons very challenging. Gross spending is
higher in this request than has been previously enacted. While
I understand some increases are due to the rising cost of HUD
rental assistance, the increases are not entirely explained by
HUD's existing liabilities.
The request adds nearly a billion dollars to new
initiatives, new demonstration programs, and large increases to
existing programs. Just to cite a few examples, $200 million is
requested for a Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative, a
narrowly targeted program not funded by this Subcommittee in
recent years. Also, Choice Neighborhoods, another narrowly
targeted program, is quadrupled to $400 million in the request.
These increases are particularly puzzling in the context of a
request that also proposes to cut core state and local
partnerships like CDGB and HOME.
Looking beyond funding levels, I am deeply concerned by the
lack of a comprehensive reform proposal in the budget. Neither
the authorizing Committees nor the administration appear to be
committed to leading the way on this issue. While I appreciate
the inclusion of some legislative savings ideas, cherry-picking
authorizing provisions just to accommodate more spending
elsewhere is no substitute for genuine leadership on reform.
Without something comprehensive, it will only get more and more
difficult to keep pace with the growing cost of assisting
vulnerable households and forging pathways to self-sufficiency.
Mr. Secretary, I think we can both agree that even in this
fiscal environment, protecting households currently served by
HUD should be a top priority. However, we must also fulfill a
duty to the American taxpayer to get serious about deficit
reduction. HUD's request goes exactly in the wrong direction on
deficit spending and appears out of touch with fiscal reality.
This Subcommittee will take a hard, line-by-line look at what
can be accommodated in the current environment, particularly
among the grant and demonstration programs in this request that
have nothing to do with meeting current HUD commitments.
I am looking forward to an open and productive discussion
with you as we continue through the process, and I thank you
again for your hard work at the Department. I think we all have
a lot of questions and ground to cover today, so with that I
will yield to my distinguished ranking member, Mr. Pastor, for
his opening remarks.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Good morning. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. And
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the recognition. I also want to
welcome Secretary Donovan this morning.
Mr. Secretary, you have had a busy few months spearheading
the Federal government's recovery efforts from Hurricane Sandy,
an issue I know that is vitally important to my ranking member,
Ms. Lowey.
When we finished our work on the fiscal year 2013
appropriation bill last month, we tried to preserve the housing
safety net for our nation's most vulnerable populations.
However, cuts due to sequestration undermine our aim. I am
particularly concerned that many public housing authorities
feel that these lower funding levels are insufficient to keep
every person who we housed last year in a home this year.
President Obama has submitted a funding request that
protects housing for vulnerable populations that we house.
There are increases for the Section 8 program, and a modest
increase for the public housing program. While I support these
increases, I am concerned that the growth in these programs may
come at the detriment of the rest of the program in the
Department.
I look forward to your testimony this morning. And Mr.
Chairman, thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor. I see the Ranking Member
of the Full Committee is here. If you have an opening
statement, Ms. Lowey, please go ahead.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Mr.
Ranking Member. And I would like to thank you for your efforts
on these very important issues. And I join you in welcoming
Secretary Donovan.
First, Mr. Secretary, I want to thank you for your
assistance with designating Westchester County a most-impacted
and distressed county for the first allocation of Sandy Relief
funds from the Community Development Block Grant Disaster
Relief Program. I appreciate your Department honoring my
request and that of Governor Cuomo and some of my House and
Senate colleagues, to take a second look at the designation. As
I review your budget request, I am pleased that the Department
is prioritizing funding to maintain current levels of rental
and homeless assistance.
While our economy is in recovery, some of our fellow
citizens are being left behind. The president's budget should
honor our commitment to assisting their recovery as well.
However, like a number of my colleagues, I am concerned about
the long-term health of the Department in the face of the
sequester. For example, through its housing assistance
programs, HUD serves millions of low-income seniors and
disabled individuals. However, like other low-income programs,
such as SNAP, these housing programs are not protected from the
sequester. As you know, HUD's own estimates project that
125,000 individuals and families will lose voucher assistance
under sequestration, likely increasing homelessness for these
populations. Additionally, state and local units of government
rely on CDGB to help with vital investments and economic
revitalization, affordable housing, and infrastructure. I fear
they will soon have to manage with less support in order for
the Federal government to meets its obligations to our most
vulnerable citizens.
Mr. Secretary, I do not envy the task before you. I hope
that your testimony today will provide reassurance about the
difficult choices ahead for HUD. I look forward to working with
my colleagues on the Committee and the secretary to continue to
review the president's budget request to ensure that we
adequately fund the initiatives that will aid our citizens who
are most in need while supporting economic development and job
creation throughout the country.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Ms. Lowey.
After the secretary, we will proceed with five-minute
rounds in standard order this morning. With that, Mr.
Secretary, I invite you to present your opening statement. Your
full statement will be in the record. You are recognized for
five minutes.

Secretary Donovan's Opening Statement

Secretary Donovan. Thank you, Chairman Latham, Ranking
Member Pastor, Ranking Member Lowey, members of the Committee.

HOUSING AND COMMUNITIES

Today I would like to discuss how HUD's fiscal year 2014
budget proposal will help grow our economy from the middle
class out by supporting the ongoing recovery in our housing
market and creating ladders of opportunity in communities
across the country. As the president said, our economy is
strongest when we expand opportunity and reward the hard work
of everyone. HUD's budget would do this by supporting the
creation and retention of 620,000 jobs.
We followed four main principles in creating the 2014
budget. The first was to continue support for the resurgent
housing market while encouraging the return of private capital
and rebalancing the nation's housing finance system. Today the
housing market is playing a key role in our economic recovery.
Rising home values lifted 1.7 million families back above water
and home equity grew by more than $1.6 trillion in 2012.

FHA

FHA continues to play an important role in this effort,
ensuring nearly 1.2 million single-family mortgages in 2012.
However, due to the loans insured during the economic crisis,
the fiscal year 2014 budget projects that FHA will need $943
million in support from the Treasury. As you know, any decision
to draw from the Treasury depends on the actual performance of
the fund during the current fiscal year. We have taken
aggressive steps to protect the fund and are already seeing
strong results, even with stress from the troubled reverse
mortgage program and the now banned seller-assisted down
payment programs. In fact, while the gross budget authority HUD
requests in fiscal year 2014 is $47.6 billion, a 7 percent
increase over the fiscal year 2012 enacted level, offsetting
receipts from FHA and Ginnie Mae totaling $14.5 billion bring
the cost to the taxpayer to only $33.1 billion, almost 12
percent below the fiscal year 2012 enacted level. Despite this
progress we continue to take responsible administrative action,
and the fiscal year 2014 budget calls on Congress to further
assist in stabilizing the fund.

IMPROVING HUD'S HOUSING PROGRAMS

The second principle we used in developing our budget, as
you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, was to protect current residents.
Currently, there are 5.4 million families who live in HUD-
assisted housing, a number we have increased by more than
219,000 over the last three years through better management.
These households earn just $12,500 a year on average, and
nearly two-thirds have a member who is elderly or disabled.
Fully funding renewals of this assistance consumes 84 percent
of our proposed budget just to keep current residents in their
homes, support homelessness prevention programs, and provide
basic maintenance to public housing.

BUILDING ON EXISTING PARTNERSHIPS

The third principle we followed was to build on existing
partnerships, helping to create ladders of opportunity while
embracing smart, effective, efficient government. As the
president said in his state of the union address, in too many
hard-hit communities the life chances of a child are determined
not by her talents but by her ZIP code. The promise zones
proposed by the president expand investments by HUD, the
Departments of Education and Justice, and other agencies, while
coordinating and streamlining this work to maximize our impact
and reduce cost. The $400 million we have requested for our
Choice Neighborhoods program represents a significant increase
that will allow us to transform public and assisted housing in
our hardest hit neighborhoods and ensure our children are
prepared for the 21st century economy.
Building on the success of three rounds of Neighborhood
Stabilization Program funding, a $200 million competitive
Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative within our Community
Development Block Grant program will address the needs of
neighborhoods that continue to suffer the negative effects of
abandonment and foreclosure of privately-owned housing.
We have also proposed reorganizing the Office of
Sustainable Housing and Communities and relocating it within
the Community Planning and Development Office as a direct
result of feedback from this Committee. This new Office of
Economic Resilience would offer 75 million in integrated
planning and investment grants that support local investments
in infrastructure and other development to create jobs and
build diverse resilient economies.

REDUCING REGULATORY BARRIERS

The final principle we used in creating this budget was to
increase sufficiency, reduce regulatory burdens, and provide
flexibility to our partners, allowing them to better manage
resources.
I look forward to working with Congress to enact the
Section 8 reforms proposed in our budget which would save
approximately $2.8 billion over the next five years and
streamline outdated statutes governing our public and assisted
housing. Expanding initiatives like the Rental Assistance
Demonstration and the Moving to Work program will allow more
public housing authorities the flexibility to pilot innovative
strategies that will better serve residents and save taxpayers
money.
This budget also continues the Transformation Initiative,
allowing us to propose increased investment in programs we know
work and stop funding the ones that do not. And to hold our
partners accountable for the funding they receive. Perhaps the
best example of this approach is found in Opening Doors, the
administration's plan to end homelessness, which has
dramatically reduced chronic and veterans' homelessness over
the last two years. Because we know these programs save lives
as well as taxpayer dollars, our budget proposes 10,000 new HUD
VASH vouchers, and a significant increase in our homelessness
assistance grants.
Unfortunately, sequestration seriously threatens our
ability to serve families, communities, and veterans across the
nation with hundreds of thousands likely to lose the assistance
we have worked so hard to preserve. While we are attempting to
reduce these impacts, there is simply no way to prevent serious
damage this year or the resulting consequences for fiscal year
2014 unless sequestration is reversed with a Balanced Deficit
Reduction Plan proposed by the president.
I look forward to working with you, both on the fiscal year
2014 budget and on reversing the harmful cuts imposed by
sequestration. Thanks for the opportunity to testify today. I
look forward to your questions.
Mr. Latham. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
As you mentioned, HUD's budget anticipates it will use its
permanent, indefinite authority to access $943 million from the
Treasury to reserve against future losses in the FHA portfolio.
And while HUD is taking steps to stabilize the broader
portfolio, including five premium increases, little has been
done to stabilize the HECM program, which is projecting losses
and entirely offsets any surplus reserves from the forward
mortgage market.

FHA REFORMS

In the narrative portion of the budget, you mention
additional steps to shore up your losses, but these fall under
the authorizers' jurisdiction. These reforms would decrease the
chances of having to use the permanent indefinite authority in
the future. Can you tell us what progress you have made with
the authorizers as far as these reforms to strengthen FHA
programs and to limit the need for these funds?
Secretary Donovan. Absolutely. First of all, I think you
make a very important point, that if you look at the new
business that we are making and even the entire book of the
standard single-family programs and you were to look separately
at the reverse mortgage program, the fund would actually be in
a $4 billion positive position rather than in the negative $940
million. So the reverse mortgage program alone is a critical
element of what we need to do.
We did take steps a few years ago to create a new option
under the reverse mortgage program called the Saver. For a
range of reasons I will not bore you with today, that program
did not have as much take-up as we expected. Many of these were
capital markets related, but the bottom-line was that forced us
to take the step of actually consolidating, so essentially
stopping the full draw program that was causing the most
damage, and not allow any new loans under that program pending
broader reforms.
And so I think the most critical authority we are asking
for from the authorizers is instead of having to go through the
full notice and comment rulemaking process which might take 18
months or so, to allow us through Mortgage E-Letter to make
important reforms that I think we broadly agree on to the
reverse mortgage program quickly. If we are not able to do that
this year, we will have to take more dramatic steps on pricing
and other things that will both protect the fund but I also
fear could have negative impacts on seniors. So it is critical
that we get this done before the end of the fiscal year.
I have reached out and we are working with the authorizers.
As you know, we got a vote that was broadly bipartisan on a FHA
reform bill last year. I am hopeful that we can have the same
progress in the House, but I have already reached out to
Chairman Hensarling, to the ranking member, to make sure that
we are moving quickly on that. And certainly, we are actively
involved in discussions right now.
The other changes that are most important would--because we
are making significant money on new loans, is to help us better
collect and make better returns on older loans that are causing
so much of the damage. So particularly increasing our
enforcement authorities is a critical step that we need to
take, and we do have four specific proposals in the budget on
enhancing our ability to increase returns on those older loans.

AUTHORIZING LEGISLATION

Mr. Latham. Do they require authorizers to act on those?
Secretary Donovan. Those four, yes, they would. But I will
say there are many steps that we can and are taking, short of
getting authorizing legislation, we have instituted loan sales
and ramped them up dramatically, which has increased our
returns substantially on those older loans. It is a more
efficient way to dispose of certain loans. We are in the
process of issuing guidance on short sales that will help both
minimize losses to the funds and allow families to move on if
they are not going to be able to stay in their homes. And so
there are a set of other steps we can and are taking, but we do
believe that these six reforms--two on HECM, four on
Enforcement--are absolutely critical to get done. And I pledge
to you we will work as hard as we can to get those done with
the authorizers.
Mr. Latham. Have you made formal legislative proposals to
the authorizers?
Secretary Donovan. We have.
Mr. Latham. In language?
Secretary Donovan. In language. I would say one of my
concerns is that there is debate about the future of the
housing finance system, as there should be. We believe strongly
there ought to be reform of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. And
there ought to be reforms to FHA that are done in concert with
that in terms of our loan limits and other steps. But I think
it is very important that we move quickly on these steps to
shore up the fund and not delay those with the broader
legislation that might move on housing finance reform. So we
are urging all of your colleagues on the authorizing side to
help us move quickly on FHA reform that helps the fund and
leave some of the broader mission questions for legislation
that can be done in concert with changes to Fannie and Freddie.
Mr. Latham. I see my time has expired. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like some clarification on the CDBG and the
Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative. While the overall number
for the CDBG grant program is about the same as last year's
budget request, the funding request for the formula grant to
cities, counties, and states is at the lowest level since 1976.
This lower level is due to the creation of the $20 million
Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative within the CDBG program
that you have proposed.
I believe it was two years ago that you and I visited a
number of--at least several neighborhoods that had the
Neighborhood Stabilization Program and very successful, and we
saw families getting the keys to homes that had been rehabbed,
and obviously, the families had been counseled and they
qualified and they were in new homes that were lost when we had
the housing problems. Now, how is this program, this new
initiative different than the housing program that we saw that
was initiated in 2008?

NEIGHBORHOOD STABILIZATION INITIATIVE

Secretary Donovan. So this program builds on the success of
Neighborhood Stabilization. We do not consider it a new
initiative because we have now, through $7 billion, three
rounds of Neighborhood Stabilization, which are effectively at
an end now. We have seen over 100,000 properties that are
renovated or rebuilt or demolished, frankly, where that is the
best outcome, and we have created about 85,000 jobs. We have
also--and this is why we felt this was an important proposal--
what we have seen is not just the job creation that you might
traditionally get through CDBG, we have also seen in 75 percent
of the neighborhoods where we have invested this money, vacancy
rates are down and home prices are rising relative to
surrounding communities. And what does that mean? You not only
get the jobs directly from construction, but you get--because
homeowners are doing better in those neighborhoods, increased
consumer spending, stronger economies surrounding that for
other reasons as well.
So we are in the position, and this goes back to--if we are
going to prioritize the 84 percent of the money in the HUD
budget to keep existing families in their homes, the pressure
on our other programs is going to be intense. We are going to
have to make very difficult decisions. Do I believe that CDBG
and HOME should be increased from their current levels?
Absolutely. But I also felt when we were looking at having to
make difficult choices specifically on CDBG, we felt $200
million directed to this Neighborhood Stabilization Initiative
would get us, first, better acceleration of the housing
recovery that we are seeing, and also more job creation than we
would by keeping that $200 million just in the CDBG formula
program.
So it is a difficult decision. I understand the concerns
that you and the chairman express about this. And I would love
to be able to do both, but when we are making difficult choices
we felt this $200 million, knowing what we now know about the
success of Neighborhood Stabilization, is a good investment and
builds on it.
The last thing I would just say, we are trying to leverage
the power of our 108 loans in CDBG. That is why we have put
them together. As you know, 108 is a program to leverage
private capital that can be brought in through a loan guarantee
in CDBG. We believe that the $200 million plus the power--we
are proposing to double 108 capacity in CDBG--could bring not
just $200 million but potentially billions of dollars in
private capital to leverage that that could further increase
the job creation through this initiative.
Mr. Pastor. Well, CDBG is very popular with local
governments, as you well know.
Secretary Donovan. For good reason. I ran the largest CDBG
program in the country before coming here.
Mr. Pastor. So how do you envision this neighborhood
initiative? Is it going to be part of the decision-making for
the mayors and county commissioners and the governors in some
cases to--as they consider the blight in their community, that
they will look at this imitative? Because right now they can
address some of these issues with the CDBG money as it comes
into the local jurisdictions. I mean, how is it going to work
with the local politicians in making CDBG decisions?

COMPETITIVE FUNDING

Secretary Donovan. So we would expect to run a competition
that would be targeted at the places that have the greatest
need. As you know from your own district, certain parts of the
country were hit harder than others, and while we have made
great progress in the housing market, we still have a series of
neighborhoods and communities around the country that are
really still suffering from the housing crisis. And so we would
run a competition. We would target it to those places. Again, I
understand that there is concern about not having as much CDBG
formula money, but we believe that by targeting that $200
million to the places that are still hurting the most,
requiring through a competition that that be leveraged
substantially with private funds, that we could end up getting
more job creation and more acceleration of our housing recovery
through using that $200 million for Neighborhood Stabilization.
Mr. Pastor. Jim, just a short question, if I may.
Have you determined already the 20 competitive sites that
you would direct this money to?
Secretary Donovan. We have not. And even the idea that it
would be 20 is not set at this point. We would obviously be
willing to work closely with the Committee to try to shape this
in terms of eligibility and need. With Neighborhood
Stabilization written in the legislation was a series of
criteria for targeting that money, so we would love to work
with you on how exactly to target it.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Do you have any communities in mind, Mr.
Pastor?
Mr. Pastor. Well, there are about three or four.
Mr. Latham. Ms. Granger.
Ms. Granger. Thank you.
I would like to talk to you about the Sustainable Community
Investment grant program. One of my constituents in North
Texas, the North Central Texas Council of Governments, is
currently using a grant award to address regional development
planning issues, especially as they relate to Fort Worth and
Tarrant County. The Livable Military Communities project will
help develop a comprehensive plan for local planning issues. We
have a large base that is based in a small city, and they do
not have the staff and the funds to do it effectively. So I
would like to know how this type of work will be continued
beyond the grants that were issued in the previous year,
particularly in areas that did not receive a Sustainable
Community grant. And it is my understanding this program will
include grant funding for implementation costs related to
recommendations by the grant recipients. What criteria will HUD
be using in prioritizing communities that will undertake in
these planning efforts?

REGIONAL PLANNING ISSUES

Secretary Donovan. So first of all, I would just say we are
very encouraged by the work that is being done in your district
on this. It is exactly the kind of regional focus we like to
see. And the idea that it is focused on a local issue of great
importance--not just to you, to the community--but to make the
community a better place for military families to allow them
not just to lower their housing costs but also to lower their
transportation costs and create neighborhoods that are going to
provide more jobs for the community. So I think it is a great
example of what we are trying to achieve with this effort.
Specifically, what we are proposing is $75 million. And one
of the changes we are proposing this year based on feedback
from the Committee is to, going forward, focus more on
requiring implementation strategies so that we know these plans
are not going to sit on a shelf but they are actually going to
move toward implementation. Obviously, if we do not get
funding--the last two years we have not gotten funding for
these planning grants--we are not going to be able to do that
going forward. So obviously getting that done. We also are
going to require a greater focus on job creation and economic
development going forward. I think the example in your district
has done that but we want to make sure that all of the grants
are maximizing job creation.
The other thing I would say that is important here
specifically for your community, one of the things that we are
working on is a preferred status for communities that have won
these planning and implementation grants, to be able to get
access to the funding they need for implementation. In other
words, if what is necessary to carry this out would be
infrastructure investment, whether it is through bus, rapid
transit, road repairs or construction, we would create a
preference in the Transportation Department, HUD, and other
funding programs so that this grantee would be able to come in
and get a head start, if you will, on the implementation
funding that is necessary. That is something we have already
started in HUD programs, and we will be rolling out soon with
the Department of Transportation, EPA, and other infrastructure
agencies, that effort.
Ms. Granger. Good. Because you are right. They will just
sit on a shelf and not be used.
Let me ask another question about this program. In your
agency request you have the Sustainable Communities Investment
program relocated to the Office of Economic Resilience. Can you
explain the reasoning for the move?

SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITIES INVESTMENT PROGRAM

Secretary Donovan. This is directly based on conversations
that we have had with this Committee. One of the concerns that
we heard is how does this really work with the main block grant
programs? And so one of the things we are requiring of grantees
is that they have some skin in the game by bringing not just
their community development block grant and home funding, but
also bringing private capital. We also felt that by bringing
these together, frankly, we would create a more efficient
organizational structure and potentially save dollars within
HUD's budget by consolidating the program. The change in name
is really focused on this emphasis on job creation; that every
one of these plans has to demonstrate clearly where the job
creation and the savings are that it is producing.
Ms. Granger. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Ms. Granger.
Ms. Lowey.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
Under the supplemental, grantees must abide by a 24-month
expenditure deadline for federal grants on critical recovery
and Mezoian C projects. Considering the depletion of resources
across the executive branch because of the sequester and the
environmental reviews and regulatory requirements that must be
met before construction begins, I am extremely concerned that
some of the big infrastructure projects, such as housing
development, subway repairs, water treatment plants, will not
be built or will be built poorly to meet the deadline.
Now, you are the leader of the Sandy Task Force. I would be
interested to know if you are planning to work with OMB to
grant waivers since this is an issue shared by a number of
departments. CDBG funds are also subject to this 24-month
expenditure deadline. How are you going to work with grantees
to structure the release of CDBG funds so that projects which
will take longer than two years will be undertaken by the
grantee? And can you deal with this issue by granting waivers
or is congressional action necessary to fully resolve this
issue? But it is a real problem that has been brought to my
attention.

24-MONTH EXPENDITURE DEADLINE

Secretary Donovan. So first of all, the short answer is
yes, we have the authority to grant waivers, and we do not need
Congress to further act to be able to do that. What I would say
overall, and this is shaped very much by my experience on the
Gulf Coast. As you know, HUD has been deeply involved in the
recovery of the Gulf Coast from Katrina and from other
hurricanes--Ike, Gustav, et cetera. And you know, frankly, in
too many cases we have seen that the money has not moved
quickly enough to help people recover, and there has not been
sufficient urgency and discipline imposed by the Federal
government on doing that.
So we felt strongly, and we worked with Congress. For the
first time ever there is this 24-month requirement in there,
and I was a supporter of that. And we have seen through our
experience in the Recovery Act that by setting deadlines,
holding grantees' feet to the fire, we actually do get better
performance. And most importantly, quickly help to families and
communities.
Having said that, you are absolutely right that there are
certain types of projects, large-scale infrastructure,
resilience, mitigation projects, that will not be able to meet
a 24-month deadlines. We have begun a detailed process with OMB
and the grantees to look at certain types of investments and to
create a waiver process that would allow not, you know, with a
lot of red tape, but up front here are the categories where we
are going to be willing to waive it and to allow agencies and
grantees to come in and have sort of preapproved authority if
certain conditions are met for those to go beyond the 24 months
and to establish more reasonable deadlines for those kind of
projects. But we do believe that the large majority of
projects--housing redevelopment, rebuilding small businesses,
getting boardwalk back on the shore--all of these are types of
projects where we ought to be able to meet the 24-month
deadline. And for the ones where we should be able to, we will
keep that timeline.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, by my personal privilege, we have the mayor of
Lawton, Oklahoma standing up back there. That is my second
largest city and fourth largest in the state of Oklahoma, home
of the Field Artillery, and civic leaders in Tulsa where my
colleague, Chairman Granger visited to be honored by the
Comanche Nation for her work on their--the Navajos think they
were the first code talkers but it was really the Comanches.
Kay helped get that straightened out, so she was honored.
Mr. Pastor. There is still debate on that.
Mr. Cole. Pardon?
Mr. Pastor. There is still debate on that.
Mr. Cole. Well, not really. I will let you take that up
personally with the Comanches.
If I could, Mr. Secretary, and I am new to this Committee
and I wanted to bring up a couple of matters related to Indian
housing questions that I have. Years ago, before I was in
Congress, I sat on a bank board, a tribally-owned bank, and
probably is the largest single originator of Section 184 Loans
for Native Americans, not just in Oklahoma but really all
across Indian country. And they tell me that there has been--
they have twice had funds cut off in the last few years where
we basically just ran out of money with almost no notice
whatsoever and they had a lot of loans in process. Literally,
people who had left their homes, you know, counting on
getting--this had been preapproved but we just ran out of money
and they had no notification and no ability to help people that
they might have kept where they were at. So this has been a
matter of a great deal of concern to them.
Can you tell me, are you aware of the problem and what, if
anything, are we doing to make sure that does not happen again?

CREDIT SUBSIDY SHORTFALL

Secretary Donovan. Absolutely. And this is a challenge we
have in a number of our loan programs, not just the 184
program. But basically what happened was that we have, through
the appropriations bill, credit, subsidy, and commitment limits
for how much business basically we can do in each of these
programs. The amount of business that we had during the first
months of this year exceeded our expectations and basically at
the end of February we ran out of credit--so-called credit
subsidy. And there was about a month where we could not approve
new commitments. We went ahead and closed ones that we had
already authorized, but we could not do new ones. We worked
with the Committee to, in the continuing resolution, get an
anomaly that added, I think, $12 million in new credit subsidy
that it would allow us to move forward, and we do believe that
is sufficient for the rest of the year.
Mr. Cole. That helped, but had we not had a CR, which was
just, you know, we were sort of fortunate that that vehicle was
coming along, you know, we would have left a lot of people
hanging.
Secretary Donovan. Honestly, we have had this experience in
our other programs in the past where we have had to get
standalone legislation done. And I would say if we do not get
standalone legislation for our multifamily and health care
programs, we are going to have the same exact problem in mid-
August. And here is what concerns me the most about this. That
is a $5 billion increase, not in credit subsidy but in
commitment authority for our multifamily programs. If we do not
get that, we think we will lose 22,000 jobs that are being
created by these new either hospitals, multifamily
developments. We also would have fewer refinances that would
happen. These are making--because of record low interest rates
they are making our fund safer for the taxpayer by doing the
refinancing. And on the multifamily programs we actually make
money. So there is $200 million that the taxpayer would lose
out on if we had to shut down those programs in mid-August. So
this is not something that is unique to the Section 184
program. It is something that we have in the past been able to
work well with Congress on, but obviously, getting that
legislation through, as you said on the CR, was absolutely
critical. And we are going to have the same challenge going
forward on our multifamily and health care programs later this
year if we do not get legislative relief.
Mr. Cole. Well, I would like to work with you on that, and
frankly see what we can do to maybe be a little bit more
precise in our estimates so that, again, we can get the lender
a little bit of advanced notice because we literally had a lot
of families that were adversely impacted, you know, not
deliberately by the lender. They are the point of contact so
they take the grief.
Secretary Donovan. I completely understand.
Mr. Cole. Okay. I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Cole.
Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning, Mr.
Secretary.
Secretary Donovan. Good morning.
Mr. Quigley. Secretary, as you know, a lot of the agencies
and foundations, organizations that deal with HIV/AIDS are in
my district. Many of them are concerned about is the Department
looking or considering consolidating HOPWA into the Homeless
Assistance program? Whenever something like this happens there
is a concern that the Agency loses focus or initiative or
emphasis on that particular issue. Can you run through the
Agency's thinking about this and where that process is?

COMBINING HOPWA AND HOMELESS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM

Secretary Donovan. And let me be very clear, Congressman.
What I am talking about here is the staffing and oversight of
the program within HUD; not the programmatic dollars
themselves. We have proposed in the 2014 budget to fully fund
the HOPWA program. In fact, every year in very difficult fiscal
circumstances, the president has proposed full funding for the
HOPWA program, and he will continue to defend the program as a
very important investment.
But we are planning to move forward with bringing together
the staffing for the HOPWA program with our other special needs
housing programs. Part of that, frankly, is just the fiscal
challenges that we have under sequestration, and we have to
look for efficiencies everywhere we can.
But there is also a programmatic reason to do that. As the
epidemic has evolved, what we have seen is that more and more
people that are struggling with HIV and AIDS are also folk who
are at imminent risk or are actually already homeless. And what
we want to do is find ways that we can better align these
investments. Again, we are not proposing to consolidate the
programs, but we are looking to better align the work that is
being done on the ground with families and individuals with HIV
and AIDS with the work that we are doing around homelessness.
And we think we will actually get better results by doing that
programmatically, and that is one of the reasons, along with
the fiscal challenge we have, to try to align the staffing and
the oversight of these programs.
Mr. Quigley. Now, as Cook County commissioner I learned all
too well how important housing was for the care issues for
people with HIV/AIDS.
Secretary Donovan. Absolutely.
Mr. Quigley. And I would be glad to work with you to
maintain those efforts.
In your testimony you mentioned loan limits, a particular
area of frustration for me because I understand the concept. I
understand why they were there. But what I appreciate your help
with is the fact that the borders, the boundaries are not in
particular accordance with the financial reality. So sometimes
an area will be skewed far below what it should be,
dramatically hurting housing possibilities in that area, and
hurting the housing market. So as a result, conforming loan
limits in parts of a district like mine are far below where
they should be and it curtails activity. Could you comment on
that or what we can do to try to at least address some of those
issues?

RAISE FHA LOAN LIMITS

Secretary Donovan. Yes. So I do believe, the Administration
believes, as I said in my testimony, that we have to continue
to find ways to shrink the government's footprint. We made
progress on that. FHA's market share has been shrinking. It is
back to roughly where it was in 2000. But we still have further
steps that we need to take on that front. And ultimately, we
believe that Congress ought to allow FHA's loan limits to go
back to the level that they were before the HERA legislation
raised them to about $730,000 in some places.
Having said that, I recognize that that is a national
question; that there are particular districts where the
boundaries of how we set loan limits are not particularly
aligned with the realities of the housing market. I saw this in
New York City, and often we are going on metropolitan scale
decisions. So what I would suggest is we would be happy to
follow up with you and have specific conversations about the
areas that you are concerned about and to see whether there is
something that we can do to better align the boundaries that we
work with with the realities of the housing market.
Mr. Quigley. And I appreciate that.
In closing, Mr. Chairman, what I have learned here in just
a short period of time on this Committee is that secretaries
have a way of reminding us that a lot of this bad legislation
is our fault. I get it. But there are some things, and I think
you just pointed to one of them, where the secretaries can act
unilaterally and change some of this that is creating a
hardship.
Secretary Donovan. On the specific boundaries, we do have
some--not complete flexibility, but I do have some, and we
ought to talk about that.
Mr. Quigley. Very good. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time has expired. I do not know
if you have anything to do with the bridge in Washington, but
if we could have Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. He is going to dodge that subject
today.
Mr. Latham. Ms. Herrera Beutler is recognized.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I actually wanted to kind of go back to the last part of
the answer you gave to Mr. Cole, because that was something I
have been hearing a lot about was the commitment authority and
concerns, whether it is hospitals or multifamily housing, that
the commitment authority is going to be insufficient.
I guess I did not understand that that is something you may
have known about prior to this CR, but this is something we
need to fix. You cannot just start in the middle of something
like this significant and then, oh, we ran out of money,
especially considering, from what I understand, that the
program kind of covers itself, at least as far as the
multifamily housing piece is concerned. Can you speak to that a
little bit more?

INCREASE COMMITMENT AUTHORITY

Secretary Donovan. It does. And even just that extra--
currently, we have $25 billion in commitment authority. We are
asking to go up to $30 billion, just that extra $500 million--
that extra $5 billion, sorry, in commitment authority would
return about $200 million to the Federal government. So the new
loans, we think the sort of profits, if you will, on those are
about $200 million.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So for the extra $5 billion in
authority you will get another $200 million?
Secretary Donovan. We would earn for the taxpayer about
$200 million.
And I will say, this is something that we did try to get
into the CR. I think there are broader concerns that stopped it
around this issue I just raised of what is the government's
footprint, should we be shrinking FHA's footprint? As you have
heard, I do believe over the longer term that we should do
that. I think this is the wrong way to do it by stopping us.
These are literally projects ready to go. Shovel-ready as they
say. And we are talking about 22,000 jobs that would not be
created just with that $5 billion in commitment authority.
And I would also say this is not an issue that only affects
particular districts. One thing I would point to, critical
access hospitals in rural areas are a substantial part of our
investment in our hospital program. Small multifamily
properties are often the beneficiary. We know in Ms. Granger's
district, for example, Texas is a place that is significantly
dependent on investments from this program.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So if it were not an anomaly and it
was standalone legislation or the idea of it, would it then bag
a zero or negative--I mean, would it have a negligible CBO
score? Can you guestimate on that?
Secretary Donovan. The score would be positive because of
the money that we are making on these new loans.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Wow.
Secretary Donovan. So, now, I am not sure that it would be
scored and we would have to work, but if it is scored by CBO it
would have a positive score because it does return.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And it is not that the commitment--it
is not that these things are going to be built, it is the
commitment authority. It is not that they have not been----
Secretary Donovan. All this says----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. It is in the pipeline already; is
that--am I understanding that right?
Secretary Donovan. Working in the pipeline, we are well
along. They have presented architectural plans to us. They have
negotiated with their contractor. I mean, these are not sort of
glimmers in the eye of developers going forward.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. It is process across country?
Secretary Donovan. Real projects. We could show you the
holes in the ground. We could show you the plans. We could, you
know, you can meet the contractors that are ready to have
plumbers and other folks start on the jobs. And it is 22,000 of
them.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. That is a pretty big deal.
Can I switch topics on you? I think I still have a little
bit of time.
Section 8 project-based Rental Assistance Program. I have
no idea. Everybody keeps using the section and law where
everything is from. I am not that good yet.
The budget proposal indicates that $10.2 billion requests
will enable the 12 months of funding, but I have been told, and
we keep hearing, whether it is sequestration or flat funding
for our fiscal year 2013, we are actually short what is
expected. Can you tell us if the $10.2 billion request for 2014
will actually fund the contracts for a full 12 months?

PBRA SHORTFALL

Secretary Donovan. It is sufficient to fully fund these
project-based rental assistance contracts. And I want to be
clear. This is over a million apartments around the country, a
million families. It is sufficient assuming that the
president's budget proposal, which is what this is part of,
obviously, is adopted. And so to be clear, the president has
proposed a way to reverse sequestration while still reducing
our overall budget by $1.8 trillion. If sequestration remains,
we will be, even with our request, $1.2 billion short in this
project-based rental assistance account in 2014. What that
means is that we would have to short-fund contracts. There
would not be sufficient money for a full year of funding. And
that is something that we are very concerned about.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. My time is up. We will circle back
around. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, good to
see you again.
Secretary Donovan. You, too.
Mr. Ryan. I will try to get through a couple questions
here.
Hardest hit funds? I am working with Congressman Joyce and
Congresswoman Kaptur about trying to see how some of these
funds can be used for demolition. How do you feel about that?

DEMOLITIONS AND TARP FUNDS

Secretary Donovan. I am well aware of these efforts. We
have actually hosted meetings at the White House between HUD,
Treasury, the National Economic Council. And I am fully
supportive of that flexibility. Ultimately, this is a legal
question of what can--the hardest hit funds, they are part of
TARP. What they can be used for. And so we are working actively
to try to be as creative as we can in terms of how these could
be used.
Mr. Ryan. Great. Okay. We will look forward to working with
you on that.
Secretary Donovan. I would also say that the Neighborhood
Stabilization Initiative that we have proposed as part of CDBG
would give significant ability to be able to do demolition, to
fund land banks, to do other things that I know are of
particular importance to you and to others on the Committee.
Mr. Ryan. Yeah. I mean, we have had some success with a lot
of this.
Secretary Donovan. A great deal of success.
Mr. Ryan. In Northeast Ohio, and I think that was the
original intent, was the older industrial cities, that have a
lot going on. It is just amazing. You know, I use the example
all the time in Cleveland, which is not necessarily my
district, but you have the Cleveland Clinic. It is one of the
best health care, you know, operations going in the world. And
one block outside of it is the poorest neighborhood in the
country. And some of these programs have been really
successful.
I just want to ask you one other question or make a
comment. The Neighborhood Stabilization, we had an issue in
Youngstown because when the formula was written it was for folk
who had been affected through the housing crisis in the last
few years. Some of these older communities, like Youngstown and
Akron and Cleveland and some of these others, we have had
chronic foreclosure issues since the collapse of the steel
industry. So there was a process there where we were not
necessarily qualifying for some of the grant money and it
became harder and more hurdles for us to jump over. So I just
want to get that on your radar screen as you are going through
some of these other programs and ideas to make sure that we are
not locking out communities that have had these chronic issues.
Because, as I said, there are a lot of very positive things
going on.
And as we are trying to lure--and that is why I just love a
lot of what you are doing and what the president is pushing--we
are in the process now of luring young people back to these
communities that left 20, 30 years ago--maybe they are not as
young as I think I am still--that want to come back and now
they are seeing downtown revitalization. They are seeing a lot
of the dilapidated homes go down. And that is why I think the
work you are doing is very, very important, and part of an
overall comprehensive economic development agenda that local
communities like ours can tap into. We have got the Additive
Manufacturing Institute that the president is pushing these 15
innovations in, so that is in Youngstown. Plus the Neighborhood
Stabilization we are starting to begin to piece together. That
is why I think these are great programs that the more they get
ramped up, the more economic development is going to happen in
one of the older industrial cities that lifts everybody up in
the process. So I want to thank you for that.
Question on the promise zones. Can you just mention about
them? I am sorry I came in late, but if you could just talk
about those for a second. And again, I wanted to make sure that
with the promise zones, places like Youngstown and Akron do not
somehow locked out because the formula is not written the way
we would be able to benefit from.
Secretary Donovan. So I would say on both these--
Neighborhood Stabilization, as well as the promise zones--we
want to work close with the Committee. The ranking member
mentioned this as well. How exactly we set the formulas are
based on legislative language in the Appropriations Act. So we
want to work closely with you to make sure we get that right.

PROMISE ZONES

Let me talk for a moment just about the promise zones. This
is something the president talked about in the state of the
union address. It is something we all believe in the
administration is deeply important. And I want to be clear.
This is not a new program; this is taking the work that we did
in the first term at HUD, Department of Education, at Justice,
Health and Human Services--that is focused on our most
challenged neighborhoods and is proposing to significantly
increase those investments for the work we are doing at HUD, a
Choice Neighborhoods investment up to $400 million. Focusing
things like Neighborhood Stabilization into those communities.
Focusing the work that we are doing through our rental
assistance demonstration in those communities.
But I would also say one of the things that we have learned
in talking to mayors and others in community organizations,
businesses in these communities, is that too often these
programs can be, you know, siloed and, well, one department
does not know what the other department is doing on these. So
the idea of promise zones is to link all of these together and
to have a single federal team on the ground in these
communities, working to make sure that we coordinate and
improve the way these investments are being made together, both
in urban and rural communities.
USDA is deeply involved through their strike force effort
to make sure that we are doing it in rural communities as well.
And we would have a set-aside for rural communities as well.
Mr. Ryan. If I could just mention in 10 seconds that having
Ag involved, too, in the urban programs, because the urban Ag
people are jonesing to get more urban Ag in their communities,
and it ties into edible classrooms and a more comprehensive
plan. So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Ryan.
We have completed the first round here, but I want to go
back to the indefinite authority with Treasury, the $943
million. And I think that estimate was February, that that is
what the number was going to be. And the actual amount you will
need I guess will be determined September 30th. What chance is
there of it being less than that? Or do we know?

LOAN VALUE ESTIMATE

Secretary Donovan. I wish I had a crystal ball on that.
What I can tell you, last year, as you remember, Mr. Chairman,
we did have a negative estimate in the budget, about just under
$700 million. And we were able to end the year with about a $3
billion surplus. Part of this is just loan volume. And
honestly, I cannot tell you whether we are going to exceed our
loan value estimate. Part of it is the improvements that we are
making, not just through premium increases but other steps that
could help us there as well.
I would say that the $943 million was our best guess, our
best estimate at that point, and I am--honestly, I am concerned
without putting a percentage chance on it, that we will need to
draw at the end of the year, given what we know at this point.
But I am also not going to give up until, you know, a day
before the end of the fiscal year because I do want to make
sure we are doing everything we can. And these legislative
proposals that we have are a piece of what we can do to make
sure we minimize the chances.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Getting back to HECM, you mentioned that
you would like the authority to issue mortgaging letters; to
undertake several reforms at HECM as soon as possible, such as
restricting lump sum payments and requiring financial
assessments and requiring borrowers to escrow taxes and
insurance. In the meantime, HUD would implement a full
rulemaking process on the issues.
Have you begun that rulemaking process? When do you plan to
publish the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking?

HECM REFORMS

Secretary Donovan. Obviously, we would prefer not to have
to do the full rulemaking, but we have begun drafting the
details. July, we would be prepared to formally begin the
rulemaking process if necessary, but I also want to be clear.
We have taken a series of steps, even short of the rulemaking;
instituted new counseling procedures; new steps on taxes and
insurance, even though we cannot currently require the escrow
without the rulemaking. They have, both in our counseling and
our work with lenders, made sure that they are more focused on
this and the way that they are managing those. So there is a
range of steps that we can and have taken. And, in fact, we
have seen better performance. We have cut the faults about in
half for the 2011 too on an applies to applies basis. So we do
think that some of those steps we have taken are having a
positive effect. But that does not short circuit the need for
this authority to do the changes without full notice and
comment rulemaking.
Mr. Latham. When did you become aware of the problems with
HECM? I will ask that first.
Secretary Donovan. So we had concerns right from the
beginning of the administration, which is why we put together
this Saver program. We were hopeful that we would see a more
substantial shift than we did. Part of the problem, again, not
to get in the weeds, is Fannie Mae stopped providing a
secondary market outlet for the reverse mortgage programs,
which meant that we ended up seeing a lot more of the fixed
rate, full draw program, which is the problem. And the other
thing I will say, this is a program that is more sensitive to
what is happening with home prices than any of our other
programs. And so a bit of this was we expected to see home
prices begin to recover earlier. When that did not happen it
produced a much more negative effect on reverse mortgage.
Mr. Latham. Explain why.
Secretary Donovan. Because these are mortgages that tend to
last much longer, and they are also based on the value of the
home. The recoveries are based more on the value of home than
the ability to pay. It is a reverse mortgage, and so it is not
about the ability to pay. It is really all about the home
value.
And therefore, when you see the substantial changes in home
prices that we saw, it tends to drive losses as a percentage
much higher on the reverse mortgage program than you would on
the other programs.
Mr. Latham. Have you foreclosed on any individuals?
Secretary Donovan. Unfortunately, we have. I do not have
the numbers right in front of me. I would be happy to get you--
I think it is something north of 1,000. And a lot of this is
related to property taxes and insurance. It is why this escrow
proposal is absolutely critical. And look, these are enormously
difficult decisions to make--1,200 is the number of
foreclosures that we have seen.
Mr. Latham. All right.
Secretary Donovan. We have also, counsel, this is one of
the reasons why our counseling programs are so important; there
is no other source of funding for counseling for reverse
mortgages other than HUD's counseling budget. We are proposing
a $10 million increase in that budget to $55 million because we
do think particularly for HECM, it is incredibly important that
we have adequate counseling as seniors who are making these
decisions.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, about a month ago we had the IG and GAO in
an Oversight meeting talking about some of the issues that HUD
was being confronted with. And one of the issues was your
computer system and I guess if I was to summarize it--old,
outdated, ineffective system, software, needs to be modernized.
And so the inefficiencies are there. And so reports that are
needed or recordkeeping is probably not at its best. I am sure
probably you have been told that that seems to be the
assessment by your own people.
Secretary Donovan. Not just told; I have seen it myself.
Mr. Pastor. What are you doing in terms of bringing the
system up so that your efficiencies are increased,
modernization is occurring?

IMPROVEMENTS TO HUD'S COMPUTER SYSTEMS

Secretary Donovan. First off, I would say as the new
ranking member on this Committee, I have been very pleased with
the partnership that we have had with this Committee to invest
through our Transformation Initiative and our working capital
fund in technology. I am a big believer that we can do a lot
better on this front, and I think we have begun to make some
real strides.
Just to give you a few examples, our FHA Transformation
Initiatives are really bearing fruit. We are on schedule, on
budget with those efforts. One of the things that we have just
introduced this past quarter is new automated ways to approve
and monitor FHA lenders. Significantly can lower our costs and
improve recoveries for the taxpayer. We are working very hard.
We have put in place a new automated procurement system that is
a substantial improvement over what we were doing before. We
have a next generation management system for our voucher
program.
We are also, I will tell you, looking at places that we can
outsource. We are looking at our financial systems. We felt
that the prior program that would have remade our whole
financial systems with essentially a new system. We took
another look at it and decided that is not the way to go; we
can save more money and do this more quickly by perhaps
outsourcing to another government agency that already has the
capacity to do this. So there is a range of different ways that
we are looking at this. And I have been very pleased with the
partnership on it.
The other thing I would say is we just have too many
systems. And so we have set a specific goal for next year to
reduce the number of systems we have at HUD by 10 percent as a
first step towards further consolidation going forward. So
those are a few examples of what I think is improvement. And if
you talk to GAO and the IG, I think they would agree that we
are making progress on this but we have got a long way to go to
get to the place we need to be.
Mr. Pastor. How would you define ``a long way''?
Secretary Donovan. I think it depends on which of these
systems, but we have what are essentially plans that by the end
of this second term we ought to be in a much better place. So
my long-term vision is four years.
Mr. Pastor. This is cyber security week here at the House,
and one of the problems that we will be discussing is privacy
and within your system you have a lot of personal data of the
people you are assisting at Housing.
Secretary Donovan. Absolutely.
Mr. Pastor. And loans. You have all that information. And
everybody thinks that cyber security only concerns terrorist
acts and that type of--the need for that type of security. But
in many cases it is just people who are hacking and wanted to
have information and just are challenged by systems. As you
design your systems and you modernize and all that, what are
you doing? Just make sure that the privacy of the clients is
being secured.

CYBER SECURITY

Secretary Donovan. It is a great question. It is both
privacy of the folks that we serve. Obviously, we are looking
at their incomes. There are a whole range of information that
is very private. Their health status in many cases. But also
HUD employees as well. And protecting that information.
This is something that my deputy secretary has really taken
on as an agency-wide project. We put in place specific plans to
protect either by removing, for example, social security
numbers and other information that we collected but did not
need, or where we do need that information to ensure that it is
encrypted and protected. We are about 90 percent of the way
through those plans, and we expect that by the end of the
fiscal year we will be 100 percent complete on instituting
those plans. We will be happy to work with you given your
experience on your other Committees. Happy to work with you in
more detail about the specifics of those.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Ms. Granger.
Ms. Granger. I just have one short question. It has to do
with the Transformation Initiative. Do you think you will need
authorizing legislation on some of the changes you are making?

IT FUNDING

Secretary Donovan. This is something we have worked well
with the Committee on. We do not think it is separate
authorizing legislation. What I would say--and this has been I
think the essence of the sort of conversation debate we have
had with the Committee--we have proposed consistently to build
some flexibility into the Transformation Initiative by saying
allow us to use up to a half a percent of a range of programs
to do this, and in response there is often concern, well, we do
not want to take away money from those programs. And so it has
tended to be a hard dollar number.
What I would say is many of the things that we work on,
whether it is with the housing market--disasters is another
very good example--you cannot plan for exactly what is going to
happen in those. And as an example, in Texas we have had
significant back and forth in work with the state land office
around making sure that we are getting disaster relief from Ike
and Gustav to the right places.
We would not have known at the beginning of the year that
we had those needs, before the disaster struck, but I think if
you go ask the state they would say the technical assistance we
have been able to provide through the transformation issue has
been enormously beneficial, and frankly is going to save a ton
of money on the backend because we are going to make better
choices on how we are using that money. And it is going to be
used faster and more effectively.
So I would just urge that as the Committee considers our
request on the transformation issue, it is not just the amount
of money but the ability to continue to make changes during the
year. We are obviously going to come back in our operating plan
to get your concurrence and to work with you on that, but if we
lock it in at the beginning that it can only be X amount and we
do not have the flexibility to move between accounts during the
year. It hurts our ability to respond to things like Gustav and
Ike in Texas.
Ms. Granger. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Ms. Granger.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would just like to maybe dig a little deeper on the urban
farming approach within the administration. So if you could
just talk about that emphasis within your department and how it
is going and what your new plans are, and maybe how it fits
into the promise zones in urban areas.

URBAN FARMING INITIATIVE

Secretary Donovan. Yeah. This is something that we have
done a significant amount of work on in partnership with USDA
and also some other agencies. I would say that the Neighborhood
Stabilization effort has been one particular way that we have
really been able to support the initiative. Obviously, creating
contiguous parcels where you can do urban farming is a key
piece of this. There is often from my experience also there can
be environmental clean up or other costs associated with it or
building these gardens in a way that has a specific way of
protecting whatever has grown from any contaminants that might
have been in the soil. And so Neighborhood Stabilization has
been a very flexible tool to do the demolition, combined with
CDBG and some other funding sources.
The other thing I would say though that probably does not
get as much attention is the work that we have done in what we
are proposing to call our Office of Economic Resilience to do
planning that would connect. We have seen a number of grantees
who believe, as you do, that this is a big source of
opportunity for jobs. In communities where frankly population
density has shrunk over decades, and to do planning that would
connect, well, who are actually going to be producing this? Who
are the farmers and other networks that you can connect to? And
also, what are the distribution channels for this food? Because
obviously growing it, producing it is one thing but where it is
actually sold, creating the connections, whether it is to local
markets or more broadly to regional distribution networks is a
very important part.
And one of the things that is unique about these planning
and implementation grants is they really do create regional--
and CDBG does not do this, right? CDBG goes to individual
communities. There is not a source of planning money that is
regional. And you know from your own experience the northeast
Ohio focus that we have had is multicounty, multi-jurisdiction,
and it really is one of the few ways that HUD can fund a
regional economic development plan that would include food
distribution but might include other key steps around urban
farming.
Mr. Ryan. Yeah, no, I think that is really a smart approach
and lays the groundwork for the kind of growth that I think can
come from it.
Also, within the urban farming initiative, one of the
things we are working on now is how do we take, as you are
already working with the Department of Agriculture, how do we
take some of the subsidies that go to big Ag now, and how do we
just take a sliver of those and drive those into co-ops that
may be operating in urban areas so that you have wage issues in
a lot of these cities where people are maybe making $30,000 or
$40,000. And I know this is not an Ag hearing, but I think you,
in your department, would be instrumental in a program like
this to where a family or 10 families or 15 families that
participate in a co-op in an urban area that maybe get some
subsidies for their family at the end of the year for producing
food in a food desert in an urban area and try to get some of
that investment back into the urban areas.
So I think all of this can tie together. And with the
education program where we are starting edible classrooms, so
where these kids can utilize the edible classroom during the
school year but then have this urban gardening experience,
urban farming experience at the end of the day where you tie in
business class to the marketing at the farmers market and on
and on and on and on.
But I want to just thank you for your leadership because I
think you get this in a way that a lot of people do not. And we
would love to just continue to work with you and innovate and
do this in a more creative way. So thank you for everything and
your staff have been terrific, too, along the way.
Secretary Donovan. I appreciate it. I am married to a
landscape architect, so I give her a lot of credit for waking
me up about this.
But I would also say that I think the Fresh Food Financing
initiative that we have put together as an administration is
also a big opportunity here. I am obviously not an expert on
the farm bill and those changes but I do think it is also about
bringing private capital to these kinds of initiatives. And I
think we have done a lot there that we might be able to work
with you as well.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to stay on the subject of Indian housing, but
move to another area, NAHASDA block grants for tribes. And as I
am sure you are aware, we quite often have a lot of unobligated
balances out there. I know this Committee has been very
concerned about that and appropriately so given how difficult
some of the timing or some of the fiscal challenges we have
are.
But I am told, and again, I am new to this so I would
appreciate being educated, I am told that there are a couple of
problems here that lead to this. One is that Indian tribes have
a lot of environmental processes and bureaucratic hoops that
they have to go through before they can actually get the money.
Second, the Department has been sometimes pretty slow in
getting the money out to the tribes. I think that the fiscal
year 2012 money did not come until like February of 2013, that
sort of thing. So can you tell me, one, are there some reforms,
some things we need to do in the process to speed this up from
your standpoint, make it easier to do this; and second, do the
tribes have some sort of unique set of difficulties in actually
expending the funds that you make available, which really are
the backbone of a lot of tribal housing programs in places that
are really very remote and very much in need of what you are
doing? So it is not a critical question. I just want to figure
out how to make these things work better.

TRIBAL HOUSING BLOCK GRANTS

Secretary Donovan. I think it is a combination of issues.
And one, I think we should be very clear that we operate with
these tribes in a nation-to-nation relationship. And so there
is, I think, both legally and programmatically a flexibility
that they are afforded and a sort of limitation on what
enforcement we might take based on that relationship that is
different than our other grantees. And so part of this is where
we do have real challenges about performance and other things.
How do we work with them? And I think that is one piece of this
I would mention that you did not.
But I also would agree part of it is environmental; part of
it honestly is just land ownership, for example, is often very
complicated on tribal lands. And even I have experienced, you
know, frustrations in--I remember meeting a family on one of my
tribal visits that the family was trying to buy their mother's
home and it had taken over a year to get approval to put a lien
on it with the mortgage; right? So there are challenges like
that that are not just environmental as well.
And I do think, you know, to say for HUD, there are things
that we can and should be doing to speed up our own processes.
We have made some progress on that to be able to allocate
faster. There have also been lawsuits and other things that
have held us back from doing it that we are trying to resolve.
But part of this is also--and I think Congresswoman Granger
asked about our Transformation Initiative--providing technical
assistance to some of the tribes with the largest unexpended
balances has been very, very important, both Native Hawaiian is
one example where we have had some challenges at the local
authority. We are working through that with them. The Navajo
tribe, others that we are working with, and we are seeing
acceleration of spending, but it is going to take us, given
some of those unexpended balances, probably a year or two to
work through those.
Mr. Cole. We seem to have a lot of these problem folks in
the Southwest regional office. And again, I am not being
critical of anybody because I do not know, but is there a
bottleneck there or does it just happen to be the concentration
of where you have got a lot of obviously large tribal entities?
Secretary Donovan. I think it is largely. We do not see
differential performance geographically. Such an enormous share
of the funding goes into that southwest area.
Mr. Cole. Okay. Last question. I would just ask--I would
love to get a brief from your office on just the range of
Native American programs that you run and what you are doing
because, again, I am new to this Subcommittee and could use the
education.
Secretary Donovan. NAHASDA is obviously the single largest
and most--and it will require reauthorization. So this is
obviously the Appropriations Committee, but I would just point
out it would be critical to make sure that we get that
reauthorization on a timely basis. We also have a proposal to
deal with mold in Indian country in the budget this year as
part of the Indian Community Development Block Grant. And that
is a major health challenge that we have seen among tribes.
Mr. Cole. And I am sure, Chairman, we would never
appropriate if the authorizers had not authorized; right?
Mr. Pastor. Gentleman, would you yield? Mr. Cole?
Mr. Cole. I am out of time, but certainly.
Mr. Latham. Go ahead, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. On behalf of the Nation of the original code
talkers, we want to thank you for asking this issue. We
appreciate it.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Cole. Let us just let the--read the Empire of the
Summer Moon, and we will let the Comanche--I will send them
Blood and Thunder and we will see who is the tougher.
Mr. Latham. I seem to have lost control.
Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I wanted to--I will ask for a little bit of a clarification
on the end of the last answer and I will reread that question
just because I was not totally following it. But I also--let me
get this other question in and then let you answer how you
choose.
I am very pleased to see HUD is doing the Veterans
Assistance--the VASH vouchers. It is Veterans Affairs
Supportive Housing vouchers--there we go--targeting homeless
veterans. As you know, the program requires a pretty intense
wraparound or service coordination with this population. And I
have heard from some of my local housing authorities that
because of the administrative fees that have been reduced, and
just basically I am having folks tell me it is insufficient.
Some housing authorities are returning the VASH vouchers and
are not able to administer this program.
How is HUD going to put the VASH program on firmer footing
to help achieve the important national goal of ending chronic
veteran housing by 2015?
And then, so you can either start with that one or the last
part, I did not understand--so I was asking about the $10.2
request and whether that is short. And I heard no and yes. So I
heard $10.2 will fund it based on what we are expecting the 12-
month period to be, but then I also heard--is that contingent
on you getting more money? I did not understand that.

IMPACT OF SEQUESTRATION

Secretary Donovan. Let me try to be as clear as possible on
this.
If sequestration is not reversed, the funding that we have
requested for 2014 will be $1.2 billion short in the project-
based----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So you did not ask for what you are
expecting the expenditures to be; you asked for an amount
hoping that also there is an addition of the sequestration?
Secretary Donovan. All of the president's budget is
constructed--he has proposed a way to reverse sequestration.
And he believes that we ought to get a resolution this summer,
hopefully, that would reverse sequestration and put in place a
more balanced deficit reduction plan.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Okay.
Secretary Donovan. So all of the budget, not just HUD's, is
based on that assumption.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. The assumption that sequestration is
reversed?
Secretary Donovan. Is reversed. That is correct. We believe
that is the right policy. It is the right direction to go. And
I will also say that as we were preparing the budget, it was
not clear whether or not sequestration would go into effect. We
were still hoping that we would be able to avoid that. So part
of this----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I have got to call you on that one
because the budget was almost two months late. I mean, we had
dealt with--sequestration had gone into effect, but that----
Secretary Donovan. Sequestration was delayed until the end
of February.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And we got the budget----
Secretary Donovan. We were deep into preparation for the
budget well before then.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I get that. But by the time we
actually got it, sequestration was a known entity. So I do feel
a little concerned because who knows? You know as well as I do.
We have no idea what is going to happen this summer, so I guess
I would say I am a little concerned with having--you made the
request that you are going to be doing contracts with private
entities and they are moving forward with Section 8, knowing
that it is all contingent on getting additional money in there.
Secretary Donovan. I completely agree with you,
Congresswoman. And, in fact, I would say this is only one of a
huge number of concerns I would have if sequestration is not
reversed. Even with changes this Committee made to do an
anomaly around our homeless program, we still have 60,000
homeless folks that are likely to be back out on the streets.
We have 125,000 families that have vouchers that are likely to
lose their housing and be at risk of homelessness. You
mentioned----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I was going to say, now maybe we
should segue to the VASH question.

VASH PROGRAM

Secretary Donovan. To go to the VASH question----this is, I
think, very important because sequestration did not make direct
cuts to veterans programs. VASH was fully preserved. The
problem is the housing authorities that run those programs
depend on fees to be able to basically do the work. And those
fees have now been cut below 70 percent. So they are basically
receiving two-thirds of what they should be receiving.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Fees from you all?
Secretary Donovan. From HUD to run the Section 8 voucher
program. VASH is a form of Section 8 voucher, and we have seen,
last year, before sequestration, there were 12 agencies that
refused these VASH vouchers.
So just think about it. You are a housing agency whose sole
mission is to serve folks with housing. You are saying no to
serving homeless veterans; right?
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Because they did not feel like it was
sufficient.
Secretary Donovan. Because they did not have the money. And
that is 12 last year, which is the highest we have ever had
before sequestration went into effect. We have had already this
year in the first three months, 13 housing authorities turn in
their entire voucher programs. Say to us, ``We just cannot
administer vouchers anymore.'' And that is only 13 in the first
quarter, again, before sequestration went into effect.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And I apologize.
Secretary Donovan. This is one of many enormously harmful
effects of sequestration that I am very concerned about. I hope
we will talk more about that.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for being
here, Secretary.
Secretary Donovan. Welcome to the Committee.
Mr. Joyce. I apologize for being late, and I understand
from the copious notes taken by my legislative director that my
questions were already answered by Congressman Pastor--asked
and answered--and Congressman Ryan. So thank you for your being
here.
Secretary Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Secretary, your budget includes--we talked
about Section 8 reform--a number of reforms aimed at reducing
program costs, as well as administrative burdens on public
housing authorities which you were just talking about. We saw
most of those reforms in last year's budget, and still we have
not seen any movement on a reform bill. Will these reforms be
part of a larger Section 8 reform effort with the authorizing
earlier this year? Or are you looking at fiscal year 2014? Or
is it your expectation that we, on the Appropriations
Committee, do these reforms?

SECTION 8 REFORM LEGISLATION

Secretary Donovan. I hope that is not the path that we need
to take. You know that I reached out to you, Mr. Chairman, and
Ranking Member, a few days before we released the budget. I
also reached out directly to Chairman Hensarling, to the
Ranking Member, and also to make sure that I had conversations
on the Senate side as well. We are very, very focused on trying
to get the Section 8 reform bill done this year within the next
two months. And I do think we are making progress on that.
Mr. Latham. Where?
Secretary Donovan. Excuse me?
Mr. Latham. With who?
Secretary Donovan. I think both on the Senate Side,
Chairman Johnson, and Ranking Member Crapo have shown interest
in doing that. I do think, frankly, what has held us up in the
past. There have been broad agreement. There have been a couple
what I would describe as poison pill types of issues around
immigration, around the Moving to Work program as I would
describe as small in the overall frame of it that we have not
been able to get past. I think we have to be able to try to
push. And I think if I could call in your help and the ranking
members to emphasize the importance of these changes, we are
talking about just from that legislation $383 million in
savings next year.
We have other proposals in the budget that are not in that
reform legislation that we could get done just on an
appropriations basis that would put us over $500 million. But
that legislation, obviously, is incredibly----
Mr. Latham. What can you do without authorization? I mean,
are there other reforms?
Secretary Donovan. We have been taking steps. And just----
Mr. Latham. Regulatory standards?
Secretary Donovan. Absolutely. Streamlining simplification
that we can do.
And if I can just step back for a second. One of the things
that really is most important in driving the costs here are new
units. We have about 150,000 new vouchers over the last four
years. We have talked about VASH, but lots of this comes from
if a public housing development is in terrible condition or a
multifamily, we issue vouchers; right? So lots of that growth
and cost is really new families that are being served or that
may be moving from our other programs.
If you take that out, the growth and costs in rents is
really between 2 and 3 percent each year. That is inflation.
And the fundamental problem is that incomes have been going up
at about 1 percent. So what has happened is not that the costs
of the units are going up that quickly; it is really that we
are at a time when rents have continued to rise but people's
incomes are not. And so that is meant that HUD's share of the
cost has gone up by 3 to 4 percent. And we have very detailed
information on this that we would love to share with you.
Mr. Latham. So what can you do administratively to solve
it?
Secretary Donovan. So I will give you an example. We
changed the cost increase factor for our project-based programs
in a way that significantly reduced the increase in costs. We
have begun to take back the reserve balances that are beyond
what these buildings need to do renovation and maintenance, and
we have reinvested those in other programs. So we have a whole
series of changes that we have made administratively. We also
believe that energy efficiency is a real opportunity here and
we are looking at ways to lower the cost. We spend billions of
dollars on utilities each year. Part of it is sub-metering so
that residents have the incentive to lower their own utility
consumption. Part of it is just smart investments as we are
replacing boilers and other things to do high efficiency. Other
things like that have an enormous potential to lower our costs
in the long run. We will not see as much next year, so
legislation can do more next year, but this multiyear can help
us significantly. And a lot of that we can do administratively
and do not need legislation on.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. I want to follow up on my colleague's question,
Ms. Herrera Beutler.
If public housing authorities are turning back vouches due
to sequestration and inability to continue their administrative
responsibilities, so that means that next year's renewal
baseline, which is based on this year's leasing will really be
affected. And as you look to next year and the baseline being
affected, it is going to cost some major problems in our whole
public housing efforts.
Secretary Donovan. Absolutely. And let me try to be
specific on the voucher program. We think it is about 125,000
families. Most of that comes from families that are on a
waiting list today, would have gotten a voucher over the next
few months, and instead are going to end up sitting on that
waiting list, maybe becoming homeless depending on what their
situation is, but that in some ways is the least visible loss
of units because it is a family that is not already in a home
that is going to be kicked out.
We do have though 750 housing authorities where even if
they completely stop leasing, they are not going to be able to
deal with sequestration. And what does that mean they have to
do? They literally have to start taking back vouchers from
families that are already out looking for apartments. They are
going to have folks that are evicted. They are going to have to
raise rents for residents.
Let me just give you a few examples. Des Moines has had to
already reduce rents, payment standards, and utility allowances
to try to meet the 100 folks that it needs to cut off the
program. In Congresswoman Granger's district, Fort Worth
Housing Authority has pulled back 99 vouchers from families
that were already out renting apartments. And they have to get
to a total of 200 that will be off the program by the end of
the year.
Congresswoman Beutler's Thurston County took away vouchers
from 26 families and has to reduce overall leasing by about 150
units. So these are real impacts that are happening as we speak
in terms of families that are going to lose housing where their
payments they are going to have to make are going to go up so
much that they are going to be evicted, end up homeless. These
are real impacts that are happening right now.
And over 750 housing authorities is a huge number to have
to be dealing with what we know are going to be shortfalls,
even if they do not lease a single voucher for the rest of the
year.
So sequestration, this kind of blunt, indiscriminate way of
cutting the budget is not the right away to approach it.
Mr. Pastor. So what happens to your baseline for next year?
Is this lessened by this number of people now who are not
getting vouchers this year?

SEQUESTRATION

Secretary Donovan. In some ways it is the opposite effect
of what is happening on the project base. The project base,
because we have signed contracts with those owners, it
increases the need next year. For vouchers, it may decrease it
some, but that really depends on what strategies agencies need.
Some of them have reserves, for example, that they are using to
try to get through this period. If they use reserves and do not
lower the number of families served, that means their baseline
stays the same. Others that are having, like I mentioned in
Thurston County, in Des Moines that are cutting families off
the program, there you are going to have a lower baseline next
year. But honestly, until we get closer to the end of the year
we are not going to know exactly those impacts because housing
authorities are still in the process of trying to figure out.
I also would just go back to the fundamental point that we
do believe, the president believes there is a different
alternative here, which is to put in place a balanced deficit
reduction plan, $1.8 trillion in savings, and reverse
sequestration. That would allow us to not have those impacts on
the baseline next year. And most importantly, those 125,000
families that are going to lose the help that they need.
Mr. Pastor. Well, I have to tell you, I agree with my
colleagues that if you read today's paper of the probability of
having a conference on the two budgets between the House and
the Senate, it really has curbed my enthusiasm that this thing
is going to happen. And so this summer is going to be very
interesting if what you are basing your budget on is--how
realistic it is going to be.
Secretary Donovan. We do have information. We have been
able to sort of run the budget in different ways, and we can
provide the Committee information around the sequestration
levels and what those impacts are. So it is not like we are--we
do not have that information, it is just that this is how the
budget is presented and we can get you the alternate ways of
looking at it working with you on the specifics.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. I want to pick up on the line of questioning that
we are going through right now and just offer an observation
and get a response.
I am worried if you are planning on sequester totally going
away because that is just politically not likely to happen. And
you know, again, I hope there is some sort of larger settlement
sometime this summer. I agree with your timing on that. I voted
for all those settlements when we have come to large arguments
before. But the idea that all of those cuts will disappear and
magically move over I think is not likely to occur. I am not
going to say fanciful, but pretty close.
So it would be helpful if we had some of those alternative
scenarios because I think you are going to likely end up
managing with considerably less than your budget projects if it
is based on a total restoration of the sequestered money.
And I would give that advice, by the way, to anybody else,
not always happily. Because we are having to deal with these
same kind of issues in defense and Indian health in a variety
of ways. But you know, to think that there are the votes here
to get that kind of total restoration I think is very unlikely.
Secretary Donovan. As I said, we are doing contingency
planning. We do have information that we can work with the
Committee on that looks at these alternatives. I mentioned the
project-based account. We know that it would be a $1.2 billion
hole and can be clear about what those impacts are. But I do go
back to--even if some may say it is unlikely, the president
still strongly believes that this is the right path and that we
ought to work towards that. And he is not going to give up
until the very last day when he can.
Mr. Pastor. Well, it would be nice to be able to arrive at
a deal before the very last day. But I suspect everybody will
be giving up something at some point about mid-summer.
I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, gentleman.
Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. I guess I wanted to echo that in
thinking about this, you know, I, too, have voted for some of
the big deals because I think we need to govern. So I am not
coming at this from an unreasonable perspective. But I know you
refer to the president's budget as balanced. Does it balance?
Does the president's budget balance?
Secretary Donovan. It produces $1.8 trillion in savings,
which when you add that to the $2.5 trillion that we have
already produced through other agreements that have been
reached over the last few years, gets us to a place that
broadly economists, nonpartisan economists agree puts our
fiscal house in order.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So it does balance? It comes to
balance?
Secretary Donovan. The definition for what the president
seeks is to get to a place where our debt is under control and
where we are on a path to long-term fiscal stability. And he
believes strongly that we can do that when everybody does their
fair share.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And I agree with that. I know the
talking point that I have heard now from several secretaries is
balanced, balanced, balanced. So I know that is part of the
descriptor that has come with the mandate of making these
requests on the Hill. I just find it curious that it is a
different way. It definitely is his vision, and I respect that
that is the direction he is going to go, but it is hard to call
something that does not ever actually come into balance,
regardless of whether economists think it is good or not--I
think there are people who would like it; there are people who
do not like it--but it does not actually balance. So I just--as
we go into this next phase, as a lawmaker who has demonstrated
she is willing to govern and to come together on big deals, I
guess I need to understand that you have a plan within HUD for
fulfilling those contracts--his budget, our budget aside--I
mean, working with what you have in the next six months.

SHORT FUND

Secretary Donovan. Let me be as clear as possible about
those contracts. We have signed those contracts with private
and nonprofit owners. We cannot go back on them. And so if
Congress does not appropriate the money to be able to pay those
contracts, what we will do is short fund them. And that will
mean that for contracts expiring later in the year--I think
close to 75 percent of them--they will not get 12 months worth
of money, and we will have to in the following year come back
and put the remaining amount of money on those.
There have been times in the past where we have had to do
that. It is not the right way to run a railroad because what it
means is that: One, owners will start to get out of the
programs and will lose decent affordable housing; two--and this
is one of the critical things about our programs. They are
deeply connected to the private sector. One of the things that
is good about our programs is that they raise and rely on
private investment. They rely on the efficiencies of the
market, and when there is uncertainty about whether we are able
to honor our contracts----
Ms. Herrera Beutler. There are ramifications.
Secretary Donovan. That makes it more expensive to run
these projects. The interest rates on the loans will go up. The
reserves that are required--I used to run an affordable housing
lending business--the reserves that are required to do this
will go up and it will make these programs--ironically, if we
think it is cutting costs, it is actually raising costs.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. And I agree with you that the real
implications of short funding a contract are going to cause
good partners to get out, which is why I am so focused on
making sure----
Secretary Donovan. I assure you, Congresswoman, we have a
plan to do that. We will be able to deal with it. It is a bad
thing and I have every hope that we can work with this
Committee to get to a way to resolve this so we do not have to
go through those bad things.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Great. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentlewoman. I recognize Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary. Thanks
for being here today.
Secretary Donovan. My pleasure.
Mr. Dent. Obviously, in this difficult fiscal climate we
are dealing with some real funding restraints. This Committee
has a responsibility to make some tough decisions in setting
those priorities. We will have to continue to balance where our
limited federal resources are most effectively and efficiently
directed.
Last month, I attended a meeting with Housing and
Redevelopment officials from across the country, and I also met
with local constituents. One of the concerns I heard throughout
those discussions was that while they are struggling to do more
with less resources, they are also significantly impacted by
increasing administrative burdens and regulatory limitations.
Obviously, we have to ensure proper oversight, but many of the
PHAs have said to me that it would make a huge difference in
managing their budgets if they had more administrative
flexibility.
I wanted to highlight two very specific examples. One of my
local housing authorities spoke with me about the burden of
required energy and Green Physical Needs Assessments (GPNA)
program, I guess. Well, this may be a valuable tool for the
Department. I am not convinced it provides sufficient return on
investment at the local level, and I am very concerned that
housing authorities have to divert resources from their core
mission of ensuring residents' needs are met. That is the one
very specific issue they raised to me.
The second one was, I understand under the Section 8
program authorities have to provide 30 days notice for a rent
change. But if they are going to change the payment standard,
you know, the maximum monthly housing assistance payment for a
family, it requires two years' notice.
Providing housing authorities more flexibility there may be
a way that they can stretch limited resources. That was a very
specific issue that they had raised with me that they thought
could help them as they deal with sequester. That would be
extraordinarily helpful to them. And so I think it is really
critical that HUD strikes that appropriate balance between
minimizing unnecessary burdens on the PHAs while continuing to
oversee that these funds are being utilized prudently.
I am interested in hearing what you are doing to evaluate
if there are ways you can alleviate some of those particular
administrative burdens, particularly during these rough times.
But the rent issue was a big deal to many of them.

ADMINISTRATIVE BURDENS

Secretary Donovan. So this rent issue is a very tough one
because what you are talking about is extremely low income
families where even relatively small increases in rent for them
could mean eviction or homelessness. And so typically what we
do, as you said, is provide significant notice and ability for
them to ramp up. And again, to be clear, this is if the Housing
Authority is going to make a system-wide change, say everybody
is going to be required to pay more.
We do have the authority to waive that in cases where it
truly is an emergency. But I will say, we want to use that very
sparingly. So what I would suggest, what we do is work with
housing authorities. I mentioned the 750 housing authorities we
identified that really do have shortfalls, even if they stop
leasing. We are prepared in extreme cases to use that
authority, but I do not want to use it where there are other
alternatives that could lower costs and not put families at
risk. And that is the balance.
Mr. Dent. You do understand that I think many of these
communities really want to maximize the number of people who
are getting Section 8. That is why they are proposing this. I
think, you know, a two-year notice is a lot of time. And if
there were greater flexibility it would really help out some
folks in places like Lebanon and Dauphin County in
Pennsylvania, Lehigh County, Berks, where they have come to me
and said--they all seem to agree that this was a proper remedy
that would really help them stretch their limited Section 8
dollars to support more people. That is why I am making this
request.
Secretary Donovan. Again, it is something that we will do
where we think it is the right alternative. But understand, we
have to be sure that this is not going to hurt lots of families
in the interest of helping others. And so we are happy to work
with you on that.
On the Green Physical Needs Assessment, we do believe, and
we have seen this particularly with larger housing authorities,
that this kind of analysis actually saves money in the long
run. We understand that because of sequestration it is hard to
have the funding to do this right now, and so we are looking at
deferring that step as a result of. And we will provide
flexibility to housing authorities on that.
Mr. Dent. The communities, at least the housing officials I
spoke with at these conferences, were very clear that this is
something they wanted.
Secretary Donovan. We also, I would add, have a number of
proposals, both legislatively and also many things that we are
doing beyond the two that you focused on to provide greater
flexibility. We proposed in the budget to merge or to allow
``fungibility'' we call it between the operating and capital
fund. That provides lots of flex. And there are many other
things that we could provide you information on that we think
can help provide greater flexibility right now.
Mr. Dent. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. By mutual agreement here I think we are going
to close the hearing. I want to thank you again for your great
work at the Department and the continued communication.
Obviously, we have got some real challenges on the budget. You
had your talking points down very well with a balanced approach
and all those good things. I have asked other people, if it is
so horrible, why did the president propose it and insist on
sequestration? But I will not ask you that. We want to continue
to work with you and we have got to get reforms so that we can
make this work.
Secretary Donovan. Agreed.
Mr. Latham. Hopefully, if there is anything I can do as far
as pushing the authorizers, I would love to do that. It is
going to be very difficult over their objections to be able to
have any of the reforms in our bill here, in the appropriation
bill. Hopefully, there is an appropriation bill this year,
rather than what we have seen in the past. But the main thing--
Mr. Pastor and I want to continue to work very closely with
you.
So with that we will thank you again and we will adjourn
the hearing.
[Questions for the record follow:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.003

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.018

Wednesday, April 24, 2013.

FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

MICHAEL HUERTA, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Latham. The hearing will come to order. And this
morning we welcome FAA administrator Michael Huerta to testify
on the FAA's budget request for fiscal year 2014. This is the
administrator's second appearance before the Subcommittee and
his first appearance as the Senate-confirmed administrator of
the FAA.
I think the biggest question on everyone's mind today is
sequestration and the effects or furloughs on the air traffic
control system. While I firmly support and pursue the principal
goals of achieving targeted reforms to reduce government
spending and balancing the federal budget, I do not support
across-the-board cuts like those mandated in the Budget Control
Act. These cuts simply punish everyone, rather than
specifically target the great number of outdated, wasteful, and
duplicative functions being funded with our taxpayer dollars.
In short, arbitrary, nontargeted, across-the-board cuts are no
way to run a government. However, an across-the-board sequester
was what the president proposed and we are now operating under
this law.
In an effort to avoid the arbitrary $1.2 trillion in cuts
mandated by the Budget Control Act, I have twice voted with the
majority of members in the House to pass common sense
legislation that would have replaced sequestration with
targeted spending cuts of an equal dollar amount.
Unfortunately, the U.S. Senate never considered anything that
would have replaced sequestration with targeted spending cuts
of an equal dollar amount. Unfortunately, the U.S. Senate never
considered either of these bills; thus, sequestration was
triggered.
Further, this goes to show that we need to return to
regular order and consider appropriation bills in their
entirety and not rely on continuing resolutions to fund the
government. Under a CR, there is no way for us to prioritize
cuts or protect programs related to the safety of the American
public. We have questions today about how the FAA evaluated the
safety impacts of these decisions, the transparency displayed,
and how you got to your furlough and contract decisions. And
finally, what is the FAA doing to mitigate these effects after
two days of disrupted air traffic activity. The safety of our
air space cannot be subject to political posturing.
As for the business of the president's fiscal year 2014
request, the FAA is requesting 15.6 billion in discretionary
budget authority, which is a decrease of 350 million below
fiscal year 2012, mostly due to reduction of the Airport Grants
Program. The president has also requested $3 billion in
mandatory funding for the FAA in the fourth round of a 50
billion stimulus request. Until you propose a pay-for, we
cannot give this request serious consideration.
Similarly, the president has chosen to include new and
increased fees in this budget that have been rejected year
after year. I also have questions regarding the FAA's ability
to meet its mission ensuring safe air travel while modernizing
our nation's air traffic control system through NextGen
investments. The FAA has seen a number of schedule slippages
and cost overruns in its NextGen programs, which could threaten
air space modernization at a time when our first mandate in
Congress is to reduce spending and bring our budget to balance.
Finally, I would like to commend you for your leadership
and open communication with Congress as you met some recent
challenges such as working to resolve the Boeing Dreamliner
battery issue. I am hopeful we can have a similar cooperative
and open dialogue regarding the implementation of
sequestration. We look forward to your testimony.
I would like to recognize Ranking Member Mr. Pastor for any
opening remarks.
Mr. Pastor. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
I would like to welcome FAA administrator, Michael Huerta.
We are starting to feel the effects of sequestration on our
system. FAA must cut more than 630 million to its programs,
more than 485 million in operations alone. Every employee will
be furloughed up to 11 days and nearly 150 contract towers are
threatened to be cut down. Since Sunday, 10 percent of FAA's
workforce has been furloughed each day, and that will continue
each and every day as long as sequestration is in effect. We
are already seeing delays in the air traffic system. On its
worst day last year, the air traffic control system had 3,000
delayed flights. FAA estimates that as many as 6,700 flights
will be delayed daily.
No one should be surprised by these impacts. Secretary
National Airspace System predicted delays in February, and our
ranking member, Ms. Lowey, issued a report early on
highlighting the potential impacts of sequestration. And this
is not just a problem for fiscal year 2013. Sequestration will
hit 2014 as well. We must sign a comprehensive government-wide
solution as you have recommended, Mr. Chairman.
I know the administration would agree with me that the
FAA's most important asset is its workforce. Every controller,
inspector, airport grant administrator, manager, and rank and
file employee, is critical to FAA's success. I hope that we can
find a way to do better by them and reach a resolution to
sequestration without raiding one account to the detriment of
another. Put another way, we should not spare one set of
employees only to sacrifice others.
We are here today to discuss FAA's fiscal year 2014 budget
request. With the exception of the AIP proposal, it freezes
funding at roughly the fiscal year 2012 levels. I look forward
to your testimony, Mr. Huerta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
We are pleased to have the chairman of the full committee
here this morning for his statement.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Director, welcome.
We have got a lot of questions for you this morning. The
first one is going to be how come you did not tell us about
this beforehand, the sequester impact on the layoffs, the
furloughs? Not a word. Not a breath. You did not forewarn us
that this was coming. You did not ask advice about how we
should handle it. You did not inform the Congress of this
sequester impact and what you plan to do about it. In fact, the
entire administration has done the same thing. They have not
told the Congress how the sequester impact will impact each
agency. And the Congress cannot operate like that. This
imperial attitude on the part of the administration, and you
are the most recent example of that imperialism, is disgusting.
And then to turn around and try to blame the difficulties in
flying on the Congress, having not informed us of what you
planned to do, is unacceptable.
I hope you have some answers for us today. But the first
question I want answered is why did you not tell us about it
beforehand. What else are you planning to do that you have not
told us about? And why is it that the administration will not
come to the table and talk about a substitute for sequestering?
There are all sorts of ideas floating around, and yet the
administration refuses to come to the table and talk about it.
Instead, they simply start shutting down airports, if you will,
closing towers, and now, furloughing airline controllers,
airport controllers.
It would be easy for the administration to come forward and
say, ``Okay, let us talk. Let us see if there is a way around
all these impacts of sequester.'' I do not like sequester. It
is across the board. It is unintelligent. It cuts good things
with bad. The people elected the Congress and the
administration to choose the good things from the bad things.
And yet we have, with sequester, abdicated that responsibility.
But it is time for the administration, and you are the first,
to come forward and talk about ways to avoid sequester. And as
long as you refuse to do that, the American public is going to
suffer.
I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have the ranking member of the full committee, Ms.
Lowey. You are recognized.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome
Administrator Huerta.
Employee furloughs at the FAA necessitated by the failure
of Congress to replace ill-advised across-the-board cuts are
causing inconvenience and economic losses to individuals,
families, businesses, in New York and across the country. But
frankly, it is mystifying to me that some are surprised by
these delays or blame FAA for Congress's failure.
On February 11th, the Department of Transportation told
Congress that given the magnitude of budget cuts to the FAA,
``it will be impossible to avoid significant employee
furloughs,'' requiring a reduction in air travel to a level
that can be safely managed by the remaining staff and causing
delays and disruptions across the country. Without action by
Congress, this situation will get much worse before it gets
better. FAA estimates the number of daily flight delays will be
more than double the highest level of delays on a single day in
2012. Across-the-board budget cuts are having a severe impact
on American families' incomes, as well as services and
investments critical to our economic competitiveness. We must
replace these mindless cuts with a renewed focus on jobs,
economic growth, and a balanced package of long-term deficit
reduction.
I agree that this has been very disruptive, but it is
amazing to me that those who are responsible for the sequester
do not understand that we have to get rid of the sequester. We
are blaming on for the impact on vital services. I do hope the
Congress can get together in a bipartisan way. We have not had
a conference on the budget. We are ready to move as
appropriators, and I know the chairman and I can move
effectively together. But unless we get started and start
working together, the reality of the sequester is seen. The
sequester took place beginning March 1st. Here we are--March,
April, May. I cannot understand why people are surprised that
this sequester has serious impacts.
I yield back.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentlewoman.
After the administrator's opening statement we will proceed
with the five-minute rounds, alternating in the standard order.
Administrator, we invite you to present your opening statement.
Your full statement will be included in the record, and you are
recognized for five minutes. Welcome.
Mr. Huerta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Chairman
Latham, Ranking Member Pastor, Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Lowey.
I am pleased to have the opportunity to be here today to
discuss FAA's budget for fiscal year 2014. As you are aware,
this is my first appearance before you as the confirmed
administrator of the FAA. We have a great number of challenges
and opportunities ahead, and I look forward to a long and
effective relationship with this Subcommittee.
The FAA's fiscal year 2014 budget request is $15.6 billion.
This budget upholds our critical safety programs, while also
deploying key NextGen benefits to our stakeholders and
modernizing our aviation infrastructure. It does this at
funding levels that are $351 million lower than in fiscal year
2012, a 2.2 percent decrease, which is part of the president's
overall effort to reduce the deficit.
The FAA's proposed budget for 2014 assumes a long-term
solution to our nation's budget deficit and no sequester. The
2014 proposed budget would allow us to maintain staffing for
air traffic control and aviation safety. It would allow us to
maintain capital investment in both airport infrastructure and
FAA facilities and equipment and fund research and development.
The budget requests $1 billion for NextGen, which is an
increase of about 7 percent above 2012. This request would help
us continue to mitigate congestion in busy airspace above
metropolitan areas, and it would help us with the continued
deployment of radio transceivers that allow us to use very
precise satellite-based information to control air traffic.
The FAA is requesting $9.7 billion in our Operations
account. This represents an increase of just about a half a
percent above the fiscal year 2012 level. This request will
enable us to run the agency on a day-to-day basis. It ensures
the safe operation of the airlines and the certification of new
aviation products. It would also enhance the safety of the
commercial space transportation industry and provide overall
policy oversight and management of our airspace.
The Operations budget includes an additional $30 million to
maintain and operate the new En Route Automation Modernization
(ERAM) system that became operational over the last two years.
ERAM is at the heart of NextGen. It helps advance our
transition from a ground-based system of air traffic control to
a satellite system of air traffic management.
The 2014 budget also allows the FAA to meet the dual
challenge of maintaining the capacity and safety of the current
system while moving forward with our comprehensive
modernization and transformation efforts. The majority of the
$2.8 billion requested for facilities and equipment is to
sustain legacy areas. This includes aging infrastructure, power
systems, information technology, navigational aids, and weather
systems.
This year's request for Research, Engineering, and
Development is $166 million, a decrease of 1 percent from 2012.
We intend to continue critical research in NextGen and in other
areas, such as fire research and safety, propulsion and fuel
systems, advanced materials research, alternative fuels, aging
aircraft, and unmanned aircraft systems.
Our budget emphasizes cost efficiency and reflects the hard
choices we must make to provide the most benefit to the flying
public. As a result, we are proposing to modify the mix of
funding available for airport development projects. The budget
would allow commercial service airports to increase passenger
facility charges from the current maximum of $4.50 to $8.00.
This gives airports greater flexibility to generate more of
their own revenue, and it allow us to reduce our request for
the ongoing airport grants program by about $450 million. This
change focuses federal resources on smaller airports that do
not have the passenger volume to generate their own revenue,
yet are still important to our nation's air transportation
network.
The President's 2014 budget request represents a balanced
approach to achieving a long-term solution to our nation's
budgetary challenges. This is critical when we consider the
impact of the sequester on our aviation system. The cuts
required by the sequester forced us to slash contract expenses
and furlough 47,000 of our employees for up to one day every
two weeks.
With 10 percent fewer hours available from each employee,
there are impacts on all FAA operations. At air traffic
facilities, this imposes limits on the amount of air traffic we
can safely allow to take off and to land. It means that our
safety inspectors will work fewer hours and it will take longer
to certify new aircraft for the market.
I want to emphasize that as we undergo the difficult
process of implementing these deep cuts, we refuse to sacrifice
safety, even if it means less efficient operations. Since
February, we have publicly described the possible effects of
the sequester, and over the past few weeks we have been working
with our industry partners, including the airlines, to share
more detailed information on the impacts we expect at our
nation's largest airports. We are tracking airport delays
throughout the system and making adjustments where possible to
minimize delays. It is my hope that we can work together to
rally around our nation's air transportation system and protect
the great contribution that civil aviation makes to our
economy.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my prepared remarks. I would
be pleased to answer any questions you may have.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much. And I guess we are all
concerned about the air traffic controllers and the effect that
that is having.
You believe that you have done everything possible to
minimize the effects of the furloughs?
Mr. Huerta. I do.
Mr. Chairman, we have to reduce our budget by $637 million
between now and September 30th. Under the rules of the
sequester, the Airport Grant Program was exempted, as were all
the grant programs of the Department of Transportation. What
that means is that it falls disproportionately on the operating
side of the budget. We are projecting savings from the furlough
of approximately $220 million. And so what that means is that
we have cut more heavily in nonpay areas--contracts,
information technology, travel, and a wide variety of other
nonpay expenses. To reach the large number that we need by
September 30th, we have no choice but to look at furloughs as
well.
Mr. Latham. Can you assure the American people that what
you are doing will have no effect on safety?
Mr. Huerta. It will have no effect on safety but what will
suffer will be efficiency. When we have to reduce the number of
controllers that we have available to handle air traffic, it
means that we have to do things like combine sectors, reduce
arrival rates at major airports and the capacity of our major
En Route facilities. The result from that are ground delay
programs, flow control measures, all of which have impacts on
the efficiency of the system. But what we are focused on first
and foremost is to maintain safe operations.
Mr. Latham. I was taken back at the same time we are
talking about cuts to new or essential services on air traffic
control. The secretary announced that he was giving out $474
million in Tiger Grants for livable and sustainable communities
from the department, which is not authorized, not defined in
law anywhere even what that is. Do you have any ability to
transfer any of his money? Have you requested any money to be
transferred?
Mr. Huerta. Under the framework of the sequester act, we
have to cut equally across programs, projects, an activities.
The way that works out in the FAA's budget is, as you know, Mr.
Chairman, we have four colors of money--our operations account,
our Facilities and Equipment account, our Research Engineering
and Development account, and then the Airport Improvement
Program. Within each of those accounts there are further
subdivisions. The largest share is our Operations account, and
that is organized according to the FAA's lines of business. For
example, Air Traffic, Aviation Safety, Commercial Space.
As I said before, the Airport Improvement Program is
exempt, therefore, the cuts are applied equally across the
other three colors of money. That means that they
disproportionately fall on operations.
Operations represents some 61 percent of total FAA
appropriations, and of that amount, approximately 70 percent of
it is pay for the employees that perform the important safety
critical functions. To get to the numbers that we need to get
to, while we have cut quite dramatically in the areas of
contracts and other nonpay expenses, we are nonetheless forced
with the choice of needing to reduce the amount spent on
salaries. That is where the furlough comes in.
Mr. Latham. To my question, have you asked for any transfer
authority of the funds that obviously the department has got
hundreds of millions of dollars sitting in other accounts
there. Have you asked for any transfer? This is from a program
that is not authorized, has on definition, and it is money
sitting there supposedly.
Mr. Huerta. I cannot speak to what is available in other
parts of the Department of Transportation budget, but within--
--
Mr. Latham. Is there any discussion at the Department about
maybe making a request to transfer money into essential
services?
Mr. Huerta. I think what the administration has been quite
clear on is that the sequester being an across-the-board
impact, we agree with you, it is not an appropriate way to run
the government. But, we are complying with the law as it has
currently been passed.
Mr. Latham. Is there no discussion about asking to
transfer----
Mr. Huerta. There have been many options.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. High priorities?
Mr. Huerta. There have been many options floated, both in
the Congress and within the public generally about
opportunities for transfer. But until something is actually
enacted, we have to live with the law as it is currently
passed.
Mr. Latham. So you have not asked for any authority to
transfer--you have not--the money that is sitting there in
other accounts?
Mr. Huerta. We have taken full advantage of the
flexibilities that we have.
Mr. Latham. That is not my question.
Mr. Huerta. As I said, there have been many discussions
that have taken place about transfer authority, but until
something is enacted, we do not have any reason to plan for it.
Mr. Latham. Okay. You are still not answering the question,
obviously.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
A year and a half ago when the 12 wise men failed to
complete their work and we voted on the Budget Act that passed
the House and the Senate, sequestration was a possibility. And
there was always, I guess an expectation that it would not
become a probability. But in, I think, January of this year,
OMB started at least issuing memorandums to the agencies that
it may be a probability and as we are getting closer into
March.
Now, when did the FAA, with its limitations and its
flexibility, was allowed by law and policy begin preparing for
sequestration?
Mr. Huerta. We began preparing with the start of the fiscal
year as we saw it as a possibility.
Mr. Pastor. October?
Mr. Huerta. Yes. But those efforts really became much more
urgent after we started at the beginning of the calendar year
when we were seeing that this was becoming a distinct
possibility. At that time, as you pointed out, Mr. Pastor, the
Office of Management and Budget provided guidance to all
agencies within the federal government, and we began looking at
our planning.
In February, the Secretary and I both spoke about what
these impacts would look like. We did talk at that time about a
very high likelihood, in fact, a need to furlough our employees
and the operational impacts that that would have on large
facilities. At the same time, we also talked about the need to
reduce our contract expenditures, and that got us into the
conversation about contract tower operations.
Throughout all of this, our focus has been on managing
these cuts in such a way that we minimize to the extent
possible the impact of these on the largest number of
travelers. But at the same time, we have to achieve the savings
of $637 million between now and the end of the fiscal year.
As we have worked through this, what we are attempting to
do is mitigate the impacts as best we can. For example, we
canceled a training program altogether for a new class of
controllers that would otherwise be taking place at the
aeronautical center. That is our pipeline for new controllers.
We have significantly canceled or significantly slashed other
training, as well as discretionary travel and discretionary
activity so that we can focus on other activities.
Controllers have been asked to return to their home
facilities, this takes them away from collaborative workgroups
that are focused on implementing new technologies. It enables
us to mitigate the impacts of the loss of controller hours due
to furloughs. And so we have been taking aggressive actions to
try to mitigate the impact of this, but there are impacts.
Mr. Pastor. In the memorandum that they sent to the
agencies they said to use any available flexibility to reduce
operational risks and minimize impacts on the agency's core
mission and services of the American people. Core mission is
obviously the air traffic system. What flexibility have you
made yourself available so that the core mission is not
minimized?
Mr. Huerta. We have transferred Operating resources to the
extent allowed by law, 2 percent, from other operations
accounts into protecting our air traffic and our aviation
safety core responsibilities. So what suffers as a result of
that are some of our longer term activities, such as
investments and research activities associated with NextGen.
That is a tradeoff that we think is important to make with the
goal of preserving safety and the efficiency of the system to
the extent we can.
Mr. Latham. In an article I think I read yesterday, it
talked about how you have furloughed air traffic controllers
but in order to ensure safety, that you have controllers being
paid overtime. And so the issue is really having and meeting
the objective of the core mission.
Mr. Huerta. We have dramatically reduced all scheduled
overtime, and we are preserving overtime really to deal with an
emergency situation.
For example, there might be a situation where due to
illness or other activities that we do not have the expected
complement of staffing at a facility. That, combined with the
furlough, can lead to a dramatic and significant operational
impact, and so through the judicious use of overtime we are
able to mitigate that somewhat. Nonetheless, we still have 10
percent fewer available hours to schedule in these facilities.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
I recognize the full committee chairman, Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding
this hearing.
There are those who say that you are imposing these
furloughs, bringing pain to the American people, for the
purpose of shifting political blame for the difficulties
caused. A little bit like shutting down the Yellowstone
National Park to draw attention to the problem.
What do you say about that?
Mr. Huerta. That is not true. We are focused on maintaining
our core operational and safety responsibilities, and doing it
to the best extent that we can, given the constraints of the
furlough.
Recognizing that 70 percent of our operations budget is
people and that the FAA is an operating agency, our effort has
been to do everything that we can to cut in other areas before
we hit our safety/critical functions that are carried out by
people. Those are air traffic control, maintaining the airway
system, and maintaining the highest levels of aviation safety.
The hardest thing that we have to do is reduce these hours.
But in order to hit the target we need to hit--we do not really
have any choice.
Mr. Rogers. All of this is a surprise to the Committee, to
the Subcommittee, to the Congress, to the world. We read about
it in the newspaper. And this Subcommittee and the
Appropriations Committee, of course, is the Committee that has
to find ways to fund the government's operations. And yet you
did not tell us about what you planned to do. How come?
Mr. Huerta. Mr. Chairman, we have been talking about this
since February. We have talked about our need to reduce our
contract expenditures and thereby to withdraw federal funding
and close federal contract towers. At that time we also talked
about the need to furlough our employees, and we said that that
would lead to significant delays of up to 90 minutes at major
hub facilities. As our planning has continued and we have done
more granular analysis, those discussions have continued, and
now we are at the place where we actually have to take the
actions in order to achieve the savings.
These are all bad choices. I will be the first to
acknowledge that. But in order to comply with the guidelines
with the sequester law, we have to take these actions.
Mr. Rogers. I wish you had told us earlier so we would have
had a chance to plan and perhaps to write or find a way against
the problem.
Now, when you decided to close those 149 contract towers,
you said that your goal was to minimize the disruption to the
maximum number of travelers. But when you decided to find
savings and labor costs just now, you imposed 11 days of
furloughs across all FAA employees regardless of how critical
those employees are to the mission of safe, efficient, air
traffic control. Can you explain? It seems to me that we had
some contradictory reasoning when it came to decisions
regarding contract towers versus the FAA air control workforce
who are furloughed equally, no matter how operational essential
they are. Can you explain that?
Mr. Huerta. Yes. Let me take first the contract towers. Our
focus on contracts was with the intent of minimizing the amount
of furlough days that our employees would have to suffer
through. In looking at our contracts, we focused on the largest
areas of where we could achieve contract savings, and the third
largest of those contracts are expenditures in our contract
tower program. We decided to look at the lowest activity
facilities, those towers that have fewer than 150,000 annual
operations and 10,000 commercial operations. All but one of
these towers currently operate for some portion of the day in a
non-towered capacity, so they have existing rules on how to
operate as a non-towered airfield. And so in the contract area,
we felt that this was the most efficient way and the most
effective way to achieve the savings we needed to achieve.
Turning next to the impacts on the FAA's workforce. Our
effort on the contract side was to bring the furlough number
down to 11. To ensure that we had to realize no more than one
per pay period or 10 percent of the available hours. As we
looked at the National Airspace System we did, in fact,
consider whether we should look at a differential impact
between facilities. We came to the conclusion that the National
Airspace System is an interconnected network. Weather phenomena
or how aircraft are moved throughout the system not make any
distinction between large air facilities and small air
facilities. An airplane may move from a small facility to a
major hub to another major hub to another small facility. Its
crew in the course of a day will travel from a wide variety of
other facilities. The purpose of this is for the airline to
maximize the use of their asset and of their available employee
hours. Conducting furloughs in an unequal fashion would still
lead to disruption and delays throughout the system because of
these network impacts and the relationships between the larger
and the smaller facilities.
Second, the effect of the sequester is basically a pay cut
for controllers and technicians; to do this in any other way
would cause even more disruption in the system. If you look at
the long history of pay cuts in the airline industry, every
single one has been applied equally, to like groups of
employees. Employees at different facilities still have to work
together, and that is difficult when you are treating them
inequitably. Over 70 percent of our Operations budget is
devoted to payroll, and the agency cannot put itself in the
position of choosing winners and losers between airlines and
where their hubs are located and geographic areas of the
country relative to other areas.
Mr. Rogers. One final question, Mr. Chairman.
Air traffic control is funded in the air traffic
organization within FAA which has $2.2 in nonpayroll
activities, including consultants, contracts, travel. Why were
you not able to find $387 million in sequester savings in that
very sizeable nonpayroll budget?
Mr. Huerta. We looked at our nonpayroll budget and we have
had dramatic reductions in that. Let us take that consultant
line item that you reference, sir.
The largest single consultant contract is a services
contract that provides telecommunications infrastructure
between all FAA facilities. Everything in that category are
nonconstruction contracts.
Our second largest contract is aviation flight service
stations. And our third largest is our contract tower program.
Where we have achieved cost savings are things like
training, travel, and within information technology as a result
of efficiencies. But we simply could not get to the number we
need without also looking at salaries. We imposed a hiring
freeze that has been in place since the start of the year, that
became a total freeze at the beginning of March. We have
canceled contracts with all of our contract employees, and all
of our temporary employees have been laid off. All with the
goal of minimizing the impact on payroll expenditures of FAA
employees.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Ms. Lowey.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Secretary for your presentation.
Frankly my colleagues, it is mystifying to me that some are
surprised by these delays or blame the FAA for Congress's
failure. And I would like to repeat again that on February
11th, the Department of Transportation told Congress that given
the magnitude of budget cuts to the FAA, ``It will be
impossible to avoid significant employee furloughs requiring a
reduction in air travel to a level that can be safely managed
by the remaining staff and causing delays and disruptions
across the country.''
We are hearing today that some of my colleagues believe we
should exempt the air traffic controllers, technicians, and
inspectors from furloughs. However, I have not heard anything.
We have not heard any proposals to do something about the
requirement that the FAA reduced $485 million in fiscal year
2013 from its operating budget due to sequestration. I am
laughing because I find most of my constituents are all upset
about what is happening at the airport, but not only can they
not pronounce sequester; they do not really understand what it
means but they are certainly learning the impact.
Can you tell us if these groups of employees were to be
exempt from the overall furlough requirements: (1) What impact
would it have on the rest of your workforce? And what impact
would this have on how you implement sequestration for fiscal
year 2014 for fiscal year 2014?
Now, I want to say again that I know the chairman and I
would like to work together. The Budget Committee--the House
has passed a budget, the Senate has passed a budget--they still
have not gone to conference. Now, if and fact they do not go to
conference, Chairman Rogers and I will proceed; however, if we
do not do something specifically to roll back sequestration,
what impact would this have on how you implement sequestration
in fiscal year 2014? We have seen what sequestration is doing
right now.
Could you please respond?
Mr. Huerta. Sure. Regarding your first question, in terms
of classifications of employees and if there were to be an
effort to exempt certain classes of employees, our pay account
in our Operations budget represents about 70 percent of the
total. Of that, some 40 percent pays for air traffic
controllers. An additional 14 percent is technicians and
supervisors. Those are the people that maintain airway
information, radar, and other facilities to ensure that it
actually works to deliver air traffic. Air traffic supervisors
are another 10 percent and then we move to our aviation safety
responsibilities. Our safety inspectors and supervisors
represent about 9 percent, and our field support for air
traffic is 7 percent.
What all of this says is the number and percentage of those
activities which are headquartered or overhead activities are a
very small percentage of the total. So to exempt the safety
critical operations and employees within the agency--since 84
percent of our employees are in the field dealing with safety-
critical functions, it does not get us there. We really have to
focus on the entire workforce.
Would you like me to respond to your second question?
Ms. Lowey. Yes.
Mr. Huerta. Your second question was on impacts of FY 2014
and beyond. We really do not have certainty moving forward
until we have a clear understanding of what our appropriation
will look like for fiscal year 2014 and what will be the
ultimate resolution of the sequester. The sequester is a multi-
year program, and the combination of not knowing what the long-
term perspective on that, combined with needing to understand
what 2014 will look like, leads to a great deal of uncertainty.
Having certainty on that is very important.
Ms. Lowey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I do hope, I would
say to Chairman Rogers, that we can move forward through
regular order, analyze these budgets, and not put in place even
greater cuts. And you have explained very elegantly the impact,
and it is just not a matter of moving around 2 percent of the
budget. This is serious, and I do hope we can move ahead on a
serious budget and roll back the sequester, which is causing
such damage not only in this area but in other areas of the
budget. And it is clear that it is up to the Congress to do it.
We have the authority.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Ms. Lowey.
The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What a great day to have
your first day of testimony, huh?
Just clarify a matter for me if you could, administrator.
Did the OMB ever direct the FAA at any time to furlough
controllers during sequestration or was this your idea from the
get-go?
Mr. Huerta. We received no direction from the Office of
Management and Budget. For us it was a mathematical exercise.
We had to find $637 million. We focused first on the contract
activities and whatever savings we could yield there. Whatever
increment was left we knew that we had to get out of payroll
savings.
Mr. Cole. Let me ask you about the contract. And you have
already partially touched on this and I appreciate the
explanation. Just by way of clarification so you know, we have
six contract control towers in the state. I have three in my
district so we were hit pretty hard by this decision. Three
that lost, you know, support, so to speak. We have been able
through a variety of measures to keep a couple of those open
locally.
It is my understanding that we have 251 contract towers. We
essentially defunded 149 of them, around 60 percent of the
total. That seems disproportionate in what is a 5 percent
across-the-board cut. Granted, somewhat substantially increased
because it had not been set at the beginning of the fiscal
year. So can you explain to me why so much it and that
particular program?
Mr. Huerta. The Program Projects and Activities within the
FAA are defined by the color of money and then within that by
our lines of business. What that means is that one PPA would be
air traffic. That is a combination of contract activities and
payroll activities. We wanted to focus on first and foremost
what could we reduce in the contract area that would enable us
to minimize the impact on employees. As you have heard me say,
the contract tower program represents a very large expenditure
within that account. We believe it is manageable because these
are relatively low activity facilities, fewer than 150 total
operations and 10,000 commercial operations on an annual basis.
All of these towers have experience, or all these airports have
experience, with the exception of one, of operating in a non-
towered capacity. There are well-established rules of how a
non-towered airport would operate.
The tradeoff is for every dollar of savings that I am not
able to achieve in contracts, that hits the payroll account.
Now, the payroll account is where we fund the employees that
operate the large facilities. That is the tension and the
tradeoff that we have to look at. As I have said, none of these
are good choices. These are extremely difficult and disruptive
choices, but it is the law as it is currently enforced and we
have to carry that out.
Mr. Cole. Have you looked at it airport by airport? I mean,
did you go down to that level of detail? Did you also take into
account when you were making these--I would agree with you,
very difficult decisions. You know, some of these things are
very close to military facilities as well and have a military
function.
Mr. Huerta. We started with just the traffic count that we
talked about, the 150,000 and 10,000. Then we considered what
the impacts of certain of these facilities that were adjacent
to major hub airports. Do they serve some important traffic
function that enables how those hub airports operate? Then we
consulted with the Department of Defense and Homeland Security.
They provided their priority facilities and every priority that
they identified we elected to exempt from closure under this
framework.
Mr. Cole. Okay. I have got some other questions but I am
not going to have time to pursue them so I will just yield back
my time and wait for the next round, Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Ms. Herrera Beutler.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know that this line of questioning is going to continue.
I am going to take a chance and ask something else.
Mr. Huerta. Okay.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. So general aviation user fees or fees,
I am actually not inclined to call them fees unless there is a
nexus between the use and what the money collected then goes
for. Otherwise, I call it a tax.
Both administrations have proposed them in general over the
last several years, but this administration now has multiple
times. I have seen this movie before. You all propose it and
then Congress says no. Partially, I would assume because the
general aviation community or the industry employs 1.3 million
people. That is $150 billion to the U.S. economy, and a lot of
those trickle down. It is small business. So in my neck of the
woods that is what we are. We are small business. And so it is
very important to me.
And I guess I would like to ask, it still is very unclear
to me--I should preface this. The one response I do not think
would be appropriate is sequestration because you have asked
for this money before and have not explained how it is going to
be used and we have not given it. Why do you think now is a
good time to ask for it again? And what is the nexus? I mean,
what is the use? And can you justify this?
Mr. Huerta. Sure.
The FAA's budget is supported through a combination of
aviation trust fund and general fund resources. In proposing
this, what the administration is simply saying is that we would
like to place a higher reliance on trust fund activities where
fees are paid by the users of the aviation system. We have had
this whole discussion about the need to reduce federal
spending, and we believe that to the extent that we could raise
significant resources from the users of the system, that that
would be of significant benefit in dealing with our larger
fiscal challenges that we as a country need to deal with.
Now, in terms of what the fee would cover, it would reflect
the fact that the government provides significant air traffic
control services, aviation services for the benefit of the
aviation community, and the fee would, for us, no matter what
kind of flight it is, it costs us the same to operate it within
the air traffic control system. The notion is that there are
services that are provided to the aviation community, and what
we are really looking to do is to see if we can recover that
through the use of fees.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. In terms of what is paid in general
through licensure and ability to use certain airport hangars,
purchases of planes, all the taxes that go into all that, so
you are saying that does not come close to playing a role in
maybe, hey, I am using this facility. I am also paying taxes
and fees and licensure fees and so on and so forth associated
with it. You do not think that comes?
Mr. Huerta. It does not completely cover the cost of
operating the aviation system.
Ms. Herrera Beutler. No? Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentlewoman.
Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Secretary, I have a few questions regarding NextGen.
Mr. Huerta. Sure.
Mr. Joyce. I was wondering if the FAA is spending a billion
dollars per year on NextGen, which we would agree is needed to
address future air traffic demand, given that domestic and
international operations are down 12 percent since 2007, do you
think we should consider deferring long-term NextGen programs
before implementing furlough of air traffic controllers?
Mr. Huerta. There are two dimensions to the response to
your question, sir. The first is the NextGen program primarily
is funded from our Facilities and Equipment account and our
Research, Engineering and Development account. We do not have
flexibility to transfer between those accounts and the
operating account, which is the account where we are seeing the
significant impacts associated with the furlough.
The second point that I would like to make is that these
are investments that have significant long-term benefits in
making the system operate much more efficiently and able to
handle the expected growth of traffic that we expect without a
commensurate increase in cost. I think it is pennywise and
pound foolish to delay and defer the investments that we need
to make in this long-term infrastructure that are actually
going to make the system operate much more efficiently down the
road.
Given where NextGen is funded from, the Facilities and
Equipment and the Research, Engineering, and Development
account, we do not have the flexibility to move those funds to
our Operations account absent some change in the sequester law.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. And I understand then from what you
are saying is that you intend on going through with the
implementation of NextGen on a timely manner.
Mr. Huerta. That is correct. We will see some delays that
will result from the effects this year. For example, we have
collaborative work groups that involve aviation stakeholders,
air traffic controllers, facility managers, and airports that
have been planning for the deployment of much more optimized
and efficient routes for transit in and out of airports. This
program, which we call Metroplex, allows for airlines to use
more direct routing, to use things called optimized profile
descents, but they all have the same benefit--reduced fuel
burn, reduced emissions, and for some communities, significant
reduced noise.
As we are furloughing employees we do not have the luxury
of assigning air traffic controllers to be working in these
collaborative workgroups. We have instead recalled them to
their home facilities so that they can actually work on moving
air traffic as we deal with the impacts of the sequester.
Mr. Joyce. Well, the GAO has indicated that lack of
controller training in the new procedures has prevented them
from being used. You are not doing anything to correct that?
Mr. Huerta. We have been doing a lot to correct that. We
have had to put it on hold to deal with the immediate impacts
with the sequester. We had actually, in response to GAO,
invested a significant amount in ensuring that we have
appropriate controller involvement and training. It has
resulted in great benefit in these procedures and these NextGen
investments being used by the aviation industry. We have had to
pause that while we deal with the immediate operational
challenges to mitigate the impacts associated with furloughing
our employees.
Mr. Joyce. I see that sequestration seems to be the answer
of the day, but what barriers do you foresee other than
sequestration and implementation of NextGen?
Mr. Huerta. Well, as we look to implement NextGen down the
road, this represents a significant technological
transformation. It moves us from a system of air traffic
control to a system of air traffic management. Those are all
good things. That is something that needs to be done
collaboratively with the aviation industry and with all of our
stakeholders and with our workforce. Some have likened it to
buying the latest technology and turning it on, I think of it
as a significant transformation in how we operate. That means
that we have to work as a shared responsibility to maintain
safety and operational efficiency with the users of the
aviation system, and we are committed to doing that. It also
means that we have to invest in the things that you have talked
about--training and operationalizing all these investments that
we are making.
I think of it this way--we are not investing in technology
for technology's sake. We are investing in technology to yield
benefits. If we cannot measure and achieve the benefits for the
aviation community then we are not doing our job.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I see I am out of time.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. I appreciate you being here, and I appreciate
the earlier answers you have given which I will not ask you to
go over again regarding the impact of sequestration and the
kind of flexibility your agency does or does not have in
dealing with these personnel reductions or furloughs and the
reduced service at major airports--things that all of us know
to be highly undesirable. And yet we have to say they are very
much in line with the intent of sequestration, which was to be
unacceptable. The intent of sequestration was to make deep and
indiscriminate cuts and to be unacceptable and to force
everybody to the table to conclude a broader, longer term
budget agreement.
Sequestration does not touch the main drivers of the
deficit; we all know that. It barely touches entitlements. It
does not touch tax expenditures. Those are the main drivers. It
goes back yet again to discretionary spending, and cuts it in
ways that, as I say, were designed to be unacceptable. And so
to pretend that it does not really need to hurt very much, and
that the president or the FAA with a flick of the wrist could
make this different, is disingenuous. We need to fix the
problem, which is to get a long-term budget agreement as
opposed to pretending that damage control, putting out this
fire and then that, is a budget policy. It simply is not a
budget policy and it is not going to work. And the sooner we
can get to a long range budget agreement the better off we are
going to be.
Let me turn to aircraft certification, which has not been
raised this morning and I do want to raise it. You are well
aware that aviation manufactured products can only go to market
once they are certified. You also know that the FAA has been
unable to support the current level of industry activity within
the current average certification wait time of six to nine
months, which puts American aviation manufacturers at a
competitive disadvantage when compared to foreign companies.
Furthermore, the number of new technologies requiring
certification is expected to increase as we implement NextGen.
So in recognition of this under the last FAA
reauthorization, Congress included language to identify some
needed reforms in the certification process and to focus FAA
resources more effectively on critical activities, involving
safety, for example, while beginning to address the backlog of
certification requests. I wonder if you can give us an update
on the implementation of these reforms. What are some of the
specifics for increasing the timeliness and effectiveness of
the certification program? What kind of challenges are you
encountering?
Mr. Huerta. Well, thank you, sir.
The certification process is something that is extremely
important for the reason that you have talked about. New
products cannot come into the market without having FAA
certification. Aviation represents the technological frontier;
it is our largest export industry. It is a very significant
creator of jobs in the country. With direction from Congress we
have focused very much on how can we take better advantage of
our certification resources.
We have recognized that fundamentally preserving safety is
about managing risk, and managing risk involves developing
data. Where are we likely to have problems and how do we focus
our inspection and oversight responsibilities on the areas that
might have the greatest potential for problems? We have been
tasked by Congress, and we have aggressively moved on relying
on designations of trusted agents in organizations throughout
the aviation industry so that we can share the responsibility
for bringing new products to market. They could do a lot of the
legwork but we never give up our responsibly ultimately to
certify and ensure that new products are safe before they come
to market.
Nonetheless, it is an evolution that needs to take place
over time. And what we have seen is a real pickup in the pace
of requests for new certification, and I think that reflects
positive economic trends within the industry. But the flipside
of it is that the aviation certification workforce is hit by
the same impacts as everybody else right now. That causes us to
focus on aircraft and parts in service at the expense of
certification activities for the immediate term as we are
dealing with the impacts of this year.
Mr. Price. Well, the fiscal 2014 request for aircraft
certification service is about level I note--213 million. It
does seem to underscore your commitment to providing the
funding and staffing necessary to ensure more timely
certification. What about the funding and staffing levels? How
is that related to the situation you just described?
Mr. Huerta. Well, the staffing for us is something--we have
staffing models that look at the full scope of our need for
resources in aviation safety. That has proven to be a complex
process and we continue to work to refine it. What we are
trying to do is strike the appropriate balance between having a
responsible budget request, recognizing the tight fiscal
conditions that we are in, but at the same time providing
resources that will support our continued growth and evolution
in our certification activities.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Huerta, just a few things, particularly with respect to
the notifications about the furloughs and what is happening
with air traffic control. I know a lot of those notifications
occurred this week. I think a lot of the American public felt
frankly blindsided--the airlines, the unions, airports, and
most importantly of all, the flying public. You know, compared
to the way the contract tower issue was handled, I got the
sense that the FAA had, in fact, consulted with other
interested partners and stakeholders, like the Department of
Homeland Security and the Department of Defense. You know, why
were DHS and DoD given that courtesy, as they should have been,
with respect to the contract towers, but it seems that all the
other folks that I just mentioned--the airlines, the unions,
the airports, and the flying public--just feel completely
blindsided by this decision?
Mr. Huerta. Sir, when we talked about the contract tower
decision back in February, we, at the same time, did say that
we expected impacts on major hub facilities and that it would
be as a result of furloughs of FAA employees. I think it is
fair to say that the thing that captured the media attention
and that was something that became, I think, a matter of
intense public focus was the contract towers. These longer term
impacts, which at the time we said would not emerge until
later, despite our efforts to talk about them, they were things
that really did not sink in with people; that we were expecting
to see this.
Last week, nonetheless, when we began that process, what we
did was we asked each of our air traffic facilities to build
schedules based on 10 percent fewer available hours per each
pay period per employee, and those form the basis for us to use
the tools that we use every day to model our ability to handle
aircraft within the air traffic system. Those operational
details were what we provided last week to the users of the
system. We are continuing to monitor it and have been
monitoring it since Sunday as we have worked through to do
everything that we can to mitigate the impacts of these. But we
have been talking about this since February.
Mr. Dent. One other thing, too, there was an editorial
today in the Wall Street Journal entitled ``Flying the
Government Skies,'' and I realize it is an editorial and it is
an opinion and you may or may not agree with what they said,
but there is just one paragraph I thought that was interesting
and I would like you to respond to it. They said, ``Ponder this
logic, if that is the right word. The sequester cuts about $637
million from the FAA, which is less than 4 percent of the $15.9
billion 2012 budget, and it limits the agency to what it spent
in 2010. The White House decided to translate this 4 percent
cut and it has the legal discretion to avoid and do a 10
percent cut for air traffic controllers. Though controllers
will be furloughed for one of every 10 working days, four of
every flights will not arrive on time, so basically a 4 percent
FAA spending cut that is translated into delays of 40 percent
of flights.''
I would like you to respond to that.
Mr. Huerta. What we are responding to is the need to find
the savings in half of the year. That one furlough day per pay
period gets us about $220 million of the total savings I need
to achieve of $637 million between now and the end of the year.
These are not great choices. These are all difficult impacts.
We have focused first on achieving savings in contracts,
achieving savings in nonpay expenses with the idea of
minimizing the impact on FAA employees. But we had a gap that
we needed to close and we had no choice.
Mr. Dent. And one other thing, too. With respect to
contract tower program, the administration's decision to close
the contract towers has garnered a lot of attention here in
Congress as you know. The Capital City airport in my district
is going to be impacted by the contract tower closures. I have
heard from Cap City, as well as the Airport Council. They cite
that DOT's inspector general is saying that the contract tower
program is a cost-effective method of providing air traffic
control. My assumption is that the closure decisions were based
on flight volume and revenues generated at these tower
airports. What, if any, analysis was conducted in parallel to
analyze the impacts these closures will have on operations and
safety of neighboring airports?
Mr. Huerta. When we looked at this we focused first on the
activity level of each of these facilities, and these represent
the lower activity facilities throughout the system. We did
consider effects on adjacent hub airports and consultations, as
you noted, with the Department of Defense and Homeland Security
on whether they wanted us to exempt particular facilities. We
did exempt every one that showed up on their priority list.
In terms of the operations of these airports, we are not
doing anything that is not safe, but an airport that is non-
towered operates differently. Generally, the difference is it
operates less efficiently in order to maintain the highest
levels of safety. We did analyze each of these airports, and in
looking at each of these airports, one thing that was apparent
was that all but one of them operate for some portion of the
day non-towered already. They have well-established procedures
of how to operate in this capacity.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman.
You had mentioned earlier on the contract towers apparently
you contacted or got guidance or direction from Homeland
Security and DoD. Who else did you talk to on these decisions?
Mr. Huerta. Within the federal government it was those two
agencies. We consulted with airports to determine if these
serve an important function and if it is related to a hub
airport. Then sent our operations teams out in the region.
Mr. Latham. Did you get any direction either from the
Department or from the White House as to how to inflict
sequesters?
Mr. Huerta. We shared what our analysis showed with respect
to the operations of the facility with our colleagues at the
Department but we did not receive any specific direction from
them.
Mr. Latham. From the White House?
Mr. Huerta. No.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Dent was asking about engaging of the
stakeholders, and again, do you want to tell how and when you
engaged the airlines as to what your plans were?
Mr. Huerta. We talked generally starting in February that
we expected the sequester would result in the closure of
contract towers, and we identified a level at that point, and
we talked about the process. We also said that we would be
furloughing our employees and that that would have significant
impacts at major hub facilities. Then we went through the
process in two parallel tracts: On the contract tower side, the
consultations that I referenced in my response to Mr. Dent; on
the air traffic side with FAA employees we went through the
scheduling process that I had----
Mr. Latham. When did you do that?
Mr. Huerta. When did we do that?
Mr. Latham. Yeah.
Mr. Huerta. Starting----
Mr. Latham. Last week?
Mr. Huerta. Starting in February and then into March. Where
we first had to make a determination of what were the minimum
number of furlough days and that is where we made the decision
to plan for one per pay period. That was handed out to all of
our facilities and they did their analysis in the course of the
month of March. They needed to build schedules that would
reflect this reduction in hours. That was shared in granular
detail with the airline industry last week.
Mr. Latham. Why did it take till last week? If you wanted
them to adjust their schedules, to me--and you keep talking
about February 11th that you had all the planning in place--why
could you not share that earlier rather than just wait? And
there was no detail as to what your plans were, and you just
said until last week.
Mr. Huerta. We did share with them what we expected broad
systemic impacts to be. We did not have the information until
it had actually been built by the facilities and we understood
how it would affect particular rates at each air traffic
facility. We shared that after we had done the appropriate work
on it to make sure that we were confident that this represented
an expected outcome as a result of these activities.
Mr. Latham. So even though you are telling us that we all
knew about everything February 11th, you did not tell anybody
at the airlines to change their schedules or to adjust to it
until last week? They got no detail until last week; is that
correct?
Mr. Huerta. We told the airlines that they should expect
impacts as a result of a reduction in available hours for air
traffic facilities starting in February, and we continued to
make that case. What we shared last week were specific
operational details.
Mr. Latham. So they could not do anything until last week?
Mr. Huerta. I would not agree with that. They could
certainly plan for a general reduction in capacity.
Mr. Latham. But if they do not know what that means, how
can they plan?
Mr. Huerta. The same way that we do; to plan for various
scenarios.
Mr. Latham. Without any specifics as to what you are going
to do?
Mr. Huerta. We have been saying that we were going to
furlough employees one day per pay period for a long time. That
is a 10 percent reduction in available controller hours.
Mr. Latham. Moving on, I guess.
Last year you spent $149 million in travel. What have you
done to reduce the steps or what steps have you taken to reduce
travel? And how much are you going to save this year?
Mr. Huerta. Last year we did spend--it was in fiscal 2012--
$149 million. That represents 2 percent of the operating
budget. We have reduced that to $125 million this year. And
that is limited to operational travel; for example, an aviation
safety inspector needing to get to a particular facility to
conduct an inspection or a technician needing to conduct work
in repairs of facilities.
Mr. Latham. My time is expired.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now that you have made that determination about the
furloughing and hours and pay periods, et cetera, what are you
doing to continually communicate with the airline industry so
that they can continue to play and avoid the problems that they
have had in the last few days?
Mr. Huerta. We have an every two hour operations call with
the operations teams at the airlines. That takes place at our
command center, which is located out in Warrenton, Virginia.
What we share with them is what we are finding in terms of
specific facility impacts as they develop over the course of
the day, what airports might have introduced such things as
ground delay programs, where we have to implement activities
such as flow control programs so that we can manage it. And
then, of course, you have to overlay on top of everything the
weather. That will also affect how a facility is going to
operate.
We want to keep that level of communication because what we
need to understand is the network impacts of how all of these
combinations of impacts at different facilities take place. The
command center is really where all of that comes together and
these conversations take place every other hour within the
course of a day.
Mr. Pastor. You had to extend the closing of the towers,
the contract towers till June; correct? And that was because of
a lawsuit. As I understand your testimony this morning,
basically, that determination was made because of your EPA's--
in order to ensure safety with the air traffic controllers you
decided 149 contract towers was the number that you had to
eliminate. Now, you are in court right now and we do not know
what the decision is going to be, but what if the court says
your decision does not merit closure so you have to reopen
them?
Mr. Huerta. I cannot comment on how the litigation will
come out. I am not a lawyer.
Mr. Pastor. Oh, just a for instance. I mean, take that as a
hypothetical.
Mr. Huerta. For instance would be for every dollar that I
am unable to save through contract tower savings, then I have
to find savings someplace else--either in other contracts or in
payroll expenses. And so that could theoretically increase the
number of days that I would require for furlough.
Mr. Pastor. Now, as I understand your testimony, you looked
at other contracts.
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Pastor. And the determination is that you could not do
it so you went to the furloughing of the air traffic
controllers. Is it possible to relook at the contracts you have
that you decided not to deal with in this round and maybe now
knowing the problems that we are having with the delays, that
you might be able to relook at that and say, well, I am going
to go back to salaries and see if I can bring back more air
traffic controllers and continue to avoid not the contract
towers but the other contract cuts that you could make?
Mr. Huerta. This is something that we are evaluating on a
regular basis.
First the contracts; Yes, we have established targets for
savings for particular contracts, and I have talked about some
of the areas where we focused. Contract towers is one but we
have also focused on training contracts. We focused on
equipment expenditures for spare parts, as well as maintaining
inventory so that we could respond quickly to things like
outages and so forth.
What we do not want to do is cannibalize contracts to the
effect that while we might be able to preserve employees, they
would not be able to carry out their jobs because they do not
have equipment, they do not have the tools they need to
actually do their jobs. But that is something that we will
monitor and we will continue to monitor very carefully as we go
through these weeks and months ahead.
If I am able to achieve higher levels of savings in
contracts, yes, then we can certainly, as we get later in the
year, consider whether we have the ability to relax the
furlough. That is something we will continue to monitor.
Mr. Pastor. Mr. Chairman, I have the yellow light so I will
yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. When did the furlough policy go into effect?
What date?
Mr. Huerta. The furlough itself went into effect with the
pay period that began on Sunday, April 21st.
Mr. Rogers. When?
Mr. Huerta. Sunday, April 21st. The furlough itself. We had
to notify employees. There were two notifications starting
about five weeks ahead of that where we notified them of the
possibility of furlough and then the intent that we were
actually going to carry it out.
Mr. Rogers. So that was April when they got the word in
detail?
Mr. Huerta. No, no, no. They got the detailed word--I will
get back to you with an exact date but we did provide them an
official notification that it would start, and I think it was a
week or two before April 21st.
[The information follows:]

The FAA delivered official furlough decision notices to all
affected employees on April 10, 2013. These notifications were
mailed via certified mail to all employees in bargaining units
that requested such delivery. Other employees received their
notices electronically through their FAA email accounts. The
notice informed affected employees that they would be subject
to furlough beginning April 21 through September 30, 2013 and
that furlough times would be no more than 11 workdays or 88
hours.

Mr. Rogers. Well, nevertheless, it was, what, a week ago?
Ten days ago?
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Rogers. Did I hear you correctly say that you first
gave the airlines and airports and the infrastructure notice of
how this thing was going to be applied last Wednesday?
Mr. Huerta. No. What I said was that we provided
notification to them of the general impact. We provided
operational details on Tuesday.
Mr. Rogers. I am not worried about general impacts. I want
you to tell us when you told them the details of which
airports, at what times they would have trouble. Now, that was
last Wednesday as I understand it.
Mr. Huerta. Tuesday.
Mr. Rogers. Last Tuesday. Pardon me.
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Rogers. Which was a few days before it went into
effect.
Mr. Huerta. That is correct.
Mr. Rogers. And we have got hundreds of airports. We have
got dozens of airlines. We have got millions of Americans
wanting to make their plans for travel. Why did you wait until
that long to tell these functionaries--the airlines, the
airports, and the personnel--the detailed impact of sequester?
Why wait that long? You have had this under consideration as
you have said for several months, but you waited until hours
before it was to be placed into effect to tell the relevant
stakeholders. I find that shocking. A shocking lapse of
management. Would you comment on that?
Mr. Huerta. We built detailed schedules within each of
these facilities, and we shared this information with the
airlines as we had it.
Mr. Rogers. And that was a few hours before it went into
effect? But you have been doing this for months. Why could you
not have brought them in earlier so that they could make their
plans?
Mr. Huerta. We have been talking about general impacts.
Mr. Rogers. General impacts again. I am not worried about--
they knew the general impacts.
Mr. Huerta. But we have been talking about reduction in
available controller hours of 10 percent for months.
Mr. Rogers. But you did not tell them which airports, which
airlines, which times.
Mr. Huerta. We told them that they should expect
significant impacts at major hub facilities.
Mr. Rogers. Well, la-de-dah. Everyone knew that. That is
what sequester is all about.
But it is important for them to plan their schedules and
their hours and their planes and the airports, their management
personnel. They needed to know detailed impact on them as early
as could be had. And you had months to do that and yet you
refused. I find that shocking.
Mr. Huerta. I do not think we refused. I would say that
what we wanted to do was conduct a proper schedule and analysis
of it and then provide them the best information we could.
Mr. Rogers. How did you inform them?
Mr. Huerta. We informed them in a meeting that we had at
the command center.
Mr. Rogers. A meeting?
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Rogers. Between whom?
Mr. Huerta. Our operations team led by our air traffic
organization.
Mr. Rogers. Now, when did you inform the airlines, the
airports?
Mr. Huerta. We talked----
Mr. Rogers. How did you inform them?
Mr. Huerta. We talked in a meeting. We have had a number of
meetings with the aviation industry, first about contract
towers and then talking about the impacts associated from the
furlough.
Mr. Rogers. So you mean you got all the airlines in the
room?
Mr. Huerta. We get together with them every day in an
operational capacity.
Mr. Rogers. And there are hundreds of airports. Did you
have them in the meeting?
Mr. Huerta. The airports, not every airport is affected by
the impacts of the furloughs, but we certainly identified
through their associations the major impacted airports.
Mr. Rogers. So you did this with a conference call?
Mr. Huerta. No, with a meeting.
Mr. Rogers. Did you ask them for their input, their
suggestions, their ideas?
Mr. Huerta. We are continuing to have that conversation. We
shared with them this is what our analysis showed and we will
continue that discussion every day going forward.
Mr. Rogers. Did you take into account the complaints, the
information that they gave to you?
Mr. Huerta. Absolutely.
Mr. Rogers. Were they shocked when you told them at the
last minute of the impact on their airport, airline?
Mr. Huerta. You would need to talk to them about what their
reaction was but they expressed great concern.
Mr. Rogers. Now, you mentioned I think that there were some
long-term projects that FAA has invested in and that you do not
really want to take much from those projects for fear of
derailing the progress. Can you tell us what those projects
are?
Mr. Huerta. That is the investment in our Next Generation
Air Transportation System.
Mr. Rogers. In light of the current situation, do those
projects really have priority over the operation of commercial
air space?
Mr. Huerta. There are two pieces to that answer. The first
is I do not have the flexibility to transfer from my Facilities
and Equipment account which funds those projects to the
Operations account. But the second point is these projects will
have important benefits for efficiency long term. And I think
that we need to get on with making those investments to ensure
efficiency.
Mr. Rogers. Have you asked the Congress for those changes
to allow you to do that?
Mr. Huerta. No.
Mr. Rogers. That is what I thought.
I yield.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me briefly revisit this matter of the contract tower
closures.
In February, you anticipated the closures at 149 contract
towers. In March, you announced that you would delay the
closure of those towers until June. So you have stretched out
that timetable. And you have already talked some about the kind
of consultation that took place at various levels and has
continued to take place about this. Let me ask you about the
consultation that takes place with the local communities, the
airports, airport authorities. I understand that some
communities, maybe 50 or so, are trying to come up with their
own resources to keep towers open as part of the FAA's
nonfederal contract tower program. What steps would need to
happen to make that a reality? How can you facilitate that
transition? And let us say that transition does occur. There
are various questions one might have about what happens to the
FAA's equipment in the towers and so forth. Can you shed some
light on that?
Mr. Huerta. Sure.
About 50 have requested the ability to locally fund the
federal contract tower that is currently existing within their
particular community, and it is relatively straightforward to
effect. It is simply a change in who is paying for the cost. We
have offered that they could simply cover the cost of the FAA's
contract or we have put them in contact with the contractor
directly in order to negotiate their own agreement and their
own contract to carry out the contract tower services.
Getting to June 15th does enable more time for those
arrangements to be worked out. As it relates to the equipment
in the facility, we have adopted a very liberal approach. If a
community wants to take over the use of the equipment, we will
continue to make it available and maintain it for that purpose
to manage through this transition.
Mr. Price. Thank you. So you can make good use of this time
you think in these cases?
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Price. All right. Let me return to another item raised
earlier, the NextGen performance-based navigation procedures.
You spent a lot of resources to develop this, to develop
these new procedures to streamline the arrivals and departures
in the airports. Of course, the industry supports the
implementation of performance-based navigation procedures. It
will reduce the number of miles, the amount of fuel consumed.
Just a couple of questions about this. There have been some
GAO studies that have indicated that one gap in this program
may be a lack of controller training in the new procedures that
has prevented them from being used fully. I wonder what you are
doing to correct this, how you assess this, and what kind of
corrective measures you have underway. And then here, too, what
impact has and will sequestration have on the development of
these performance-based procedures, especially in the Metroplex
environment? You talk about the desire to protect this program.
You talk about the fact that you do not have unlimited
flexibility to transfer funds back and forth. What I am asking
is what you anticipate the practical effect of sequestration is
likely to be near term, middle term.
Mr. Huerta. Sure.
When the IG identified for us the matter of controller
training, that is something that we concurred with. We have
actually made it a significant area of focus. Controller
training is essential. Not just training but also consultation
with controllers in a collaborative fashion to actually
understand how a new piece of technology or a new procedure is
actually going to work, and what are the benefits that we are
trying to get out of it? All of that is extremely important to
being able to yield benefit and ensure that the thing actually
gets used. That has been an extremely high priority for us.
We have focused on the deployment of technology systems
such as ERAM and TAMR, but also on procedures--the performance-
based navigation procedures that you talked about.
There is a near-term impact of our scheduling problem this
year because in order to focus on preserving the activities of
the operation we have called back controllers to their home
facilities, and that is affecting their ability to work in the
collaborative work groups as we work through sequester. The
President's Budget for 2014 assumes that the sequester has been
resolved, and it does provide resources to enable us to restart
those collaborative activities and to ensure that we have the
appropriate levels of involvement and training.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Price.
Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Administrator, I want to pick up where you left off
because that was actually the line of questioning I was
interested in pursuing earlier. You assume or the budget
assumes for fiscal year 2015 sequester will end. What do you
base that on? Are there in the budget alternative revenues or
cuts that would, you know, justify that assumption?
Mr. Huerta. Well, the entire president's budget is based on
a premise that the sequester is resolved and we simply conform
to that.
Mr. Cole. Has the president put forward a plan as to how it
would be resolved?
Mr. Huerta. Well, I think the president has put forward a
plan that represents an appropriate balance between needs to
make investments but at the same time----
Mr. Cole. Not exactly my question. I mean, does he tell us
how he would replace the cuts?
Mr. Huerta. Well, I think what the president is suggesting
is that there needs to be an appropriate balance of
expenditures and revenues.
Mr. Cole. Are you making alternative plans that if this
assumption--I mean, it seems to me that is what got us into
this problem. I think everybody assumed the sequester would not
occur. The president made that commitment in the campaigns, his
regional idea. Honestly, I think that was probably the
consensus in Congress as well. So I am not beating up on the
president, but everybody assumed it would not happen. It seems
to me a pretty dangerous thing to assume this is going to all
go away.
Mr. Huerta. Well, as I said, until we have the 2014 budget
resolved and the issue of the sequester resolved, that does
create for us a great deal of uncertainty in our ability to
plan going forward.
Mr. Cole. Are you thinking about possible scenarios
internally if you have to live with the sequester?
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Cole. Could you tell us what some of those things would
be? And as you do that, just, again, you have operated within
the limits of the law now, obviously. If you could change--what
ways would you change the law today if you knew you had to
operate this way? What additional flexibilities might you like
that under current law you do not have?
Mr. Huerta. Well, I think the policy question that this
tees up is what does this mean for the National Airspace System
and the operation of the aviation system in its totality? We
have put forward a plan that would suggest that lower activity
facilities are an area where we would want to perhaps focus on
withdrawing federal resources. The rationale behind that is
that these facilities can continue to operate safely and that
they have less of an impact on the total operation of the
National Airspace System. Now, as we know, that is not
something that everyone agrees with but that represents
certainly what a path forward could be.
Mr. Cole. What about the grants program? That has been one
of the sheltered areas under current law. Would that be
something you would recommend changing as well?
Mr. Huerta. Well, we have put forward a proposal to change
the structure of the grant program, and for large airports to
enable an increase in the passenger facility charge from $4.50
to $8.00. This is, I think, widely supported by the large hub
airports. What that would free up is it would enable us to have
a smaller AIP program, and that program could then be focused
on the smaller airports.
Mr. Cole. You do that assuming that sequester would go
away. I am suggesting it may not go away. And so given that,
would there be additional--it might be more money.
Particularly, I do not know what it would be but do you have
other ideas? Because I do think it is a long way from certain
that the sequester will disappear.
Mr. Huerta. Well, I think there are two dimensions to that.
One is the nature of what is the will that we all have for
where the federal interest is in aviation. Is it in all
facilities providing the basic level of services? Or should we
focus on the larger facilities?
Related to that is the appropriate balance between short-
term and near-term investments. You have heard me express the
view that we should not sacrifice the long term because that is
how we get maximum efficiencies and savings in the future. Then
there is the balance between operations and infrastructure. The
question that you are asking is perhaps we need to relook at
that balance. And I think that is certainly an appropriate area
of consideration for the appropriators for Congress generally,
and that is something that we need to as a country figure out
going forward if we are going to live with these constrained
budgets in the future.
Mr. Cole. Well, as a word to the wise, and again, I am not
singling you out. I think this is a problem we face in very
single budgetary department that I deal with, but we assumed
this thing was not going to happen and it did. I would be very
careful about assuming that it would all go away because I am
not at all convinced that it will. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Cole.
Mr. Quigley is recognized.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, sir.
Mr. Huerta. Good morning.
Mr. Quigley. The president's budget allows airports like
O'Hare to raise their passenger facility charges up to $8.00 in
exchange for their willingness to spread some of those dollars
to smaller airports as well to improve facilities. Given
everything we understand with tight money and the
sequestration, is this not the only way a lot of these
improvements are going to take place?
Mr. Huerta. Well, the president's proposal would reduce the
base AIP program. If everyone that has a PFC, raises it to
$8.00, it does provide them with significant offsetting
benefits and they are able to raise local resources to fund
very significant improvements. That is something that is
supported for the most part by the large airports. That enables
us to focus the AIP program on those areas where they do not
have the base of traffic that they would be able to generate
sufficient revenues through a PFC.
Mr. Quigley. So not just the large hubs but all the
airports should, you would think, support allowing these
airports to raise their fees?
Mr. Huerta. I cannot speak for all of the airports, but in
general, airports that have a passenger facility charge like
having a passenger facility charge. They like the ability to
generate local revenues, because for them that gives them a
greater degree of certainty and ability to plan for long-term
infrastructure programs.
Mr. Quigley. Let me talk--because the horse is not quite
deceased--on sequestration here and what you are doing. Can you
talk a little bit about the policy decision? I believe the
expression was it was going to be like a spread so that
everyone feels the pain when you had these furloughs. The
policy decision to do this across the board versus perhaps
taking less strain off the large hubs, I guess the rationale on
the one hand would be the volume, the sheer volume and how many
people are connecting through these large hubs. Perhaps if we
wanted to minimize the impact we would reduce the furloughs in
those locations.
Mr. Huerta. We did look at that option and the conclusion
that we reached is that the National Airspace System is very
much a interconnected network; that aircraft, crews, and
passengers move through the entire system, and the way that
aircraft get moved through the system is a combination of both
large hubs and smaller facilities. Weather and other phenomena
also factor in and what we concluded was that conducting the
furloughs in an unequal fashion would actually still produce
significant disruptions and delays throughout the system and
things that we could not possibly completely understand or
mitigate.
The other thing is that what happens in a particular
facility is affected by a number of factors. Clearly, our
availability to accept aircraft at that facility is one factor,
but other factors relate to how an airline chooses to build its
schedule and how it chooses to manage its traffic as it goes
through there. We concluded that we could not be in the
business of picking winners and lowers between particular hubs,
particular geographic locations, or one facility versus
another; that the most equitable way to deal with these network
impacts was through a universal application of the furlough
equally across the system.
Mr. Quigley. Let me suggest that there is a calculus here
that you describe that is beyond my pay grade, and I respect
that. But with all due respect, I have a hard time believing
that Atlanta, Chicago, and several other hubs impact on the
entire system is, even with connectivity, is a lot bigger, no
matter how you slice this, than several of these very small
regional airports.
Mr. Huerta. Well, let me just cite the examples over the
last couple of days. One of the things--where we have an
application of the furlough; what we have seen is there are
differential impacts on different days based on what we are
seeing in terms of actual traffic and weather situations. For
example, over the last two days there have not been significant
impacts in Chicago. Now, we are seeing that today. What we have
seen in terms of impacts in Atlanta have, for the most part,
not been as bad as what we would have modeled----
Mr. Quigley. We are not in the busy summer travel season
yet either.
Mr. Huerta. Fair enough. What we are trying to anticipate
as we work through this is what are things going to look like
as we get into the busy summer travel season, and that is part
of the discussion that we need to keep going.
Mr. Quigley. All right. And I understand you do not want to
pick winners and losers. I think you might want to pick volume
versus smaller volume.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Following up on my colleague's question, you had mentioned
before in your testimony that there were some airports that
were not impacted by this?
Could you tell me which ones those were?
Mr. Huerta. It is a number of airports. For example, the
Washington airports, they have a lot of available capacity that
they are able to manage, and so the impacts, we would project,
would be less than we would see in some other areas of the
country. The major impacts that we see are in places like all
three New York airports. It is a complex air space to operate
within. These are very large facilities and are complicated to
manage the air space and complicated to staff. And so that is
one example of where we would see that.
I mentioned Atlanta. Atlanta is one where the impacts could
be significant or they could be manageable, that is largely a
function of the design of the airport. They have five parallel
runways, so they have a lot of available capacity to operate
within at that airport. It is the relationship between the
facilities but also the design of the airfield and the
schedules that airlines have.
Mr. Joyce. But the cuts you decided to make were uniform
across the board.
Mr. Huerta. Because we determined that the network impacts
on the entire system were such that if we were to do anything
different, that there would still be significant disruptions
and it would put us in the position of picking winners and
losers.
Mr. Joyce. Because I am somewhat new with this bear with me
for a moment. When was the first time you heard the term
``sequestration'' and that it may apply to your budget going
forward?
Mr. Huerta. It was in the whole discussion that took place
with the original passage of the Budget Control Act.
Mr. Joyce. Did you prepare alternative budgets?
Mr. Huerta. Alternative?
Mr. Joyce. Budgets. One with the money that you thought you
were going to get and another one with sequestration.
Mr. Huerta. What we started focusing on at the beginning of
the fiscal year was to plan for what would a cut look like
against our budget; yes.
Mr. Joyce. Okay. In that cut, did you cut any
administration?
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. Could you tell us what you cut?
Mr. Huerta. We did significant reductions in all of our
nonpay activities along the lines of what I talked about--
training, travel. We cut----
Mr. Joyce. You cut from $129 million I heard you say to
$125 million in travel?
Mr. Huerta. One forty nine. One forty nine.
Mr. Joyce. I am sorry.
Mr. Huerta. One forty nine to $125. We also reduced our IT
expenditures through a consolidation. The savings this year for
that are about $36 million. We have put a hiring freeze on. We
got rid of contracts that were personal services contracts,
essentially letting go contract and temporary employees.
We have greatly reduced our expenditures in spare parts and
equipment and everything associated with that. And then in
terms of the overhead functions--things like general counsel,
finance, and so forth, I think a disproportionate reduction in
those areas all with the goal of preserving the operating
mission of the agency.
Mr. Joyce. Okay. And those preparations took place over
months?
Mr. Huerta. Yes.
Mr. Joyce. Who do you represent do you feel--the American
public, the airline industry? Who would you view as being your
end client?
Mr. Huerta. The American public.
Mr. Joyce. Okay. And if the aviation industry serves the
American public and moves us across the country, why would you
think that only last week would be a good time to bring them in
and act in concert with them--or as you say you told them what
you were going to do--why would you not have engaged them
earlier on and asked them for their input so they could do the
proper reductions in their schedules so we could act in concert
to serve the American public?
Mr. Huerta. We have been working as diligently as we can to
deal with what is an unmanageable situation. None of these are
great choices, and what we wanted to do was to identify as
precisely as we could impacts and manage them as best that we
possibly could. As information became available we did share it
with them.
Mr. Joyce. I was not here for it, sir, so I just want to
know why we are all of a sudden getting to this point and it
seems in the last week it has all come into play when you have
so many big stakeholders here that should have all been at the
table from the get-go to make it work.
Mr. Huerta. I have been talking about it since the start of
the year.
Mr. Joyce. I understand that. You said that a couple of
times you have been talking about it but you just told the
people who were servicing the American public on a daily basis
about it last week. Last Tuesday you indicated.
Mr. Huerta. No, we have talked about what they should
expect in the way of impacts, what the impacts on our budget
was. Last week what we were talking about was specific
operational details.
Mr. Joyce. Last week?
Mr. Huerta. That is correct.
Mr. Joyce. Last Tuesday?
Mr. Huerta. That is correct.
Mr. Joyce. And you never felt that you should engage them
before last Tuesday on what the schedules could do?
Mr. Huerta. We engage with them on a daily basis in
operating the National Airspace System. But what we shared with
them was specific schedules that we had built based on the
impact of the furlough.
Mr. Latham. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Joyce. Sorry, Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
We are going to hopefully have a quick last round here, and
I know your schedule--I think we are about noon to depart. But
a couple questions that I have yet.
There is a lot being made about the fact that domestic
flights are down 27 percent from 2000 levels, and yet the
budget has grown 109 percent since 1996. Can you explain the
math on this and why the operation budgets are up that much but
operations are down?
Mr. Huerta. Well, simply put, the nature of the system has
changed quite dramatically. The biggest increase has been
consistent with the economy as a whole, an increase in payroll.
We are a people-driven organization.
Second, we have made significant investments in new
technology since that time, and that is with the long-term goal
of transforming from a radar-based system to a satellite-based
navigation system in the years ahead. We have also introduced
significant new procedures that are intended to yield benefit
for the traveling public through reduced fuel burn and greater
efficiency in the system. We are in a period of time where as
we introduce the new technologies we need to continue to
maintain the old technologies. Long term there will be
significant savings.
Mr. Latham. You know, when we went through the process of
doing the continuing resolution, OMB sent up a list of hundreds
of anomalies to address individual funding problems and
mandatory that you had to pay raises to some people so we had
to fix this or we could not continue. Was there an anomaly
request to fix the furlough problem?
Mr. Huerta. I cannot comment on what OMB might have sent
up, but we were certainly discussing with the FAA and the
Department of Transportation what this impact was going to be.
Mr. Latham. So you never talked to OMB about an anomaly to
fix the problem?
Mr. Huerta. We shared with them what we expected the
impacts to be.
Mr. Latham. I thought you said you did not talk to them.
Mr. Huerta. No, we had discussions about how we were going
to manage and what we expected the impact to be.
Mr. Latham. But you did not request that they bring an
anomaly on their list of hundreds of changes that they needed
to do the CR?
Mr. Huerta. Well, I am not familiar with a list of 100
changes that they may have sent.
Mr. Latham. Well over that. Across the government wide they
had a list of things that they needed in the CR to address
certain problems. And apparently, but you did not tell them
that you had a problem?
Mr. Huerta. No, it was well known that we had a problem,
sir.
Mr. Latham. So they did not respond to your request?
Mr. Huerta. I cannot comment on those discussions that
might have taken place.
Mr. Latham. You do not know if there was a request?
Mr. Huerta. I cannot comment on how priorities were
established within the continuing resolution. I really do not
know.
Mr. Latham. But you are not aware of their having any
request to Congress to fix this?
Mr. Huerta. I am not aware of that.
Mr. Latham. Okay. So they insisted on the sequester back
with the Budget Control Act and then when they have this
problem that is very disruptive to the American people they
made no effort to fix it? No request?
Mr. Huerta. As I said, I am not familiar with what might
have been sent up on behalf of the government as a whole.
Mr. Latham. I am going to quit a little bit early here but
can you again look the American people in the eye and say the
sequester will have no effect on safety?
Mr. Huerta. Yes. The impact will be on efficiency, but we
will not do anything to compromise safety.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. I am going to follow my colleague, Congressman
Cole, in that this budget is based on sequestration being
removed by 2014 or the 2014 budget. But I have to tell you my
expectation is that, as I said in my opening statement, that
2013 we had sequestration and there is great likelihood that
2014, I think we are going to be at least part of the fiscal
year in sequestration. I hope that regular order comes about
and we have Chairman Rogers here and we had Ranking Member
Lowey who I think would do it if possible. But I would join
Congressman Cole to say that sequestration is going to continue
into 2014 and we should all be prepared for it.
Mr. Latham. Thank the gentleman.
Mr. Rogers.
Mr. Rogers. No questions.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. No questions.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Joyce.
Mr. Joyce. No questions.
Mr. Latham. Wow. Maybe I should run the furlough.
Obviously, there is a lot of frustration from a lot of
folks, and you are keenly aware of that. But I would hope that
as we go through this process for next year that we keep an
open communication line because we have some real tough
decisions to make and there is a lot of concerns that we all
have about going forward certainly with emphasis on safety but
let me just say we want to continue that relationship. It is a
difficult situation, obviously, but I wish you had come to us
to actually let us know what we could do to fix the problem. We
have heard nothing before and that is the frustration I think
shared by Chairman Rogers and a lot of us here, but these are
not insurmountable problems if, in fact, we cooperate and work
together.
With that, thank you very much for your testimony today.
And the hearing is adjourned.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.027

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.040

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.046

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.051

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.076

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.087

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.088

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.089

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.090

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.091

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.092

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.093

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.094

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.095

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.096

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.097

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.098

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.099

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.100

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.101

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.102

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.103

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.104

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.105

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.106

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.107

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.108

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.109

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.110

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.203

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.243

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.244

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.245

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.246

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.247

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.248

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.249

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.250

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.251

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.252

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.253

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.254

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.255

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.256

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.257

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.258

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.259

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.260

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.261

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.262

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.263

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.264

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.265

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.266

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.267

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.268

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.269

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.270

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.271

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.272

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.273

Thursday, April 25, 2013.

FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION

WITNESS

HON. JOSEPH C. SZABO, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
Mr. Latham. The subcommittee will come to order.
This morning, we welcome FRA Administrator Joseph Szabo to
testify on the FRA's budget request for fiscal year 2014.
We welcome you back, Mr. Szabo.
This year, the FRA is requesting authority to spend $6.6
billion in fiscal year 2014. This represents a $5 billion
increase over fiscal year 2013 funding, or a 330 percent
increase, one of the largest increases in the budget.
This includes $2.7 billion for Amtrak, which is doubled
from the fiscal year 2013 level. It also includes $3.7 billion
for a new rail service improvement program, which could be used
to fund high-speed rail investments, which are eligible under
this new account.
The budget assumes that $214 billion in savings from the
overseas contingency operations will be used to shore up the
Highway Trust Fund. It proposes to use $40 billion from this
bolstered trust fund to finance a 5-year rail reauthorization
proposal.
It is widely known that CBO expects the trust fund to go
broke in 2014, and the withdrawal of forces from Iraq and
Afghanistan does not create a real offset. The administration
seems hopelessly confused about the fact that budgets do not
assume that wars go on forever. I cannot make it any plainer
for you than to say Congress has not and would not have
appropriated funds for operations overseas in years that follow
the departure of our forces. That is absurd. This ridiculous
proposal is yet another accounting gimmick that this budget
puts forward to justify even more unsustainable spending.
This proposal is particularly frustrating in a year when
the American people are expecting leadership from all of us on
fiscal responsibility. This is an expensive proposal to put
forth in this environment without any real way to pay for it.
As you know, we are under significant financial constraints.
With that said, I am looking forward to hearing a more detailed
explanation of your budget.
We welcome you again, Mr. Szabo.
Before I recognize the Administrator for his opening
statement, I recognize Mr. Pastor for his opening comments.
Mr. Pastor. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
I also want to welcome the Federal Railroad Administrator,
Mr. Szabo. Welcome to the subcommittee and this hearing on the
2014 appropriation budget.
The president's budget request for the Federal Railroad
Administration includes the biggest increase within the entire
DOT budget. The budget includes a total of $6.6 billion for
FRA's programs and activities, of which $6.4 billion is
requested in mandatory funding for two new rail accounts.
Key components of the new current passenger rail service
program include: capital and operating support for long-
distance routes, transitional assistance for States as they
begin to cover the full operating and capital costs of State-
supported routes, and critical funding to address the state-of-
good-repair backlog on the Northeast Corridor.
In many ways, Mr. Chairman, the state-of-good-repair
funding builds on your new initiative you proposed in the
fiscal year 2013 bill and Amtrak's capital account for the
bridge and tunnel program. I am hopeful that we can get further
in the process this year.
Finally, I am pleased that the budget request includes $70
million for rail planning. As you may recall, I urged that we
include funding for planning when President Bush requested this
intercity rail passenger grant program a few years back. Sound
planning and analysis is essential for the development of any
new transportation project.
I look forward to Mr. Szabo's testimony and discussion
today.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Latham. After the Administrator, we will proceed with
5-minute rounds, alternating back and forth in our normal
procedure.
With that, Mr. Szabo, we invite you to give us your opening
statement. Your written statement will be included in the
record. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Szabo. Very good.
Chairman Latham, Ranking Member Pastor, members of the
committee, thank you so much for this opportunity to discuss
our 2014 budget request.
This budget represents a multiyear blueprint for investing
in the next era of American freight and passenger rail and
reflects an emerging consensus that rail is the mode of
opportunity.
We are requesting $6.6 billion for fiscal year 2014,
including $6.4 billion for the development of a national high-
performance rail system program, the first of a 5-year, $40-
billion rail authorization. The program will be focused on two
connecting priorities: modernizing our existing rail system and
building an enhanced passenger and freight network to meet
future demand.
Our budget also requests funding for expanding key safety
initiatives that have helped to make 2012 the safest year in
railroad history.
Further, as part of the President's initiative to invest
$50 billion in transportation infrastructure this coming year,
we are requesting $5 billion for rail projects. In the next few
decades, America's transportation network will need to move 100
million additional people and 4 billion more tons of freight
per year, and it will need to do it safely, reliably, and
efficiently.
But today our airports and highways are stretched close to
their limits, with congestion costing our economy more $120
billion a year. These challenges underscore the need to invest
in more underutilized transportation alternatives, such as
rail, which can be the most cost-effective, least oil-reliant,
and most environmentally friendly mode to move people and
freight.
Congress recognized this need in 2008 when it passed with
broad bipartisan support two landmark pieces of legislation:
the Rail Safety Improvement Act and the Passenger Rail
Investment and Improvement Act. And both have helped fuel the
resurgence of American rail.
Since these projects were passed, railroad accidents have
fallen to record lows, while Amtrak's ridership and on-time
performance have risen to record highs and freight intermodal
traffic has surged to near record levels. Over the past 4
years, historic levels of public and private investment have
been made in safety improvements, passenger rail equipment,
corridor upgrades, and freight capacity.
The key elements of PRIIA and RSIA are now set to expire at
the end of this fiscal year. And as much as we have
accomplished, much more needs to be done to rebalance our
Nation's transportation network.
Our budget proposes to take a more coordinated approach to
enhancing the Nation's rail system--a holistic, integrated
strategy that addresses safety, passenger and freight service
improvements, and strong planning. Our new approach builds on
the core principles of PRIIA and RSIA, and it better reflects
both our on-the-ground experiences and the complex reality of
our rail system, which runs mainly on privately owned track,
carrying a mix of passenger and freight trains.
Much of the rail infrastructure we rely on today was built
by past generations of Americans who acted on our behalf. Now
is the time for our generation, for the sake of our children
and grandchildren, to recapture that visionary spirit. But to
do so, sustained and predictable Federal funding for rail
programs is a necessity.
For decades, Congress has funded highway, transit, and
aviation programs through multiyear authorizations that provide
guaranteed funding that enables States, local governments, and
the private sector to plan for and make transportation
investments. Around the world, major rail systems have been
developed through similar multiyear funding programs. So to
build the rail network that our economy needs, we are proposing
to adopt this approach for rail by establishing a new rail
account of the transportation trust fund. Given the enormous
pent-up demand for rail projects, this is an appropriate step
forward.
For the $10 billion this administration has invested in
high-speed and higher-performing intercity passenger rail, we
have received applications requesting funding for more than
seven times that amount. And since 2009, 75 environmental and
engineering studies and 30 State rail plans and corridor plans
are under way, creating an even stronger pipeline for future
projects. With your support, we can safely position our rail
network for its increasingly vital role in meeting the Nation's
transportation challenges.
In closing, I want to thank the committee for their work to
address the rail needs in the Northeast region resulting from
Hurricane Sandy. Work is ongoing to make critical investments
needed to restore and revitalize services in the area. However,
we are not able to access all of the funds that were
appropriated for Amtrak, so we will continue to work with the
committee to resolve the underlying concerns and modify the
legislative language to make all of the funds available.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Latham. Thank you very much, Mr. Szabo.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.274

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.275

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.276

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.277

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.278

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.279

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.280

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.281

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.282

Mr. Latham. Last week, as I am sure you know, Secretary
LaHood testified before our subcommittee, and I really need
some clarification on a few topics that we discussed at that
hearing. Secretary LaHood stated, and I quote, ``DOT has never
promoted building anything to get anywhere faster. We don't
promote things to get places faster.'' Quote, ``We have never
promoted high-speed rail on the speed aspect of it.''
Why have you proposed spending billions of dollars on the
high-speed rail program if speed is not a factor?
Mr. Szabo. I can't directly, you know, attribute to what
the Secretary, you know, the point he was trying to make in his
comments, but I can say this about our program: Our program has
always been about the performance of passenger rail. It is
about a higher-performing passenger rail system. And, of
course, our proposal going forward is about a higher-performing
passenger and freight rail system.
Ultimately, it comes down to the safe, reliable, and
efficient movement of people. And so it is a matter of
understanding what is the market need between city pairs, what
types and levels and frequencies of service that best meet that
market need.
And so, certainly, speed is an element. I think likely the
point the Secretary was trying to make is that speed cannot and
should not be the only element.
Again, when it comes to our rail program, there are markets
where true high-speed rail core express service is appropriate
because of the distances to be traveled and the population
densities to be served. But, certainly, there are other markets
where just by having higher-performing service, regional rail
service, 90 to 100 miles per hour, because of the lower capital
costs, actually are much more efficient serving those markets.
And then there are, of course, those smaller communities,
those feeder routes that feed into the larger core system,
where 79-mile-per-hour service is, in fact, the most efficient
and most cost-effective way to connect them to the broader
network.
Mr. Latham. I guess that leads perfectly to my next
question. The FRA is insistent upon upholding a 125-mile-an-
hour performance standard for rail equipment purchased by the
Federal funds instead of 110 miles an hour.
If going faster doesn't matter, why take such an
affirmative stance on the higher standard when the 110-mile-an-
hour technology may be more cost-effective?
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, easy answer, and it is about being most
cost-effective.
You need to keep in mind that our program has three tiers
of service. There is that core express service, which is those
speeds of, you know, 150 to 220 miles per hour. And then the
middle tier is that regional express service, which operates at
speeds from 90 to 125 miles per hour. And then the third tier,
you know, the feeder service and merging routes, operates at
those speeds 79 to 90 miles per hour.
So under PRIIA, Congress directed us to bring together all
the stakeholders--the States, Amtrak, the equipment
manufacturers--essentially to come up with standardization
specifications for each of those three tiers of service. And so
what the States and Amtrak and the equipment providers have
come together on is a standard that fully meets the needs of
that regional express tier, up to 125 miles per hour.
I mean, the key here is you don't want to have a standard
that isn't going to meet the need of the service in that
category. And since service in that category will in many
places be going 125 miles per hour, you need a locomotive that
goes that fast.
And by standardizing it and bundling it--we just saw in our
first procurement in the Midwest where, through the
standardization and the bundling, the bids came in about 35
percent lower than expectation.
And so Illinois wants to ensure that their locomotives can
operate at 125 miles per hour. Michigan has expressed the same
need. California's locomotives are going to have to go 125
miles per hour for them. And so, as this procurement is
bundled, you need to make sure you can reach your top speed. A
locomotive designed for 125 miles per hour can still go 110,
but the opposite is not true. If you purchase a locomotive that
is restricted to 110 miles per hour, you are limited forever,
including the 30-, 40-year life of that locomotive.
Mr. Latham. All right. I think that sounds like a conflict
with what you said previously, but my time has expired.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. Since sequestration is the biggest topic of the
week, the FRA has to make $82 million in cuts due to the
sequestration. The bulk of these cuts will come from the
Amtrak. FRA's operating and research programs will be reduced
by a total of nearly $11 million.
What other reductions have you made to meet your
requirements under the sequestration?
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, we have had essentially to take a look
at--you know, turn over every rock and look in every corner of
the organization to take a look at where savings can be
achieved. And, of course, we have made our 5 percent across-
the-board cuts. It has meant, in many cases, delaying in
hiring. We have made significant cutbacks in travel and
conference.
You know, the goal has been for us to absorb more pain at
headquarters, to make sure that we protect the ability of rank-
and-file inspectors to make inspections out in the field and,
you know, try to make certain that our core safety mission is
not affected.
But, you know, we did some real due diligence and began
preparing actually a couple of months in advance by
strategically not filling positions and making significant
reductions in travel, canceling contracts.
Mr. Pastor. So has it affected the safety or efficiency of
running the railroads?
Mr. Szabo. It certainly has made our challenge greater.
Again, our priority has been to protect and preserve rank-and-
file inspections. So, you know, our goal is to try and make
sure that it does not come back and bite us in the behind on,
you know, achieving our continuous record of safety
improvements. But, certainly, there is a risk if sequestration
continues long-term.
Mr. Pastor. Well, I think that that is a high probability.
Yesterday, we had the FAA, and the budget that was being
discussed had included one of the conditions that sequestration
would have been lifted. And I and I think Congressman Cole both
suggested to the Administrator that, in my opinion,
sequestration is going to continue in 2013 and go forward to
2014. And whenever it is lifted, it is going to be quite a
ways.
So I think that would be the probable situation. And so I
think that is what you should also plan for, as you do other
alternatives.
Mr. Szabo. Congressman, obviously, the longer that
sequestration is in place, the greater our risk becomes and the
greater our challenge is. You know, but it is my responsibility
to try and make sure that it doesn't have a deleterious effect
on safety.
You know, we are very, very proud of the fact that we have
a significant record of continuous safety improvement over the
past 5 years. This hurts. It sets us back. We are dealing with
it. But the longer it is there, the greater our risk that it
ends up rooting itself in deleteriously affecting railroad
safety.
Mr. Pastor. Within the rail service improvement program,
$70 million is requested to coordinate planning for rail
projects. And I will tell you that, as you probably may be
aware, we are trying to connect two major metropolitan areas in
Arizona----
Mr. Szabo. Phoenix and Tucson, yes, sir.
Mr. Pastor [continuing]. Phoenix and Tucson, that would
connect 85 percent of the population and also would connect to
the Amtrak. So it gives the connection down in Tucson. And so I
am very happy that we had the initial grant provided by the
Federal Government, and Arizona Department of Transportation is
planning and going forward.
Is this how you see the $70 million to be used, by local
authorities and et cetera?
Mr. Szabo. Planning today saves capital dollars tomorrow.
It is so important that strong planning be done, that States
and regions be able to take a look at their transportation
needs and do good planning, having the option of using the
transportation mode that is most efficient for the journeys
that need to take place in moving people and goods.
There is some great planning work being done there in the
Southwest that I would love to spend some more bringing you up
to speed on. But the other important thing is to continue the
planning for the Northeast Corridor, the NEC FUTURE project.
And it is imperative that the good work that has been started
be allowed to continue there. Our planning dollars are going to
expire there this August, and we are really going to lose
synergy if we have to shut down that work. And this is one of
the world's strongest intercity passenger rail markets, as well
as a very heavily utilized freight market.
Mr. Pastor. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Apparently, Mr. Cole does not have a question at this time,
so I recognize Mr. Dent.
Mr. Dent. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Mr. Szabo.
Mr. Szabo. Good morning.
Mr. Dent. Just a few things. First, thanks for being here.
In light of the sequestration, can you explain how you are
prioritizing your spending decisions?
And, specifically, I am concerned--yesterday, as was
mentioned, we had Administrator Huerta in here from the FAA
discussing, you know, the issues with the FAA and air traffic
control. Could you let me know if we could anticipate similar
types of problems for Amtrak in light of the sequester?
Mr. Szabo. At this point, even though there has been a 5-
percent across-the-board reduction to Amtrak, at this point,
you know, it won't entail any direct disruptions of service.
You know, again, obviously, the longer these things go on,
the longer that they continue, the greater the risk is, you
know, in being able to maintain, in our case, from FRA's
standpoint, the level of safety that we are responsible for
achieving and, in Amtrak's case, the level of service that they
are expected to achieve.
Mr. Dent. Have you requested any flexibility yet from
Congress in the event that, you know, we would have to make
some adjustments to Amtrak's schedules? Have you requested any
flexibility, at this point?
Mr. Szabo. At this point, there hasn't been the need for us
to come and request flexibility from you. Again, we have done
our due diligence and we have made our plans to get through the
fiscal year 2013 at the sequestration levels. My priority, you
know, has been, again, to protect those rank-and-file
inspectors out there. But there would be concern that, long-
term, it can manifest itself and have a deleterious effect on
railroad safety.
Mr. Dent. Okay. Well, in the event that there is going to
be a problem, we just hope that your administration would
notify stakeholders in a timely manner, unlike the FAA, which
clearly did not give any stakeholders forewarning of what was
about to happen, whether it was--in that case, it was the
airports, it was the airlines, it was the unions, and, of
course, the flying public. We just hope that if there is going
to be a repeat event, that there is better communication.
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, we continue to coordinate very, very
closely with Amtrak. I mean, it is on a near daily basis.
Mr. Dent. Well, thank you.
And I have no further questions, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Dent.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome, Administrator. We are glad to have you here.
Appreciate your good work.
I want to talk to you about the section 209 transition
assistance. As a State that has invested heavily in intrastate
Amtrak service and has seen that service flourish and grow, we,
of course, have a very strong stake in this going well and
taking on this responsibility in a way that lets us continue
and even increase the service.
We are one of the States that is going to be financially
responsible for supporting State corridor services under
section 209 of the Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement
Act beginning on October 1st of this year. North Carolina is
also one of the States that has served on the State working
group which developed the section 209 methodology in
partnership with Amtrak.
Now, we both know States didn't ask for this change.
Mr. Szabo. Right.
Mr. Price. But they have agreed to pay for the expenses
directly associated with operating their routes, a percentage
of overhead costs for supporting services, and capital fees to
help keep trains and infrastructure in good repair.
The States had been given a preliminary estimate about the
cost that would be required under section 209 versus what they
are paying now, that the difference would be about $100
million. But last Friday, Amtrak indicated the cost for States
would be $120 million, a 20 percent increase.
States don't feel they have received the level of detail
necessary to support the new additional costs. The States that
are assuming this new fiscal responsibility need to be able to
justify expenses to their State legislatures and leadership.
The last thing we would want to happen is for States to be
forced to reduce service come October 1 because the new cost
discrepancies are not resolved.
So I wonder what you are doing to work with Amtrak and the
States to ensure that the costs are being allocated
appropriately among the various entities and that the costs are
adequately justified to all parties concerned.
Mr. Szabo. Yes, Congressman, I think several things.
First off, under the statute, actually, the Surface
Transportation Board is the governing body that has the
authority to adjudicate any disputes between the States and
Amtrak in the numbers. But we believe there is an important
role that we have to play in making sure that there is full
transparency to the numbers, that there is a good understanding
of what constitute these numbers, that there is a fair
allocation of these numbers. And so, you know, we are engaging
with both Amtrak and the States to try and better clarify the
understanding of those figures.
In addition, as part of our budget proposal and our
reauthorization proposal, you know, we do propose that there be
transitional assistance for the States so the burden doesn't
just drop on them like an anvil.
And it is not new money for this fiscal year. It is money
that originally would have been a part of Amtrak's budget that
now would go to help the States with the first year of their
payment of their 209 obligations and taper off in subsequent
years, you know, to a point to where it completely diminishes.
And then it does become the State's full responsibility to pay
the cost of operating their corridor service.
So we think there are two roles that we can be helpful in:
one, in better understanding the number, ensuring transparency,
and then providing this tapering-down financial assistance.
Mr. Price. I want to get to that in just a moment, but can
you shed light at this moment on this recent shift, on this
recent 20 percent increase in the estimated cost?
Mr. Szabo. I do not have those figures. You know, but staff
is working with the other staffs at the States and Amtrak to
try and better understand accurate costs.
Mr. Price. And you can submit that for the record, the
justification or the rationale?
Mr. Szabo. We will get you something for the record,
definitely.
Mr. Price. Your numbers.
Now, the fiscal 2014 budget, to come to that----
Mr. Szabo. Yes.
Mr. Price [continuing]. Includes $300 million for State
corridors, including the 209 transitional assistance. And
recently you indicated that, of this $300 million, $85 million
be designated for transition assistance and the remaining $215
million for equipment.
How did you arrive at these funding levels? How is this
funding going to be distributed to the States? Can you provide
additional information on what equipment costs you have in mind
here?
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, part of the responsibility that the States
end up assuming under PRIIA section 209 is the capital costs
relative to the equipment. And so the additional costs that are
in there are making sure that legacy costs are addressed, you
know, as the States meet their new responsibility, you know,
for maintaining the equipment as well as replenishing and
replacing the equipment.
And it would be a grant application process. The States
would need to apply to us, and we would administer that grant,
taking a look at their numbers for operating as well as the
capital costs that they would be responsible for.
Mr. Price. All right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
This has to do with Iowa more specifically, but, as you
know, the Chicago to Iowa City passenger rail project is under
way, with the Illinois portion of the project from Chicago to
Moline having started. And Iowa is still working on a service
development plan to analyze the project----
Mr. Szabo. Right. Right.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. To build it out all the way to
Council Bluffs, Omaha.
Recently, $18 million of Iowa's project funding was
transferred to the Illinois portion of the project to cover a
``cost change.'' I am told that this transfer is not in
accordance with the agreement in principle between Iowa DOT and
the Illinois DOT. We were advised that the FRA made the
decision to shift the funding.
Can you tell me what statutory authority under which you
stepped in and carried out the shifting of the funds,
especially since cost overruns are expressly defined as costs
over and above the amount funded by the Federal intercity
passenger rail funding?
Mr. Szabo. Chairman, we are very comfortable that the
decision that we made was not only authorized but proper. For
the record, we will actually cite whatever----
Mr. Latham. Statutory authority.
Mr. Szabo [continuing]. Statute that is appropriate there.
[The information follows:]

No statutory authority was provided by FRA to the Committee
as of time of printing.

Mr. Szabo. But the key here is, because the construction is
now moving forward on Chicago to Moline, there are now costs
that the Illinois side of the project are incurring that they
otherwise would not have incurred. And so it was appropriate--
these were costs that actually would have later fallen into the
Iowa side of the project.
And so it is not that money was taken from Iowa; it is that
the actual cost got shifted, and therefore the dollars,
likewise, got shifted.
Mr. Latham. Federal funds are not supposed to cover State
cost overruns.
Mr. Szabo. It is not about a cost overrun. We will be able
to--for the record, we will make sure that we get you a very,
very clear breakdown on our decision. I am comfortable with our
decision and believe it is the right one.
And for the record, you know, we are holding that Iowa
piece in abeyance, hoping that Iowa chooses to move forward,
but it is the last of our high-speed rail grants that is not
obligated at this point. So, you know----
Mr. Latham. What is your definition in that case of ``high-
speed''?
Mr. Szabo. Under the high-speed rail program. Actually,
Congress' definition, the statute that Congress established
under PRIIA, made the definition speeds up to 110 miles per
hour. And that is Iowa DOT's vision for that project.
In our case, under our program, that would actually be the
second tier of service. That would be what we would call
regional express service that falls into that 90-mile-per-hour
to 125-mile-per-hour category.
Mr. Latham. When it was proposed, they said it would be 53
miles an hour.
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, I do know what Iowa's vision is. Like I
say, Iowa DOT's vision for that project is 110-mile-per-hour
service. So it is the second category.
It certainly may have qualified or could have qualified
under the first tier, under feeder service, you know, that
would fall into the top-end speeds of 79 to 90 miles per hour.
But your State DOT, their vision is for 110-mile-per-hour
service on that line.
Mr. Latham. Your budget--I don't know if I have time for
this in this round, but your budget includes a vision for a 5-
year, $40-billion rail proposal. Secretary LaHood, responding
to my question as to when the administration would formally
submit its reauthorization proposal, stated that the President
was busy with issues of gun control, immigration reform, and
sequestration.
Further, he stated that receiving a proposal from the
administration was contingent upon, basically, Congress taking
action on immigration reform, gun control, and sequestration.
That is interesting to me, since the President insisted on
sequestration himself and he has not made any proposal as far
as immigration reform or gun control.
Are you at least working on your reauthorization proposal,
or are you waiting for gun control and immigration and
sequestration to be addressed before you start? Or what is
the----
Mr. Szabo. From a rail perspective, we are absolutely
working on our reauthorization proposal. And what you have
before you is, you know, that blueprint.
We clearly believe that rail is the mode of opportunity, it
is the mode of need when you take a look at our transportation
challenges, and that we need to achieve parity for rail, like
we have for other transportation modes, ensuring a dedicated
fund set up for rail investments and making sure that we can
advance the safe, reliable, and efficient movement of people
and goods. And we think rail has a significant role to play.
Mr. Latham. Just to complete the thought, what
circumstances will you be permitted to formally submit your
reauthorization, and when can we expect it? Because we have
issues here that you are talking about, amounts that we don't
know, they are just mystery amounts, in what you are talking
about as far as the big proposal in your budget.
Mr. Szabo. We look forward to continuing to work with your
staff to have provide all information that we are able to
provide in moving forward.
Mr. Latham. When do you expect and under what circumstances
will you have the reauthorization proposal to us?
Mr. Szabo. Well, I am not in a position where I can speak
about DOT's reauthorization proposal. But like I say, certainly
from a rail perspective, we have given you a great blueprint
here, and we look forward to continuing to provide additional
information to try and make this vision a reality.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.
Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. In my round of questioning when we talked about
planning, at the end of your testimony you brought up the
Northeast Corridor and talked about funds, that they were going
to lapse at the end of the fiscal year. And you showed some
concern, and so I go back to that so that you may further
explain what your concern is and, if it does lapse, what are
your plans so that we have an idea of how you propose to
address it.
Mr. Szabo. Well, of course, the hopes would be to find a
legislative fix so Amtrak could have access to the $86 million
that was intended for their use for Hurricane Sandy
remediation. And so we need to work with the committee and make
sure we come up with language that folks are, you know,
comfortable with to hopefully make those dollars available so
Amtrak can move forward with some very important projects in
the Northeast.
Mr. Pastor. All right.
In your budget, you have $675 million to address Amtrak's
state-of-good-repair backlog and to replace aging equipment on
the Northeast Corridor. You also have the moneys that was
available through Sandy.
How is that being coordinated so that the money is being
spent in a more efficient way so that we don't have duplication
or something falls through the crack? Because, obviously, you
are dealing with Sandy problems now and you want to repair
things up to state. So there must be some similarity in the
situation.
Mr. Szabo. Yeah. Well, I would break it down into three
components. You know, there are those projects that need to
move forward today to make repairs to damage caused by
Hurricane Sandy and to try and harden the resiliency of those
assets to make sure that they can withstand a storm in the
future.
But over and above that is the serious backlog of state of
good repair on the Northeast Corridor. And so if you take a
look at our program under current passenger rail services, over
the life of the 5-year proposal that we are putting out there,
we are looking to bring the entire Northeast Corridor to a
state of good repair.
Now, that doesn't allow it to grow, you know, for the
future. It only allows it to function today at its, you know,
peak efficiency. For it to grow for the future, you actually
have to go down into the second leg of our budget proposal in
the rail service improvement program. And Amtrak then would be
able to apply for the grants that would be available there to
start meeting, you know, that vision for the future, with true
220-mile-per-hour trains and the ability to grow the services
based on market needs.
Mr. Pastor. But I guess the crux of the question is, you
probably have infrastructure and equipment that was injured by
Sandy which probably was part of the backlog that you need to
bring into good repair. And so what I guess the question is: In
dealing with the situation that is similar to that, how are you
doing that to ensure that, once you deal with the damage
brought by Sandy and being part of the backlogs, that you can
accomplish the repair so it will go for the period of time you
anticipate?
Mr. Szabo. Through good transparency through our grant
oversight management of Amtrak. You know, those are exactly the
types of things that we would be drilling down into to ensure
that there is no level of duplication. So it would be through
our grant management program.
Mr. Pastor. And is some of the effort--as I understand,
there was a committee that was looking at the coordination of
the damage and repair dealing with Sandy. As I recall, it was
Secretary Donovan who was kind of the head of that committee?
Mr. Szabo. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Pastor. I am assuming, then, you also have people on
that effort. And how are you being informed of what----
Mr. Szabo. No, you bet we do, Congressman, that we are
engaged in that effort with Secretary Donovan. And we are doing
our due diligence, our oversight to make sure we are
comfortable with the accuracy of the numbers that get submitted
to us and, again, through our grant oversight, then making sure
that it is not duplicated elsewhere.
Mr. Pastor. Okay.
I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. I thank the gentleman.
Just to kind of go back over a little bit on the proposal,
you realize for us to consider your rail proposal we need to
understand every detail of it here. And without----
Mr. Szabo. Sure.
Mr. Latham [continuing]. A copy, it is impossible to
understand it.
On the very first page of your budget justification, it
says, ``The rail proposal is integral to the President's plan
to spur immediate job creation and economic growth through
investment in transportation infrastructure.'' And, it
certainly appears that you believe the rail reauthorization
proposal is important. I am really hopeful, eternally
optimistic that you will find it important enough to actually
send it to us so we can see it.
Is there--you don't have any timeline as to when you will
have the rail proposal?
Mr. Szabo. Well, we will continue to make information
available to you and continue to work with your staff to, you
know, fill in whatever questions it is that you have.
Mr. Latham. We want to know what your proposal is.
Mr. Szabo. I mean, the document before you is the blueprint
that really lays it out, the different components of, you know,
how we ensure that we are investing in the future of safety by
expanding our risk-reduction program, confidential close-calls
reporting, investing in the technology that we need to advance
safety, making sure that we are doing a better job of tracking
and following data. It is an invaluable way to become that much
more efficient with safety.
And then making sure that we have the ability not only to
bring the existing passenger rail assets, the Amtrak network--
broken down by business line, again, for that full transparency
and accountability--but bringing it to a state of good repair.
And then allowing the opportunities for States and regions to
continue to do good planning to meet their future
transportation needs. Have the opportunity to apply for capital
grants for freight and passenger rail investments that have a
clear basis in market need, you know, and that have clear
public benefits.
And advance a research and development program that, again,
not only meets our safety needs but allows us to meet the next
generation of rail needs, advancements in the Transportation
Research Center in Pueblo, Colorado, instead of having to do
some of this testing of equipment overseas, to have the ability
to do that here in the United States.
To make sure we are doing good workforce development. If
you take a look at the railroad industry, it is a whole group
like me that are getting gray in--you know, everybody is going
to be walking out the door and retiring together. And so for
rail to meet the role that it is going to have to play, there
has to be strong workforce development, not just for the
industry itself, but to strengthen States' and regions' and the
Federal Government's ability to plan for and execute good rail
projects.
Mr. Latham. Well, I think one example, without any details
of what the proposal is, is positive train control. Secretary
LaHood stated that the problems with the PTC are financial
rather than technical and that FRA was resolving the technical
difficulties. Your budget requests an amount for PTC for
Amtrak. I would add that we are not sure of the exact amount
since you haven't submitted the proposal, there is no
reauthorization proposal.
Does this mean that if we provide the mystery amount that
is in your request, that you can achieve implementation by
2015?
Mr. Szabo. I think the Secretary----
Mr. Latham. Do you see our dilemma? There are no specifics.
Mr. Szabo. Let me help clarify the record. There are both
financial as well as technical and programmatic challenges for
the industry to meet full--full--PTC deployment by the 2015
deadline.
Mr. Latham. Does Mr. LaHood know that? That is not what he
said.
Mr. Szabo. No, he does. He does. And, again, I don't want
to pick at his words, but I will say this for the record: The
financial challenges that he was talking about are what public
agencies face, Amtrak as well as the commuter rail operators.
The financial challenges for them are significant, very
significant, and, without question, a hurdle for them to meet
the 2015 deadline.
For the freight rail industry, it is less of a financial
challenge, and it is more the availability of radios and
spectrum.
And so the report that we submitted to Congress last fall,
you know, really outlined the challenges that the industry is
facing from a technical and programmatic standpoint. It does
indicate that they will achieve partial deployment by 2015, but
full deployment by 2015 is very unlikely.
Mr. Latham. Okay. I will have a follow-up here, but I am
out of time.
Mr. Price.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator, let me turn to the high-speed and intercity
passenger rail items in your budget. Your fiscal 2014 budget
request includes $6.5 billion for a new national high-
performance rail system.
Now, I understand this assumes a reconfigured
authorization, so the program structure is somewhat undefined
at this point. But I would like to ask you a few questions
about how you see this program working.
Mr. Szabo. Okay.
Mr. Price. In the first place, how are you building on the
key sections of PRIIA, section 301, 302, 501, which have
established the capital grants programs for the States and for
Amtrak? What are the continuities and the innovations here?
Mr. Szabo. You know, our goal to date has been to build out
good projects, build them on time and on budget. And North
Carolina has been a great example of a State that has been
doing just that, with a couple of their projects coming in
actually ahead of schedule and under budget. The program that
we have put together allows those good projects to continue on.
North Carolina has just done a tremendous job in making
capital improvements between Raleigh and Charlotte that are not
only going to increase the speed of trains but it is going to
improve the reliability of service. Most importantly, it is
going to improve the safety of the service and the safety for
motorists.
Mr. Price. Well, as you know, this has been an aspiration
for a long time. And we do feel like the State has been
rewarded for the early planning and early investment it made in
passenger rail. But there is no way this would have happened
without the funds provided through the Recovery Act. And we are
grateful for that, and we appreciate your commendation of what
we have done with that money.
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, the Sealed Corridor that you folks are
building out and the ability to work with those communities and
understand their vehicular and pedestrian traffic needs and
coming up with a, you know, very comprehensive plan to close
crossings, build overpasses, build underpasses, it just
improves the efficiency of the rail service while improving the
safety of the rail service and the safety for motorists and
pedestrians. And the fact that 50 grade crossings are going to
be closed between Raleigh and Charlotte by working with those
communities is just a huge achievement.
Mr. Price. Well, I want to thank you for your commitment to
developing a 21st-century rail system.
Within that $6.4 billion is $3.7 billion for new intercity
rail development. That appears to be a successor to the
previous high-speed rail program. Unfortunately, as you know,
high-speed rail hasn't been funded since fiscal 2010. That is 3
years of zero dollars for this program. We, of course, hope we
can avoid another year where this investment gets completely
shut out.
We tend to hear in the news about some of the struggles
with specific projects. I wonder if you can give us a general
idea of where things are with the existing Federal dollars and
projects under way. You have just done that with respect to
North Carolina, but where do we stand with the money that is
still being spent out?
And, of course, the implication is that this won't last
forever and that we pay a price for these successive years of
zero funding. In the absence of new Federal funding, what
evidence have you seen that States and localities are
continuing to invest and have interest in high-speed rail? To
what extent is that or might that fill some of the gap?
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, there are several States that continue to
not only make progress but move forward on their own dime on a
limited basis.
Our goal is to continue to build good projects, build them
on time, build them on budget. And the success that I outlined
in North Carolina is being captured essentially in every region
that we have made investments in.
In the Midwest, through the dollars that have been
invested, 80 percent of Chicago-Detroit will be at sustained
speeds of 110 mile per hour. Approximately 75 percent of
Chicago-St. Louis is going to be at those sustained speeds of
110 miles per hour with an entirely new fleet of equipment all
funded from the existing investments. Much of that work is
already operating today. Orders have been placed. And so it is
on schedule and on budget, with some things actually coming in
below bid estimate for the equipment.
You go out to the Northeast Corridor, and good work has
been done on the corridor itself to improve the efficiency,
reliability, and safety of existing operations on the Northeast
Corridor, while nice improvements have been made on some feeder
routes. New service was returned to Brunswick and Freeport,
Maine, to great celebration. Ridership is beating all of the
projections. Revenues are beating all of the projections.
You go out to the Pacific Northwest, we just had a ribbon-
cutting yesterday on the King Street Station. That work is
complete. Not only does it enhance the efficiency of the
station, more importantly it enhanced the safety of the station
by making it able to withstand a seismic event, which is
important out there, making renovations to prevent mudslides
from blocking out the corridor, and a series of improvements
that are going to reduce trip times, improve reliability
substantially, and, again, enhance the safety of the operations
there, and allow the Pacific Northwest to achieve their goal of
carving off an hour between Portland and Seattle while
advancing service to hourly departures.
So, I mean, you can go to every region and there is a
success story of this nature that has already happened today.
Mr. Price. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I know my time has expired. Let me just ask
you----
Mr. Latham. It has more than expired.
Mr. Price. All right. I want to ask for an item for the
record, if I might, and I will be very brief.
Mr. Latham. You are more than welcome.
Mr. Price. I appreciate those success stories and commend
you for them.
Mr. Pastor. Let me yield a minute of my time.
Mr. Latham. Okay. The gentleman is keeping us honest.
Mr. Price. All right.
I appreciate the success stories and commend you for them,
but I do want to know the other side of the story. Maybe you
can furnish this for the record. I want to know what gets
stopped in its tracks, so to speak, what doesn't get completed,
what plans don't get fulfilled if we continue with this pattern
of no funding. I mean, we really do need to know that side of
the story.
Mr. Szabo. We will provide that for the record. I think
there is good information we can provide from both standpoints,
a very clear update on what has been done and then what good
work gets put at risk if additional funding isn't made
available. And of particular concern would be the work on the
Northeast Corridor.
Mr. Price. That is exactly what I think we need. Thank you.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. I think in the last set of questions, you
brought up the Pueblo, Colorado, center.
Mr. Szabo. Yes.
Mr. Pastor. Before I ask a question on that, let me go back
to what--your budget proposes to fund reach and development in
two separate accounts. The budget requests $32 million in
general funds for railroad research and development and $55
million in mandatory funds for a new railroad research,
development, and technology program.
The basic question that I have is, why can't you do the
research under the one program? What requires you to now set up
two programs?
Mr. Szabo. Well, the first one is what has been our
historic, traditional program, which has more of a safety
focus. I mean, we have done some great work under that program.
And, actually, I would love to come brief you on some of the
good work that we have done under that program.
But the second part of it is taking a look at what it is
really going to take to grab the future.
Mr. Pastor. Does the second part mean the $55 million?
Mr. Szabo. Yes. Yes. And to make sure that we can upgrade
our test facility there in Pueblo to ensure that, instead of
having to farm out this testing across the globe to other
countries, that we have the ability to test high-speed rail
equipment here in the United States, to make sure we are doing
the good workforce development that is not only going to meet
the industry's needs but, again, government at the State,
regional, local, and Federal level to plan for and execute good
rail projects, to make sure that once again our country
captures the opportunity to be an exporter of this intellectual
property, this talent, and this equipment instead of having to
import it from Asia and from Europe.
We really want the United States of America to become a
leader in rail. We are a leader today in freight rail. We want
to see that role grow and be enhanced. And we want to become a
leader in passenger rail through a balanced program that
embraces high-speed, regional, and good feeder service, just
like they have in Europe and Asia.
Mr. Pastor. So the $25 million that is going to the Pueblo,
Colorado, test site or facility, that is for high-speed rail
technology?
Mr. Szabo. Yeah. It allows us to upgrade the facility there
to meet our future needs--in particular, the ability for it to
become a world-class test center for high-speed rail equipment.
It is a world-class test center in a lot of other areas. We
want to make sure that it keeps that world-class setting in
particular in this area, where we are a little bit deficient,
has the ability for grow.
Mr. Pastor. And the remaining $30 million will go where
under that new account?
Mr. Szabo. Again, that new account is about upgrading the
test center and the workforce development. For the record, we
will itemize out for you everything that falls under that
category, Congressman.
Mr. Pastor. Okay. All right.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you, Mr. Pastor.
The California High-Speed Rail Authority's latest business
plan assumes a total of $32 billion in Federal funding for the
project over the 10 years from fiscal year 2014 to 2023 period.
Congress so far has only provided $3.3 billion of that funding.
California's funding plan assumes another $28 billion over the
next 10 years.
Is it the policy of the administration to provide that
additional $28 billion for this project over the next 10 years?
Mr. Szabo. Well, let me say this. Under our program, this
is a grant program to where you have to apply for on a
competitive basis and be deemed the most meritorious--one of
the most meritorious proposals in that hopper. So there is no
automatic guarantee that California gets dollars.
Now, having said that, we remain very committed to that
project. We remain very bullish on what we believe that project
is going to mean for the people of California. And, certainly,
the fact that, you know, the bids just opened last week came in
substantially below budget--the range of the budget estimates
was, I think, between $1.2 billion to $1.8 billion, and they
came in less than a billion dollars. So, you know, we are
already going to be able to start work out there and do it
under budget.
And, of course, the goal here is to make sure that as
incremental pieces are constructed that they have immediate
usability, and so there is never an island that is left out
there that doesn't have value that it can provide the traveling
public.
Mr. Latham. So what you are saying for California, there is
no certainty that you are going to continue to fund that $28
billion. And if that is the case, how can they proceed if they
are not knowing if the funding is going to be there?
Mr. Szabo. They have to compete just like anybody else.
They have to compete just like anybody else. Now, again, we
remain committed to the project. We think it is a worthy
project. But they have to compete.
And, certainly, their goal needs to be to continue to do
good work, build out with the dollars that they have available,
and, of course, get that project to a point to where there is a
tipping point for private investment. Private investment is
going to have to be a very, very important part of the
California high-speed rail project.
And so it is going to be that balance between the public
dollars that the Federal Government and the State provides to
get to a point where private dollars can come in and
essentially get it over the tipping point.
Mr. Latham. I am still very concerned about uncertainty out
there. Especially, because in December last year, you amended
the grant agreement with the California High-Speed Rail
Authority to allow the authority to spend its Federal grants
first.
Mr. Szabo. You bet we did, because it saves the taxpayers
$100 million to $150 million. So, you know, this is consistent
with----
Mr. Latham. Which taxpayers?
Mr. Szabo. All taxpayers. It saves the project, it saves
the project $100 million to $150 million.
And so this is one of those wise things that you do to save
dollars. It is consistent, it is consistent with other grant
programs inside the DOT. There is nothing unique or unusual
here. It is just a sound business practice.
Mr. Latham. Well, it is unusual to have the Federal
Government fund 100 percent of something that is supposed to
be----
Mr. Szabo. No, Congressman--no, because the match--
California's match is still required. Their 50-percent match
does not go away. It comes into the project later.
But, again, this is consistent, this is consistent with the
approach used in other DOT modes. And so it is not something
that is unique.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Mr. Szabo. And, Chairman, if I can, you talked about the
uncertainty, and you are right. You know, for private investors
to come in, there has to be certainty. For States to do good
planning, there has to be certainty.
And this is all the more reason why we need to have a
program that goes on into the future, so States can do the good
planning that they need, so private investors have the
opportunity to come into these projects with that certainty
that they are going to be looking for, and, again, that rail is
put on parity with the other transportation modes like
aviation, highways, and transit, not left out there like an
orphan.
Mr. Latham. What, basically, you are saying is that the
stimulus, the $2.6 billion, this is a way of spending that out
before the deadline in 2017, as far as expending those funds.
Mr. Szabo. Chairman, I would argue that it is a way of
maximizing return to the taxpayers by saving $100 million to
$150 million on the segment.
Mr. Latham. How does it save that money, again?
Mr. Szabo. For the record, we will provide that to you or
come brief that to you. But that is the projection. That is the
projection, sir.
Mr. Latham. Save the Federal Government and taxpayers?
Mr. Szabo. Save the project.
Mr. Latham. Okay. Say you fund 100 percent or 80 percent
over the next 2 years of the project, and the project--I mean,
California, I don't know if you have heard, is not in great
financial condition. If they cannot come up with the money, the
project dies, are they still on the hook for the Federal part?
Mr. Szabo. Well, absolutely.
You know, two things. Again, first off, we are ensuring
that every piece that gets built has functional utility, has a
use that the traveling public will be able to take advantage
of, to ensure that there is never an orphan left out there as
this project, step by step, moves forward.
In addition, in addition, California is absolutely on the
hook for the balance of that Federal grant. Through our grant
agreements, we have assured that. There is no free ride here.
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Mr. Price, did you have questions?
Mr. Price. No further questions.
Mr. Latham. Mr. Pastor.
Mr. Pastor. I don't have any further questions.
Mr. Latham. You are very short-winded.
Mr. Pastor. Well, he did such a good job here, I----
Mr. Latham. He did. I know.
Mr. Pastor. And I read all the material. But there will be
questions for the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. On California, if we are funding 100 percent
initially--you are well aware that there are potential delays
of the project. I think there are some lawsuits out there. They
haven't bought the land yet.
Mr. Szabo. Actually, they have started land acquisition
this week.
Mr. Latham. They haven't bought the land yet. Are you
saying that if this gets bumped into fiscal year 2014-2015,
that that 100 percent guarantee is going to extend to those
years, then, if, in fact, they are not ready to go?
Mr. Szabo. I am not sure I follow the question, but,
certainly, let me say this: Our job is to make sure that the
grant agreement that we have with California is met. It is our
obligation to enforce that. And, certainly, we are going to
ensure that the terms of that agreement are adhered to.
Mr. Latham. But you have a 100 percent guarantee for fiscal
year 2013. You are paying--Federal share is 100 percent for
this year.
Mr. Szabo. Again, I am not sure I understand your question,
Chairman, but----
Mr. Latham. It is your agreement with them.
Mr. Szabo [continuing]. Again, the approach that we are
using, there is nothing unique or unusual about it. In fact, it
is the encouraged practice in some of the other modes in cases
of this nature. It is often used. I don't believe it is the
first time we have done it in FRA.
You know, so, yes, it was a different approach from what
our original grant agreement said. But based on the fact that
it saves $100 million to $150 million and is widely used in
other transportation modes, it was deemed to be the most
appropriate step in going forward. It is about saving costs
inside the project.
Mr. Latham. The California project's business plan assumes
Federal funding for the project of $2.2 billion per year in
fiscal year 2015 and again in 2016 and again in 2017, rising to
$3 billion per year thereafter.
If next year Congress enacts its 2015 appropriation and
authorization agenda and the amount provided for the new high-
speed rail projects in 2015 is the same as it was in 2011,
2012, and 2013, which is zero, do you have a contingency plan
in place to assist California for an orderly wind-down--if you
need to shut down the project?
Mr. Szabo. Well, I would certainly hope, in its wisdom,
Congress will understand the need to move forward with making
rail a viable transportation mode and putting it on parity with
highways, aviation, and transit. And so I would hope Congress,
in its wisdom, would choose to move forward with an approach to
where States and regions can plan and execute with certainty in
meeting the traveling public's transportation needs.
Under the grant agreement with California high-speed rail,
we have carved it up into pieces to, again, ensure that there
are immediate transportation benefits for each and every piece
that gets built, to ensure that there is always a return to the
public.
Now, it would be a crying shame if the people of California
aren't able to reap the full benefits and efficiencies that
come out of the build-out of that entire system, but our
contingency is to make sure that at least each piece that gets
built has functionality.
Mr. Latham. You know, you are fully aware that the funding
has been zero. You are still spending stimulus money.
Mr. Szabo. Well, we have allocated--we have, you know,
allocated all of our dollars, and, you know, good projects
continue to be built out. There is about $3.6 billion in
projects that are either complete, under construction, or set
to go into construction. Next 2 years are going to be our
biggest construction years on record.
And so, you know, again, this is about ensuring a pipeline
of projects, allowing States and regions certainty, the ability
to do good planning. You know, we have been building highways
for 80 years now. State DOTs are good at it. They always have a
supply of projects on the shelf as dollars become available.
For rail to reach, you know, reach the--the level that it
has to reach in helping eliminate congestion, reducing fuel
consumption, improving air quality, and being part of a
balanced transportation network, it has to be put on parity
with the other transportation modes.
Mr. Latham. Back in October of 2009, the California
authority stated in its application form that it would address
the STB jurisdiction issue. And it seems pretty clear that the
authority has known of the need to address the question, yet
waited till the last minute to properly request the
determination as to the jurisdiction. And the DOT has not
properly ensured the authority's compliance, at this point.
What conversations or communications, oversight actions
have you had with the authority over the past 4 years to ensure
that they comply with the construction licensing authority?
Mr. Szabo. Well, I think it is important to note that never
at any time were they in noncompliance of our agreement. And
so, you know, it is----
Mr. Latham. They need it to go forward.
Mr. Szabo. And it is a matter of timing. But certainly
there was never, ever, ever, sir, a point where they were in
noncompliance. And so it is a matter of timing of when they
felt it was appropriate for them to move forward with applying
to the STB.
Certainly, we believe that sooner is better than later. But
the important thing is that we do not view the filing or the
decision of the STB as a significant risk to the project or a
significant risk for delay. As I mentioned, California is
moving forward with land acquisition now, as we speak. And so
there are several things that they are going to be able to
continue to do concurrently with engineering, acquisition, as
they await a ruling from the STB on construction.
Mr. Latham. Apparently, Congressman Denham had to write a
letter to remind them that they needed authority. And they are
asking for an expedited review.
Mr. Szabo. They were aware that they needed authority. So,
again, it is just a matter of timing, a matter of timing of
when they chose to apply.
Mr. Latham. But they have known for 4 years they had to do
it.
Mr. Szabo. Yeah, and we have known.
Mr. Latham. And they waited till the very last second to do
it.
Mr. Szabo. It is matter of timing. I mean, again, it is----
Mr. Latham. Okay.
Do you have any other questions, Mr. Pastor?
Mr. Pastor. No, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. If not, we will, I am sure, be submitting some
questions for the record.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.283

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.284

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.285

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.286

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.287

Mr. Latham. I appreciate very much your testimony today.
Look forward to working with you. We have a lot of challenges,
obviously. We would love to see the reauthorization proposal so
we could fill in some blanks as to what we need to do.
But, with that, again, thank you for your testimony, and
the committee is adjourned.
Mr. Szabo. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Latham. Thank you.

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.288

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.289

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.290

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.291

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.292

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.293

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.294

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.295

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.296

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.297

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.298

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.299

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.300

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.301

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.302

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.303

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.304

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.305

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.306

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.307

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.308

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.309

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.310

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.311

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.312

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.313

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.314

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.315

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.316

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.317

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.318

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.319

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.320

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.321

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.322

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.323

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.324

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.325

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.326

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.327

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.328

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.329

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.330

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.331

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.332

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.333

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.334

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.335

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.336

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.337

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.338

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.339

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.340

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.341

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.342

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.343

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.344

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.345

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.346

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.347

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.348

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.349

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.350

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.351

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.352

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.353

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.354

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.355

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.356

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.357

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.358

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.359

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.360

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.361

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.362

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.363

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.364

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.365

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.366

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.367

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.368

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.369

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.370

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.371

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.372

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.373

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.374

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.375

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.376

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.377

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.378

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.379

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.380

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.381

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.382

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.383

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.384

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.385

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.386

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.387

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.388

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.389

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.390

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.391

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.392

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.393

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.394

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.395

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.396

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.397

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.398

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.399

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.400

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.401

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070B.402

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T5070P3.001


