- MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2014

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MILITARY CONSTRUCTION, VETERANS AFFAIRS, AND RELATED AGENCIES
APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2014

----------

Friday, April 12, 2013.

INSTALLATIONS, ENVIRONMENT, ENERGY AND BRAC

WITNESSES

HON. JOHN CONGER, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR INSTALLATIONS
AND ENVIRONMENT
HON. KATHERINE HAMMACK, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE ARMY FOR
INSTALLATIONS, ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
MR. ROGER NATSUHARA, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY
FOR INSTALLATIONS AND ENVIRONMENT
HON. KATHLEEN FERGUSON, ACTING ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE
FOR INSTALLATIONS, ENVIRONMENT AND LOGISTICS

Chairman's Opening Statement

Mr. Culberson. The Appropriations Subcommittee on Military
Construction and Veterans Affairs will come to order. We are
delighted to have with us today--we are going to have our
hearing today on Installations, Environment, Energy and BRAC
for Fiscal Year 2014. Delighted to have all of you here today
with us. We want to dive right into the questions. I would like
to recognize my ranking member, Mr. Bishop, for any opening
remarks he would like to make.

Ranking Member's Opening Statement

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am glad to
be here today. Today we are going to be able to talk about the
President's 2014 budget request. And we have the civilian
leadership here that can explain the priorities for military
construction for each of the services. I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses today about how sequestration is
affecting their military construction projects not only this
year, but in their requests for next year.
I have said in each hearing, and I will reemphasize it
again today, that I believe sequestration is the wrong way to
reduce budgets, and that the Members of Congress, both
Republicans and Democrats, need to really start working
together to find a compromise in making fiscally responsible
decisions. So I hope that starting with this year's budget we
can work together to that end.
Mr. Chairman, another subject equally important is the
Defense Department's request for the second year in a row to
conduct BRAC. In 2005, Congress authorized a BRAC that ended up
being far more expensive and expansive than we were led to
believe. And I have read your testimonies, and I understand
that in 2004 it was known that the Department had 24 percent
excess capacity, but during the 2005 BRAC, Defense only made
reductions of 3.4 percent. I realize that it was, as many of
you have stated in our private meetings, more of a reshaping or
restructuring BRAC, but a lot of money was spent to move
things, and most importantly, moving people around. So I am
concerned that we will see more of the same if another BRAC is
authorized, and we never get to any real savings, rather just
moving military families around from one base to another.
I am happy to see that the Department is taking steps that
this committee asked for last year in focusing your reductions
in facilities overseas. But before we start making facility
reductions here at home, I think we should wait to see what
savings we are actually going to have from the reductions
overseas.
Mr. Chairman, I realize that these are difficult issues for
all of the Members of Congress and for the Department, and so I
am glad for today's hearing so we can discuss them openly, and
I look forward to a very vigorous debate and discussion. Thanks
for the opportunity to share my comments.

Introduction of Witnesses

And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, sir. I am delighted to
have with us, as Mr. Bishop says, the civilian leadership at
the Pentagon for military construction. And I would like to
introduce our witnesses. The Honorable John Conger, who is the
Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Installations and
Environment, and a first time witness. We are glad to have you
here, sir, and welcome your testimony. The Honorable Katherine
Hammack, Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations,
Energy and Environment. And the Honorable Roger Natsuhara,
Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Energy,
Installations, and the Environment. And the Honorable Kathleen
Ferguson, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Installations, Environment and Logistics. We deeply
appreciate your service to the country, the time that you have
taken to be here in helping us do the best we can to provide
support for our men and women in uniform. And without
objection, your written statements will be entered into the
record in order to keep us on time and on track, particularly
because, as usual, votes are going to be called in the middle
of this.
I would like to ask if you could, each one of you, to
summarize your statements in about 5 minutes. And we will of
course enter those into the record in their entirety. And I
would like to start with you, if I could, Mr. Conger, and
welcome your testimony today. Thank you, sir.

Opening Statement of Mr. Conger

Mr. Conger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Ranking
Member Bishop, distinguished members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you to discuss the
Department's fiscal year 2014 budget request for installations
and environment.
First, I would like to take a point of personal privilege
to say how much I appreciate being invited to speak before this
subcommittee. As some of you know, I worked for Congressman
Chet Edwards for many years. And coming back to this
subcommittee is a little bit nostalgic for me. I have been
looking forward to this opportunity since I moved over to the
Pentagon in 2009. And I will say this, as Congressman Carter
will probably appreciate, Fort Hood is still my favorite base
in the military.
Mr. Carter. Good for you.
Mr. Conger. The testimony that I submitted for the record
describes the $11 billion we are requesting for military
construction, the $10.9 billion that we are investing in
sustaining and restoring our facilities, and the $3.8 billion
we are seeking for environmental compliance and cleanup. You
will note that the numbers are not significantly lower than
those we requested in fiscal year 2013. In fact, they represent
a slight increase from what was appropriated this year. That is
because the President's budget request replaces across the
board sequester cuts with a comprehensive deficit reduction
plan. And within the request, that plan averts what would
otherwise be another significant reduction in the defense
budget, and enables us to present to you a fiscal year 2014
budget request that allows us to continue prudent investment in
our infrastructure.
In the interests of time, I am going to save talking about
the fiscal year 2013 sequester impacts for a Q and A. And in
fact, my colleagues here will be able to talk about base by
base stuff in particular. I did want to raise one particular
issue, though. I wanted to say a word or two about BRAC.
As you know, the administration is requesting a BRAC round
in 2015. The Department is facing a serious problem created by
the tension caused by constrained budgets, reductions in force
structure, and limited flexibility to adapt to the first two.
We need to find a way to strike the right balance so
infrastructure does not drain too many resources from the
warfighter. Without question, installations are critical
components of our ability to fight and win wars. Whether that
installation is a forward operating location or a training
center in the United States, our warfighters can't do their
jobs without bases from which to fight, on which to train, or
in which to live when they are not deployed. However, we need
to be cognizant that maintaining more infrastructure than we
need taxes other resources that the warfighter needs as well,
from depot maintenance to training to bullets and bombs. We are
continually looking for ways to reduce the cost of doing
business, from looking for ways to reduce the cost of military
construction, to investing in energy efficiency that pays us
back in lower operating costs. BRAC is another very clear way
for us to reduce the infrastructure costs to the Department.
The previous five rounds of BRAC are providing us with a
recurring savings of $12 billion every year. In essence, our
past investments in BRAC are paying for our entire MILCON bill
and then some.
I am well aware of the skepticism that many in Congress
have about the need for BRAC. But I think there is a good case
for presuming another round. And I would be happy to have that
conversation here today.
Thanks for the opportunity to testify this morning. It
truly is a pleasure to be here, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Conger follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Mr. Conger. Ms.
Hammack, glad to have you with us today. Thank you.

Opening Statement of Ms. Hammack

Ms. Hammack. Thank you, Chairman Culberson, Ranking Member
Bishop, and members of the committee. On behalf of soldiers,
families, and civilians of the United States Army, I want to
thank you for the opportunity to discuss our fiscal year 2014
military construction budget. For fiscal year 2014, the Army
requests $2.4 billion for military construction, Army family
housing, and Army's share of the DoD base closure account. This
represents a 34 percent reduction from the fiscal year 2013
request. In addition to, and in support of Army installations
and facilities, the Army also requests $15.2 billion for
installation, energy, and environmental programs, facilities
sustainment, restoration, modernization, and base operating
support. With the fiscal challenges that the Army and the whole
Department of Defense is making, we closely reviewed our
facility investments to determine the level of resources
necessary to support the force. Supporting the force requires
adequate facilities, training ranges, maintenance, and
operations. As you well know, the Army is reducing our end
strength by about 14 percent, or 80,000 soldiers, effective in
2017. In January of this year, we published a programmatic
environmental assessment, or a PEA, that was prepared in
accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA.
A signed finding of no significant impact was published in the
Federal Register this morning. What we found is there is no
significant environmental impact, although in many communities
we received responses of socioeconomic impacts. But the
resulting force structure reduction, as Mr. Conger mentioned,
is and will create excess capacity at several installations.
With the reduced end strength and reduced force structure in
the United States, now is the time to assess and right-size the
supporting infrastructure. In line with force structure
reductions in Europe, where we are reducing by two Brigade
Combat Teams, the Army is already downsizing our
infrastructure. With a 45 percent reduction in force structure,
the Army is implementing a 51 percent reduction in
infrastructure. We anticipate a corresponding 58 percent
reduction in workforce, 57 percent reduction in base operating
costs. A future round of base realignment and closure in the
U.S. is essential for us to right-size our infrastructure in
the United States, just like we are doing in Europe. In Europe,
we are working closely with OSD and the other services to
identify if there are other opportunities for jointness or
consolidation beyond that which the Army is already
implementing. As John mentioned, the prior rounds of BRAC have
resulted in operational cost savings to our bottom line. For
the Army, the BRAC 2005 round resulted in $1 billion worth of
savings annually. But we know that as we close bases there is a
cost for property conveyance and environmental cleanup. Putting
excess property back into productive reuse can facilitate job
creation, help communities build the local tax base, and
generate revenue. In total, the Army has conveyed almost 78
percent of the total prior BRAC acreage. And we are investing
in the environmental cleanup to convey the remaining.
In closing, I ask for this committee's commitment to our
soldiers, families, and our civilians, and support for the
Army's MILCON and installation programs, and request for a BRAC
round in fiscal year 2015 so that we can appropriately manage
our budgets. The Army's strengths is its soldiers, its
families, and Army civilians who support them, and they are and
will continue to be the centerpiece for the Army. I thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today and look forward
your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Hammack follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much. Mr. Natsuhara, we are
delighted to have you with us here today. Thank you, sir.

Opening Statement of Mr. Natsuhara

Mr. Natsuhara. Thank you, sir. Chairman Culberson, Ranking
Member Bishop, and members of the subcommittee, I am pleased to
appear before you today to provide an overview of the
Department of the Navy's investment in its shore
infrastructure. We appreciate the support of the Congress in
passing the Defense and Military Construction, Veterans
Affairs, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act of Fiscal Year
2013. They provide us with the critical funding necessary to
repair, maintain, and modernize our infrastructure and support
new platforms as they arrive on station.
For fiscal year 2014, the Department is requesting over $12
billion in various appropriations accounts to operate,
maintain, and recapitalize our shore infrastructure. This level
of funding, rooted in the Defense Strategic Guidance of 2012,
represents continued investment to enhance combatant
commanders' capabilities, improve servicemembers' quality of
life, and recapitalize aging infrastructure. The fiscal year
2014 budget also demonstrates the Department's commitment to
energy security by funding cost-effective projects, efforts
that will improve our energy infrastructure and reduce our
consumption. The strength of our Navy and Marine Corps team
lies not only in advanced weaponry or faster, stealthier ships
and aircraft. Our Naval forces derive their strength from the
sailors and marines who fire the weapons, operate and maintain
the machinery, or fly the planes, and from the families and
civilians supporting them. Toward this end, the Navy and Marine
Corps have programmed over $244 million of military
construction funds for operational and technical training,
professional development, and academic facilities, nearly $100
million of unaccompanied housing, and $463 million to support
family housing construction operations.
Guam remains an essential part of the United States' larger
Asia-Pacific strategy, which includes developing the island as
a strategic hub and establishing an operational Marine Corps
presence. The Department of Defense recognizes congressional
concerns regarding execution of the Guam military realignment,
and is taking steps necessary to resolve critical issues that
will allow the construction program to move forward.
Furthermore, the United States and Japan are continuously
looking for more efficient and effective ways to achieve the
goals of the Realignment Roadmap. Both countries remain
committed to maintaining and enhancing a robust security
alliance, and the United States remains committed to enhancing
the U.S.-Japan alliance, and strengthening operational
capabilities. Our Nation's Navy and Marine Corps team operates
globally, having the ability to project power, effect
deterrence, and provide humanitarian aid whenever and wherever
needed to protect the interests of the United States.
The Department's fiscal year 2014 request supports critical
elements of the Defense Strategy of 2012 by making needed
investments in our infrastructure and people, reducing our
worldwide footprint, and preserving access to training ranges
afloat and ashore.
I look forward to working with you to sustain the
warfighting readiness and quality of life for the most
formidable expeditionary fighting force anywhere in the world.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify before you today, and
I welcome your questions.
[The statement of Mr. Natsuhara follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, sir.
Ms. Ferguson.

Opening Statement of Ms. Ferguson

Ms. Ferguson. Good morning, Chairman Culberson, Ranking
Member Bishop, and distinguished members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today about the
Air Force's installations programs. Also, on behalf of the
Secretary and the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, I would like
to thank the subcommittee for your unwavering support for our
Air Force and our Airmen. Our fiscal year 2014 budget request
contains $1.3 billion for military construction, $2.2 billion
for facility sustainment, $813 million for restoration and
modernization, and $465 million for military family housing. In
fiscal year 2013 we took a deliberate pause in MILCON to ensure
we were making the right capital investment decisions, as force
structure adjustments were being made in the emerging defense
strategy. Our fiscal year 2014 MILCON request is approximately
$900 million above our fiscal year 2013 request, and returns us
to near historical funding levels, supports the Department's
strategic priorities, our top weapons systems modernization
programs, and distributes MILCON funding equitably between
Active, Guard, and Reserve components. This budget request
reflects our modernization effort. This includes critical
projects to support the F-35 and KC-46, recapitalization of
U.S. Strategic Command headquarters, and construction of the
new Cyber Command Joint Operations Center. Included in this
request is $265 million at unspecified locations to support the
KC-46 bed-down. We will submit site-specific MILCON project
document forms in May of 2013 after preferred and reasonable
alternative bases are announced, and will request the
subcommittee's support for this substitution.
The Air Force strongly supports the Department's request
for another round of BRAC in 2015. While we have no current
capacity analysis from which to draw, our 2004 capacity
analysis suggested that 24 percent of basing infrastructure was
excess to needs. BRAC 2005 did not result in major reductions
to the Air Force. And since that time, we have reduced our
force structure by over 500 aircraft and our active duty
military end strength by more than 8 percent. We continue to
spend money maintaining excess infrastructure that would be
better spent on recapitalization and sustainment. Divestiture
of excess property on a grander scale is a must. During this
period of fiscal uncertainty, the Air Force is ready to make
the tough decisions required to avoid mission-impacting
reductions and installation support that contribute to a hollow
force. Our fiscal year 2014 budget request addresses our most
pressing needs, seeks authorization to eliminate unnecessary
infrastructure, and stays true to the fundamental priorities of
the Air Force.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The statement of Ms. Ferguson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, Ms. Ferguson. I know
every one of us has got a number of questions. I wanted to, if
I could, start out with you, Mr. Conger, and talk about the
President's proposed reductions.

BUDGET REDUCTION AND RISK TO MILITARY CONSTRUCTION ACCOUNTS

The Department of Defense has been asked to reduce the
defense budget by approximately $487 billion over a 10-year
period. And we have seen some budget reductions from the
services. Within the fiscal 2014 budget recommendation from the
President there is proposed significant reductions to the Guard
and Reserve accounts, while active military construction
accounts are recommended to increase.
Can you explain to the committee the increases you are
recommending in active construction accounts and what areas do
you see are most at risk with the reductions that are proposed
to Guard and Reserve accounts?
Mr. Conger. For the specific Guard and Reserve accounts, I
would like to defer those questions to my colleagues from the
services to talk about their independent budgets. Just a brief
note on the reductions of $487 billion over 10 years. That was
under the Budget Control Act. Those were cuts that we absorbed.
And my note in my opening statement was the 2014 request
doesn't have--basically doesn't have additional cuts due to
sequestration. So let's put that in context. This is the
reductions that we have been working with for the last couple
years that we have been planning for.
Now, with regard to the AC-RC mix, I would flag it out to
any of my colleagues to see if they have any thoughts.
Mr. Culberson. If I could also follow up on that, remind
me, the level of cut for 2013 and the automatic cuts under
sequestration for military construction accounts I think was
7.8 percent. What is the proposal for 2014? What would the
statute, the Budget Control Act require of the military
construction accounts across the board?
Mr. Conger. The military construction accounts are going to
be at--when you aggregate MILCON, family housing, and the
various other things that fall into the MILCON appropriations
it is $11 billion. That is our request for 2014.
Mr. Culberson. If I could hear from Ms. Hammack on the
other, please.

BUDGET CONTROL ACT IMPACTS ON MILCON

Ms. Hammack. Absolutely. As I stated in my opening
comments, the Army has taken a 34 percent reduction across the
board in our military construction request for fiscal year
2014. It was an equitable distribution, an equitable reduction
across all components, whether that be Guard, Reserve, and
Active Army. Everyone took the same reduction in top line
funding.
Mr. Culberson. And what effects, what are some of the areas
in your opinion most at risk as a result of those reductions?
Ms. Hammack. What we are funding is the most critical, and
the most critical at risk of failure. We believe we have
appropriately prioritized the reductions for all, and are
addressing those that are most critical.
Mr. Culberson. Mr. Natsuhara.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACTS ON MILCON BUDGETS

Mr. Natsuhara. The Navy MILCON budget overall for 2014 is
slightly less than 2013. And primarily a lot of that is Marine
Corps growth of force and barracks recapitalization program has
been completed. Relative to our Reserve force, we have a very
small Reserve, but it is comparable to our Active, about the
same amount of cuts.
Mr. Culberson. Ms. Ferguson.
Ms. Ferguson. For the Air Force MILCON program for fiscal
year 2014 we increased our MILCON from just over $400 million
to $1.3 billion, so about a $900 million increase. As we
increased it, we increased the amount of dollars that went to
the Guard and Reserve components, and we maintained equity
between the Active, Guard, and Reserve, so the Air Force
actually increased funding in this budget for that.

NEW ROUND OF BASE REALIGNMENT AND CLOSURE

Mr. Culberson. If I could ask each one of you to talk to us
about why you believe one new round of BRAC is necessary for
the fiscal year 2014 budget submission.
Mr. Conger. Let me take that. First of all, we are
requesting one new round of BRAC, not two. Last year we asked
for two rounds, one in 2013, one in 2015. This year we are
asking only one in 2015.
Mr. Culberson. Right, 2015.
Mr. Conger. I think that if I could characterize the
requirement, we are carrying excess infrastructure. We believe
that we are essentially paying more than we need to for
infrastructure. And that taxes money away from the warfighter.
We point to excess for three reasons. One, in 2004 we did a
study of excess capacity. That was the one that came out
overall aggregate the Department would have 24 percent excess
capacity. Then we had a BRAC round. That BRAC round reduced
approximately 3.4 percent of our plant replacement value. So as
a consequence, we deem there is still a lot of excess there.
Then subsequent to that we have had significant force structure
reductions. We have talked a little bit today about the Army
reductions of 80,000 personnel that they are planning, 20,000
people reduced from the Marine Corps, and the Air Force has cut
500 aircraft since that point in time. As a consequence, we
have significant evidence that we have excess capacity. We
simply don't want to be spending money we don't have to on that
when it takes away from a variety of other programs that are
hard pressed across the Department. And that is why we think we
need a BRAC round.
Mr. Culberson. Ms. Hammack.
Ms. Hammack. I could say ditto.
Mr. Culberson. Okay.
Ms. Hammack. But I am going to say that we cannot afford to
keep infrastructure that we do not need. And right now we are
planning to reduce at least by six Brigade Combat Teams in the
United States. Each Brigade Combat Team has a little over a
million square feet. So if you do the math, that is going to
tell you that we are going to have excess capacity as we reduce
the size of our force.
Mr. Natsuhara. The Department of the Navy in the past BRAC
rounds had closed approximately 50 percent of our
installations. So we have seen the benefits of BRAC. We are
supporting the BRAC rounds because we believe that the analysis
is always beneficial to see where we have our capacities, where
we can make our efficiencies.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
Ms. Ferguson. As both Mr. Conger mentioned and I mentioned
in my opening statement, the Air Force believes we still have
excess capacity. We had identified 24 percent excess capacity
as we prepared for BRAC 2005. We reduced just .8 percent, .8 of
1 percent of our infrastructure as we executed BRAC 2005. We
reduced by 500 airplanes. And an additional 8 percent of our
active duty military end strength has gone down.
As I think Mr. Conger mentioned in his opening statement,
prior rounds of BRAC have yielded significant savings for the
Department. Over the last five rounds of BRAC, the Air Force
has closed 40 bases, and as a result we saved $2.9 billion a
year. And we believe we can save additional dollars by
consolidation, closing additional facilities.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Ferguson. Mr. Bishop, I know
you have got a conflict next door, so I want to go right to my
good friend from Georgia.

RATIONALE AND BUDGET DRIVERS REASON FOR NEW BRAC ROUND

Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. I have an abiding interest
in BRAC. And Secretary Conger, let me address you first.
Obviously, we have been talking about the fiscal year 2014
budget submission that calls for another round of BRAC. Is the
budget driving these rounds, or the drawdown of our forces, or
restructuring really driving it?
Mr. Conger. So there are two ways to answer the question.
Let me hit them both briefly in sequence. One of the major
reasons anybody decides to have a BRAC is to save money. You
have excess capacity, you are paying more than you think you
need, and you look at base closure as a way to save that money.
When we do the BRAC analysis, the decisions are driven by
military value. And so that folds in together, and as the
result of a BRAC round you get the savings. So the force
structure reductions create an excess. And so therefore you can
keep spending the money for the empty buildings, but that is an
expenditure the Department doesn't deem wise. And we would like
to be able to close facilities in order to save that money.
Mr. Bishop. What type of reductions and savings are you
looking to achieve in the new round?
Mr. Conger. Well, it is a fair question. And I hate to give
a copout, but it depends on what the analysis says, right? I
mean we don't have a target. GAO said we should have targets
for savings, right? But I think that nobody wants us to say we
are going to close X number of bases. Because what happens when
you get halfway down that list and you decide it doesn't make
sense to close more? We don't want to have a particular target
for how many bases to close because the business cases have to
drive the answer. You know, particular recommendations are
going to say, okay, if I need to spend this amount of money I
am going to save this amount of money per year. And that is how
you make a business case, you get a payback in a certain amount
of time. It is all going to be based on those scenarios. And
those scenarios are going to be driven by where there is
capacity.
Mr. Bishop. So you don't know.
Mr. Conger. I would be remiss, and it would be highly
inappropriate for me to prejudge the results of a complex BRAC
analysis here off the cuff at the table.

METRICS FOR CALCULATING SAVINGS IN A BRAC ROUND

Mr. Bishop. Okay. So you don't really have expectations
that you can establish metrics for. But this past Wednesday
Secretary Ferguson and I had a very good BRAC discussion in my
office regarding the Air Force and its excess capacity, and how
the 2005 BRAC didn't really do much to help lower the cost of
the military construction budget. So I have two questions.
First, how much did the 2005 BRAC save the Department? And how
did we do a BRAC that left the Air Force with 25 percent in
excess facilities?
Mr. Conger. Well, each service contributes to the analysis
that drives what the recommendations are that affect that
service. There is obviously a combined OSD look at these
things. But the Air Force was driving the input that led to a
conclusion that had fewer bases closed than they might have
had. That said, how much are we saving from the 2005 BRAC round
writ large? We are saving $4 billion a year. The cost was
higher than expected. Nobody is hiding that point. There was an
original projection, the numbers came in higher. We ended up
spending more money than we had expected to spend. That said,
we are doing nothing but saving right now. We are saving $4
billion a year. And that recurs forever.

COST INCREASES IN PREVIOUS BRAC ROUNDS

Mr. Bishop. How do we know that won't happen again this
time?
Mr. Conger. You mean the numbers would go up?
Mr. Bishop. Right.
Mr. Conger. Well, I think there are a couple of reasons why
the numbers did go up. Let me address those briefly. There were
a combination of decisions made within the Department to
rebuild rather than renovate. We will have to exercise
discipline in that regard. There were decisions made by
Congress to add additional standards to some of the buildings
we were building. World-class hospitals is the example that
comes to mind. That added billions of dollars to the bill. And
obviously we are not going to ignore what Congress tells us
what to do and how to build what we are building. So if we have
a recommendation that says go build a new hospital to a
particular standard, and we hadn't planned for that standard,
we are going to have an additional bill that goes along with
it. That is just a fact of life, and we deal with that. I guess
we all have to exercise some discipline in order to make sure
that the costs don't go up in a future round.
The other thing I would point out is that the last round
that we had was at a time of growth. We were increasing the
size of the military. And so as a consequence, there were
fewer--there were more relocations and realignments than we
might have had, and fewer closures than we might have had if we
were at a time of decreasing forces. Right now we are at a time
of decreasing forces. And so the appropriate model, the analog
is those earlier rounds in the 1990s when we were decreasing
forces. And those are distinctly different than the 2005 round.
The 2005 round is an outlier in that regard.

EXCESS INFRASTRUCTURE

Mr. Bishop. Secretary Ferguson, can you give the committee
an idea of how much it costs to maintain the excess
infrastructure, the 24, 25 percent that the Air Force has? And
Secretary Hammack and Secretary Natsuhara, do your services
have a problem with excess facilities?
Ms. Ferguson. Congressman, if I could take that question
for the record. I don't have that calculation off the top of my
head. And one thing I would like to point out to you is as we
look at the capacity analysis, the capacity analysis was based
on infrastructure, and our analysis demonstrated that we had 24
percent. Now, could we close 24 percent of our installations?
No, we couldn't close 24 percent, but it is an indication that
we do have excess infrastructure out there. Because as we would
look in the Air Force to execute another round of BRAC, we also
need to look at our operational space, we need to look at our
airspace and ranges and spectrum and all those other things
that contribute to being able to execute the Air Force mission.
So the 24 percent is a physical capacity issue. But we can get
some numbers back to you.
[The information follows:]

The overhead cost of maintaining bases is substantial so
any reduction in excess will yield a savings. The Air Force's
expenditures related to facilities, including military
construction, average around $5 billion annually. Other costs
associated with operating our installations (e.g., payroll
support; personnel management, morale, welfare, and recreation
services; environmental compliance and physical security)
average about $9 billion annually. To be good stewards of
taxpayer funds, the Air Force believes it must conduct a
periodic review of our infrastructure to ensure that it is
effectively and efficiently configured. BRAC has served this
purpose well over the last 20 years, particularly where reduced
budgets push us towards sustaining our infrastructure at lower
levels, which will eventually affect readiness and quality of
life.
While we have no recent excess infrastructure capacity
analysis from which to draw, our capacity analysis from 2004
suggested that 24 percent of Air Force basing infrastructure
was excess to our mission needs. While BRAC 2005 did not make
major reductions to the Air Force, since that time we've
reduced our force structure by more than 500 aircraft and
reduced our active-duty military end strength by nearly eight
percent. So, intuitively, we know that we still have excess
infrastructure.

Mr. Bishop. Thank you. I would appreciate that.
Ms. Hammack. As we are decreasing the size of the force,
right now in the Army a lot of that is occurring through
attrition. So we are on a downward trend right now to reach 490
by 2017. And as we are seeing forces decline, we are seeing
that we are having excess space created, excess space in
barracks, excess space in motor pools, excess space in
headquarters. And when you implement a BRAC round, you
consolidate into the highest and best use facilities that have
the highest and best military value. So right now we are
beginning to see problems with excess infrastructure in that
our budgets do not support the operating costs of
infrastructure that is partially occupied.
Mr. Bishop. Staff is telling me that when you are looking
at the reduction of forces, you are going back to the 2004
level. So it seems like the same analysis would apply that was
in effect in 2004.
Ms. Hammack. Some of that analysis does still apply. And as
Mr. Conger stated, at that point in time across the entire
Department of Defense there was identified excess
infrastructure for all.
Mr. Natsuhara. In the Department of the Navy, I think we
are in a little bit of different situation than the Army and
the Air Force. Our forces are not drawing down as much as the
Army and the Air Force have changed in the past 5 years. We
believe we have been the beneficiary of previous BRAC rounds,
and conducting this analysis will help us refine what we have
currently. We have not identified anything to date because we
haven't done an analysis, but we do believe the analysis will
be beneficial for us.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think my time has
expired.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to all of you.
As Mr. Conger pointed out, I have Fort Hood. I am going to be
talking more about the Army than I am anybody else. However, I
have great friends in the Air Force. And my family, if we had a
force we were in, it was the Navy. So I love you. Mr. Conger, I
am happy to see you here. I will say that in the world of
partisan Washington, D.C., Congressman Edwards and I showed a
big bipartisan effort on behalf of the Army in our
neighborhood, and it has been one of the rewarding things that
I have had in my time in Washington. And I consider Mr. Edwards
a good friend as well as a colleague.
Ms. Hammack and maybe Mr. Conger, you may want to comment,
and I need something clarified. I am sure you are aware of the
Endangered Species Act and its onus on the Federal Government.
In many situations, our military installations have to lead the
efforts for recovery of endangered species. In economically
restrained conditions, maintaining compliance redirects those
limited resources away from defense-related programs.
Additional restrictions placed on our installations affect
infrastructure decisions and limit training capacity.
Can you discuss how environmental considerations affect the
military value analysis, MVA, used in the programmatic
environmental assessment and ultimately the Army's force
structure and stationing decisions as troop levels reduce to
490 by 2017? In your opening statement as to no significant
impact, does that have a bearing on what I am asking you about?

FORCE STRUCTURE AND STATIONING DECISIONS/MILITARY VALUE ANALYST

Ms. Hammack. Thank you for your question. And Fort Hood is
a great installation. In regards to the Endangered Species Act,
one of the things that the entire Department of Defense has
done over the years is identify many different mitigations, one
of which is what we call the Army compatible use buffer system,
I think it is called Readiness and Environmental Protection
Integration Program (REPI), across the Department of Defense,
where you have set aside lands that enable those species to
establish habitat so that you are able to use your training
lands for training purposes. The great thing about that program
is it doesn't obligate future budgets. It is a one-time
expense. And that is set aside for extended periods of time.
And so we don't believe that the environmental impact would be
adversely affected by these budgets. But that being said, when
you talk about the programmatic environmental assessment, that
assessment was evaluating significant reductions or minor
increases across the bases, 21 bases were identified. If you
are reducing the size of the force by 4,000 or 8,000 soldiers
at a base, it would have a positive environmental impact not a
negative, or adverse environmental impact. The most increase
anticipated would be a thousand soldiers. That would be a
gaining base. And we did not find any adverse environmental
impact on any of our bases.
Mr. Conger. Could I make a quick comment on that, too?
Mr. Carter. Yes, please.
Mr. Conger. On the endangered species issue, obviously we
have a lot of species on our bases because we don't allow
development on our bases. And so whereas when people build
outside the installation, you know, sometimes--and in many
cases the only place some of these species are found are on
military bases. And, you know, we do take a degree of pride in
taking care of what we are given as stewards for the taxpayer
and for the country. That said, we have some really interesting
tools in place that were passed by Congress that allow us to
avoid some of the more egregious restrictions that would be
imposed by critical habitat designations or such, one of which
is the Sikes Act. And I was over at the Natural Resources
Committee a couple weeks back testifying on that.
The bottom line is the fact that we can do integrated
natural resource management plans, as opposed to designating
critical habitat, gives us the flexibility not just to protect
the species but to protect the mission. And we don't have the
sort of slam down restrictions that come into place that one
might have in another scenario. In addition to that, I want to
point out that we are all aware of the fact that there was a
recent court case that says there is another couple hundred
candidate species that have to be evaluated in a fairly short
order. We have been proactive about that. We went in and
required the services to do an assessment of whether any of
those species being declared as endangered would impact our
installations, which ones, where, and how much. And then we are
integrating those proactively into our integrated natural
resource management plans so if they are declared endangered we
already have a plan in place to execute to avoid the impacts
that they would impose.
Mr. Carter. Well, good. That sounds very effective. I
assume you did it with the salamanders and all the other things
we are having to deal with in the private sector.
Mr. Conger. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. It is quite a challenge. Well, to me the most
important thing we do is make sure that we put effective
fighting men and women in the field, well trained. And whatever
we can do that is smart to protect our training space is
important to all of us. Fort Hood has done, and I know you,
John, are aware of what Fort Hood's plan has been. It seems to
have been effective. I know there is analysis being done right
now as we approach BRAC. BRAC is a stressful time for the
community, as all of you know. And that is why I just want to
make sure that we are dotting our I's and crossing our T's on
environmental issues, because I want trained soldiers in the
field, as does the Army. So I thank you for that. I don't
expect you to have any comments until your entire study is
done, but overall as it relates to Fort Hood, do you think our
set-aside program has been effective?
Ms. Hammack. Yes, I do. I think it has been effective.
Mr. Carter. Good. That is all you have to answer. That is
all I want to know. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Judge.
Mr. Price.

PROGRAMMATIC ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT

Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the entire
panel today. By virtue of my redrawn congressional district, I
paid special attention to the Programmatic Environmental
Assessment that was released in January, and the response to
that assessment from both the Fort Bragg leadership and the
Fayetteville and Cumberland County communities. The signals, as
I observed the situation, from the military--and this is of
course directed to Ms. Hammack, because this is about the Army
and its assessment--the signals that came from those issuing
this report seemed to be somewhat mixed. On the one hand, there
was a reassurance that these were hypothetical scenarios,
possibilities, that they had a certain tentative quality. On
the other hand, they certainly got a lot of attention. And
there was an encouraging number of responses and of feedback
from the community. And it was not quite clear just how
concerned the communities should be or how seriously they
should take these assessments. But I think it is fair to say
they took them very seriously indeed. And so I understand now
you are in the process of reviewing thousands upon thousands of
public comments offered in response to the PEA, and that you
expect to see a final product to this public comment period
published in the Federal Register in the relatively near
future. And you are going to have public listening sessions at
the larger Army installations around the country.
So my question this morning is just to ask you to give us
whatever details you can about how this process is going to
unfold. What are the steps that you are going to take to
conduct these assessments? What kind of time frame are we
looking at? And how much is all this complicated by
sequestration and by the uncertain future with regard to
sequestration? The entire PEA process of course was predicated
on the Budget Control Act and the strategic review and the kind
of budget figures that are contained there. Sequestration is an
additional and unwelcome element in this picture, adding
considerable uncertainty. And so if you could comment on the
process you are following, but also on the degree it could be
qualified or complicated by budget uncertainty a la
sequestration.
Ms. Hammack. Thank you, sir. We published today in the
Federal Register a finding of no significant impact for the
Programmatic Environmental Assessment (PEA), which closes the
PEA process.
Mr. Price. That is the environmental impact.
Ms. Hammack. That is the environmental impact. The next
step in the process is an explanation of the stationing process
through the listening sessions that will be held at 29 Army
installations. I believe Fort Bragg is scheduled for April 22.
During those listening sessions, we will explain the stationing
process, and we will take input from the community in regards
to how they would be impacted by either an increase or a
decrease in force structure.
Mr. Price. And that is not limited just to the
environmental impact. That includes the socioeconomic factors
you mentioned earlier?
Ms. Hammack. What I will tell you, in the finding of no
significant impact, we did not get input on environmental. The
input, I would say, the majority if not all of the input was
socioeconomic. Over 8,000 comments were received. A majority of
those comments were letter-writing campaigns, so they were
identical in asking the Army to consider the socioeconomic
impact and to consider that they would not be a location that
would have a reduction in force, but would be a gaining
installation. The Budget Control Act and the response to the
Army is a reduction in force size by 80,000 soldiers. And so
the PEA is a first step in the process to identify where we
will be taking those reductions. When you layer Budget Control
Act and anything beyond that $487 billion impact, the Army
might have to reduce our force structure further. So in our
80,000-man reduction, that is two Brigade Combat Teams out of
Europe, that is six Brigade Combat Teams out of the United
States. If we have to go further, it might be more of a
reduction, could be eight, could be 10 Brigade Combat Teams in
the United States. And the PEA is a foundational document that
we will then be progressing through a military value analysis,
a rating and ranking of each installation on various military
value criteria, and then publishing input--a response as to
where we will be taking those reductions.

FORCE STRUCTURE AND STATIONING DECISIONS

Mr. Price. Can you clarify the timetable you have been on
with respect to final decisions about the restructures mandated
under the Budget Control Act, or required by the Budget Control
Act, and how that timetable could be disrupted or altered by
the uncertainty surrounding sequestration?
Ms. Hammack. Thank you, sir. Absolutely. In January, we
released the programmatic environmental assessment that had
taken the previous 6 to 12 months to do the comprehensive
analysis. We extended the comment period from February to the
end of March. And today, the 12th of April, we published the
finding of no significant impact. The next phase is a month-
long time period during which we will conduct community
listening sessions. After that, we will go into the military
value analysis period. And then sometime this summer is when we
anticipate announcing the stationing decisions.

FORCE STRUCTURE/SEQUESTRATION

Mr. Price. And is that or is that not responsive to the
additional variable of sequestration?
Ms. Hammack. Whether we go beyond a reduction of six
Brigade Combat Teams is entirely subject to budget. But you
asked if there is anything that could change that, and yes, it
could be something that happens globally that changes the mind
of Congress and others that we need to maintain, if not
increase the size of the Army in response to a threat.
Mr. Price. No, I understand that. Of course we would assume
that. But I am still not quite certain what the status of this
summer report or this conclusion that the Army is going to
reach this summer, what the status of that is, whether it is a
kind of tentative report or policy contingent on the future of
this sequestration, which after all is designed to go on for 10
years and to be indiscriminate. And you know all the negative
features of sequestration. Let's hope they can be overcome. But
I guess my question is what if they aren't?
Ms. Hammack. In my mind, and I like to sort of break it
into simple terms, there is part one, part two. Part one is the
$487 billion that is already in play that we are already
responding to. And that is a reduction of 80,000 soldiers. Part
two is the amorphous question of sequestration that we are not
sure how to respond to, and we haven't identified the force
reduction that we would have to implement to go there. The
80,000 is already determined, we have already announced that,
and we have two choices. What is happening right now is we are
reducing the size of the force through attrition, which means
you are going to have units that get to 75 percent manning or
60 percent manning that are not complete units to train or
deploy. So we need to consolidate into fully manned units to
ensure that we are able to be a trained and ready force to
support this Nation. So that is what is in play right now is
that 80,000 reduction. That is the programmatic environmental
assessment anticipation that we will be announcing those
stationing decisions this summer as to where we are going to
take those cuts. What is unsure is if we have to go deeper than
that. And one of the concerns that we have is the only time the
Army has been below 480,000 soldiers in the active Army was
before World War II. 1942 we were at 480,000. And I don't think
the world has gotten any smaller or safer since then.
Mr. Conger. Could I jump in and make one more point just to
clarify one quick thing? The budget request that came over in
2014 does not make further cuts because of sequestration. In
fact, the President's budget replaces the across the board
sequester cuts with a comprehensive deficit reduction plan. In
other words, it is almost like a budget resolution question
that it became rather than an appropriations across the board
cut. They have looked at other parts of the budget to absorb
the cuts. And so we are able to come to you with a fiscal year
2014 request that doesn't make the additional sequester cuts,
that is more of the kind of budget that we would be asking for
in order to maintain our facilities.
Mr. Price. I think that is exactly what you should have
done. I just hope that this institution can live up to the
assumption embedded in that request, because the country
deserves better than this. And our military deserves better
than this. We simply must overcome this sequestration impasse
and come up with a long-range comprehensive budget plan. So
thank you for clarifying the extent to which your own
recommendations are contingent on that.
Ms. Hammack. And I thank you for your support, sir.
Mr. Price. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PASSAGE OF PRESIDENT'S BUDGET PROPOSAL

Mr. Culberson. Thank you, Mr. Price. Your budget
recommendation then is contingent upon passage of the
President's budget proposal?
Ms. Hammack. Yes.
Mr. Culberson. It is all based upon the President's budget
proposal.
Mr. Conger. It is based on the President's budget proposal.
The President has sent over a budget proposal. That is what we
are talking about here today. What the House and the Senate do
is where we will end up.
Mr. Culberson. Yeah. And I understand. You all are members
of the executive branch. You are limited in what you can
propose. You have to base it on what the recommendation is of
the chief executive. That is something else we need to all of
us talk about, and I hope change, because it is intensely
frustrating for me, as it is all of us on the Appropriations
Committee, to see all of the wonderful work that our agencies
do, and no matter who is the President, you are sort of trapped
as a member of the executive branch in planning on the
President's budget recommendation becoming law, when we all
know since I got here in 2001, and you have been here longer
than I have, that is not going to happen. It is going to be
based on what the Congress approves, and working it out with
the Senate and the White House. It seems to me it would be far
more productive for us to consider changing the budget process
so that you all are able to make budget recommendations to the
Appropriations Committee and the Congress based on an
extrapolation of what previous appropriations bills have done
and what is most likely to happen. Because the President's
proposals are not likely to be enacted, as the recommendations
of President Bush made didn't ever really fully become law. So
you are sort of trapped as members of the executive branch. You
have to assume the President's budget proposal will be enacted
even though we all know intellectually and politically it is
not.
Mr. Conger. And we are given a figure to budget to writ
large. And that is what this is all based on. I will note that
the House-passed budget resolution had a substantial amount for
defense, too, and it didn't take the cuts out of defense
either. I mean that is a point of somewhat agreement in that
context. It is just a question of where the money is made up,
right?
Mr. Culberson. Yes, sir. Thank you very much, Mr. Conger.
Let me recognize my colleague, Mr. Fortenberry, from
Nebraska for questions.

A NEW ROUND OF BRAC

Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing today. This question has been unpacked,
but let's try to unpack it again. What would a new round of
BRAC basically look like? You talked about six million square
feet of excess. There were some hints at excess base capacity.
And the other question being we have termed it base realignment
and closure, but that might not necessarily point to wholesale
closures of certain areas. It might be programmatic, I assume,
and then moving those and concentrating them in one area versus
the other. Is that definition of BRAC being reworked?
Mr. Conger. I don't think anybody is reworking the
definition of BRAC per se. Realignment and closure are two
different pieces of the puzzle. If you look at the earlier
rounds that we conducted, there was probably more of an
emphasis on closure than realignment. If you look at the 2005
round, there were probably more alignments than we had had
historically. It is because we were at a time of growth in
2005. And in the previous rounds, the earlier rounds, we were
consolidating, we were shrinking the size of the force. Today
we are shrinking the size of the force. And so if you ask what
will a future round of BRAC look like, I would posit it will
look like those early 1990s rounds. That is the answer to the
question. And I know there is a bad taste in people's mouth
about the 2005 round. I have heard a lot of the arguments. But
this is going to be a lot closer to the early 1990s rounds.

U.S. STRATCOM HQ CONSTRUCTION

Mr. Fortenberry. Okay. Let me turn as well to the issue of
Strategic Command new headquarters funding. The new
headquarters, ground has been broken. The original building
from the 1950s was basically designed to house telephones, and
it has actually come under assault not from a foreign enemy,
but from a broken water pipe, as you are probably aware and
have said this to the committee before. So we are very pleased
that we are making good progress, substantial progress on
moving forward with this important, important component to our
national security. We have got a 4-year projection. Does that
look solid to you? There is one idea out there that apparently
in construction processes you have to sequence certain things,
either by department directive or maybe it is embedded in law
somehow, in order to expedite construction and to ensure that
we are on time and using the funds that are available in a
timely fashion so it is not pushed to the outyears. Are there
ideas in which we could move away from sequencing, if you will,
and just parallel, meet those regulations in a parallel
fashion? And I don't have any specifics. That is just a broad
concept that has been proposed.
Ms. Ferguson. What I can tell you is the Air Force is fully
committed to supporting the construction of the headquarters US
STRATCOM building. In this year's budget request we are
requesting the third increment of funding. And that is $136
million. In the last 2 years, Congress has authorized the full
amount and appropriated $120 million in 2012 and $128 million
in 2013. We are asking for $136 million this year.
Construction, as you mentioned, construction is under way at 3
percent complete. And we are still on a 4-year construction
schedule. And we are anticipating construction being complete
in September of 2016.

SEQUENCING CERTAIN CONSTRUCTION DICTATES

Mr. Fortenberry. Are you familiar with this issue, though,
of expediting things, or rethinking this whole concept of
sequencing certain construction dictates? And again, I don't
have the specifics on that. It is just the concept.
Ms. Ferguson. I am familiar with the concept. I am not
familiar with the discussion surrounding this project. But we
can get back to you.
[The information follows:]

The Air Force remains fully committed to supporting the
construction of the headquarters USSTRATCOM building. The
contractor's already aggressive construction schedule has been
optimized to the maximum extent in line with the four years of
incremental funding defined at project award. Because the
USSTRATCOM site is small for a project of this magnitude, there
is a limited amount of additional time that can be saved by re-
sequencing project events and would require restructure of the
programmed incremental funding appropriations.
While it is important to sequence the construction
processes, we also must sequence the construction with the fit-
out of the facility's uninterrupted power systems, information
technology/security equipment and furnishings. We appreciate
Congress' continued support and timely appropriation of funds
for these fit out items so they can be efficiently integrated
into the construction schedule.

Mr. Fortenberry. Well, that might be one way in which we
can all think creatively as to how we move this along in an
expedited fashion. If you want to research that further, it
would actually be helpful to me to know the specifics of what
that concept looks like.
Ms. Ferguson. We will take a look to see what they are
doing with respect to that.
Mr. Fortenberry. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. He left. Am
I the chairman?
Mr. Nunnelee [presiding]. I will recognize Mr. Farr.

USES FOR CLOSED OR REALIGNED FACILITIES

Mr. Farr. Thank you very much. First of all, Principal
Deputy Assistant Roger Natsuhara, congratulations on being a
graduate of the Naval Post-Graduate School. It is a big deal up
here. I appreciate this discussion on BRAC. I have probably
been BRAC'd more than any Member of Congress. I have been
closed, realigned, reorganized. I think the one thing that is
missing in this BRAC discussion is what happens to these bases
once they are closed. The goal is to transfer that land back to
local governments and private sector to do economic development
and to, you know, have a revitalization for the local economy.
What is missing is the discussion of what it costs to clean up
the base and how you do that. I would like to have a whole
hearing on just that issue of cleanup. We have spent $451
million on cleanup on all previous bases ever closed. One big
issue with cleanup is the definition of dirtiness. The land
can't be used until it has been cleaned. It can be mothballed,
but that doesn't help the local economy at all. In fact, it is
a problem. The ability to analyze how dirty it is is getting
better through technology, and therefore can find more
dirtiness so to speak. But with these advances in technology
many of the people who are doing the cleanup say we can clean
it up quicker, easier, and more efficiently, and we can save
money while doing it. I think we need to concentrate on
instances where the private sector comes in and says this
cleanup can be done two or three times faster and more
efficiently than the military DoD is doing it. I am not going
to get into that other than I know a lot about that issue as
does Representative Earl Blumenauer.

CAMP ROBERTS--SATCOM

But I want to ask a couple of questions here for Secretary
Hammack. First of all, I really appreciate all the effort you
have given to deal with installation issues in my district. And
these issues of which I am going to ask you, you can come into
my office and talk about, because they are pretty specific. But
for the committee, in my district there is a satellite command,
SATCOM. There are only a few SATCOM stations in the entire
world. They do all the intel communication globally. The SATCOM
in my district is a very important relay facility based in the
center of California inside a National Guard training base.
There is a new MILCON project to enhance and expand and improve
their operations. It was authorized in fiscal year 2011. It is
known formerly as the Camp Roberts Satellite Earth Terminal
Station Facility. The Corps of Engineers completed the project
design and awarded the construction contract in August of 2011.
Subsequent problems with the design have led the Army to
terminate the existing contract, rebid the project based on a
corrected design, which was less expensive than a lot of
contract modifications. So the project is starting all over
again from scratch. But I understand about $2 million has been
spent on the project already. And I want to know, you know,
what happened? How will the $2 million already spent be made
up? What is the new deadline for completing the building? And
what is the impact on SATCOM's mission? So to answer you might
want to just come in to my office rather than take the time of
the committee. And the second question I have----
Mr. Culberson [presiding]. Very quickly. Forgive me, I just
want to make sure, we have 11 minutes and 27 seconds.

RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITIES INITIATIVE

Mr. Farr. Okay. The last question, and I won't even go into
the background, is essentially the RCI projects and all the
lawsuits that are going on around them. Why are we allowing
project funds to pay for legal fees? And how will this money be
reconstituted so that the RCI project doesn't cut corners and
get into problem?

LAND TRANSFER MONTEREY COUNTY

Lastly, this committee would be shocked at how difficult it
has been to transfer one acre of land in an old historical site
at Fort Hunter Liggett to the County of Monterey. So far it has
taken us about 5 years of bureaucratic hurdles. But thank you,
Ms. Hammack, for pushing that along. I can't believe what we
have to go through to transfer such a little parcel of land
that has no controversies.
So Mr. Chairman, I will take my response in the office.
Mr. Culberson. That is good. Thank you.
Mr. Farr. Thank you.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much, because we are in a
vote. There is about 10 minutes left.
So Mr. Nunnelee.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. All of you are in a
very challenging position. Members of this committee, members
of this Congress are in a challenging position. Any time we
hear the word BRAC we cringe. It is just a fact of life that
many of us have military installations in our States, in our
districts. And folks, those installations seem to have a way of
building things, and buying things, and getting their
paychecks, and it appears in the local economy, and it is
important to all of us. Speaking only for myself, in my opinion
it is not appropriate for us to invest in Department of Defense
or any other agency of government for the purpose of economic
development back in my hometown.
Mr. Culberson. Hear, hear.

FORCE STRUCTURE REDUCTIONS EFFECT ON DEFENSE OF FREEDOM

Mr. Nunnelee. It is very appropriate for us to invest in
defense for the purpose of defending freedom. If that happens
to create jobs in mine or any other district, that is a
byproduct of the defense of freedom. But our number one
function is defense of freedom. And so we have heard a lot of
talk this morning about reduced force structure, realignments,
closure. I just want to hear from each of the four of you do we
have too many Americans wearing the uniform of the United
States around the world than the defense of freedom requires?
And can we reduce force structure without compromising defense
of freedom? Number one. Number two, we have an obligation to
the soldiers, the sailors, the marines, the airmen that are
defending freedom, standing in harm's way, to make sure they
are the best equipped, the best trained in the world to do
their job. Do we have too much training capacity in the United
States and around the world to prepare those men and women than
the defense of freedom requires?
Mr. Conger. Those are great questions, sir. And
unfortunately, you are talking to the infrastructure folks, not
the people who decide how many people should be in any service
of the military. So let me throw that caveat right out at the
beginning. So we are going to have to defer to the experts in
that regard. But let me throw out one other piece. We are the
infrastructure folks. So our job is to make sure that there is
enough training capacity, enough testing, enough housing, et
cetera, et cetera, to make sure that the folks we do have, that
we take care of them. That is our job. And it is one we take
very seriously. What we are faced with is do we have too much?
We think we do have a little bit excess of our needs. And we
need to do that analysis in order to figure out where we can
reduce without impacting. That is really what it boils down to.
So I can't tell you whether we have too many, too few. There
are people in the Department who will be better poised to
answer that question. And I don't think it is appropriate for
me to answer it. But I can say that I believe that we have too
much infrastructure, and we can reduce it without jeopardizing
our freedom.
Mr. Culberson. Great question. And we have got about 7
minutes left in the time to vote. But it is a superb question.
I couldn't agree with you more, Mr. Nunnelee, that it is about
defending freedom. Please answer.
Ms. Hammack. I echo what John says. You know, one of the
challenges we have is if our infrastructure is out of balance
with our force structure, then you have money going to force
structure that should go to training our forces. And so one of
the things BRAC does is enables us to align our infrastructure
with our force structure so budgets can be appropriately spent
and allocated.
Mr. Natsuhara. In the Department of the Navy we also try to
match--we continuously match our infrastructure with our force
structure. And as John said, the force structure is set by
others. We on the facilities side work with them to make sure
we have the proper facilities in the Department. Overseas, I
think we have continuously done a good job of matching our
infrastructure overseas. We have a little more flexibility
there. In the United States, in the past the Navy has been very
aggressive in BRAC. And I think we have benefited from that. So
upcoming BRAC, ``we think the analysis would continue to be
beneficial for us.''
Thank you.
Ms. Ferguson. I agree with all the statements that all my
colleagues have made. One thing I just would like to add is if
another round of BRAC is authorized, the first thing we do is
we look at the 20-year force structure plan and marry that up
against the infrastructure inventory and begin to do our
analysis off of that.
Mr. Nunnelee. Thank you for the work you do. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you.
Mr. Diaz-Balart.

NET ZERO

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know we are
running out of time, so I will just I think ask maybe one
question to Ms. Hammack. What is the status of the net zero
initiatives? Those initiatives around the country. And are
there any concerns of the cost of those initiatives as we move
forward? And what is the cost? Is it less expensive, more
expensive? And what is the status of that?
Ms. Hammack. The status of net zero is to reduce our
resource requirements so that we can help manage our costs in
balance with the environment. So when you use less energy, then
you have less need for energy budgets. And if you use less
water, then you have less need for water costs. So it is really
focused on reducing our resource requirements, better utilizing
the resources we have, and the net result is lower operating
costs. So the net zero program is really to enable us to
operate more efficiently and effectively with the resources we
have.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And the bottom line is that obviously then
with the goal of it costing less.
Ms. Hammack. Absolutely.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Great. Great. Mr. Chairman, can I have one
other quick question?
Mr. Culberson. Quick as you can.

DISPOSAL OF CLOSED PROPERTY

Mr. Diaz-Balart. This will be quick. Just when you go
through the BRAC process, and you know, the property is
disposed of, how do we assure that those properties don't go to
folks who are, you know, connected? In other words, that it is
a clean, transparent process? And obviously a lot of times, you
know, local governments get in. But is there a process to try
to make sure we don't read about it later and get embarrassed?
What is that process?
Mr. Conger. Let me take that one real quick. There is a
complex process, but it involves buy in from the local
community. First, actually Federal Government entities get a
shot at reusing the property. But then we go out to local
authorities that come up with a reuse plan. And it is
transitioned in that way. The advantage of the BRAC process in
particular, as opposed to just a simple divesting of excess
infrastructure, is that it gives the opportunity to the local
community to get first shot at that, and it also emphasizes the
creation of jobs and projects and reuse methodologies that
actually create jobs. And that ends up making the community
better off than if you simply divested the infrastructure
without BRAC.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. But I am assuming that once it gets to the
local community, I mean do you all lose control or do you all
lose total control?
Mr. Conger. Once it has been transferred, we don't actually
keep rights to the property.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Right. So you lose control once it is
transferred.
Mr. Conger. Once we have actually handed it over.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. I thank the witnesses for coming. I think we
have had extensive conversations, and we will submit some
additional questions for the record. Thank you.
Mr. Culberson. Thank you very much. We deeply appreciate
your service to the country. I know we each have additional
questions we will submit to you in writing for the record. And
we are about 2 minutes left in this vote, and the Members will
be scattered to the four corners of the globe.
So we will adjourn the hearing with sincere thanks and
appreciation for the work that you do, and our renewed
commitment, of course, to provide every ounce of effort and
support we can to our men and women in uniform to ensure they
never have to look over their shoulder and worry about the
quality of their living conditions, or health care, or
equipment that they have. We deeply appreciate your work. And
the hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Questions for the Record follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


