- H.R. 2231, OFFSHORE ENERGY AND JOBS ACT PART 1 AND 2

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 2231, OFFSHORE ENERGY AND JOBS ACT PART 1 AND 2

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

Thursday, June 6, 2013 (Part 1)
Tuesday, June 11, 2013 (Part 2)

__________

Serial No. 113-23

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

81-371 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2014
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
EDWARD J. MARKEY, MA, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Eni F. H. Faleomavaega, AS
Rob Bishop, UT                       Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rush Holt, NJ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
John Fleming, LA                     Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
Tom McClintock, CA                   Jim Costa, CA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                    CNMI
Dan Benishek, MI                     Niki Tsongas, MA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Tony Cardenas, CA
Raul R. Labrador, ID                 Steven A. Horsford, NV
Steve Southerland, II, FL            Jared Huffman, CA
Bill Flores, TX                      Raul Ruiz, CA
Jon Runyan, NJ                       Carol Shea-Porter, NH
Mark E. Amodei, NV                   Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Markwayne Mullin, OK                 Joe Garcia, FL
Chris Stewart, UT                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Steve Daines, MT
Kevin Cramer, ND
Doug LaMalfa, CA
Vacancy

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Legislative Counsel
Jeffrey Duncan, Democratic Staff Director
David Watkins, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Steven A. Horsford, NV
Rob Bishop, UT                       Matt Cartwright, PA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Jim Costa, CA
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Niki Tsongas, MA
John Fleming, LA                     Jared Huffman, CA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Peter A. DeFazio, OR
Dan Benishek, MI                     Tony Cardenas, CA
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Raul M. Grijalva, AZ
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Bill Flores, TX                      Joe Garcia, FL
Mark E. Amodei, NV                   Vacancy
Steve Daines, MT                     Vacancy
Kevin Cramer, ND                     Edward J. Markey, MA, ex officio
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Thursday, June 6, 2013...........................     1

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     7
Holt, Hon. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey..............................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Conathan, Michael J., Director of Ocean Policy, Center for
American Progress Action Fund..............................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    23
Felmy, John, Ph.D., Chief Economist, American Petroleum
Institute..................................................     9
Prepared statement of....................................    10
Guith, Christopher, Vice President--Policy, Institute for
21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce..............    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Miller, Richie, President, Spectrum Geo Inc..................    12
Prepared statement of....................................    13

Additional material submitted for the record:
Markey, Hon. Edward J., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts.....................................    50
Walters, Thomas P., Letter Submitted for the Record by.......    40

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Tuesday, June 11, 2013...........................    53

Statement of Members:
Hastings, Hon. Doc, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................    53
Prepared statement of....................................    54

Statement of Witnesses:
Alexander, Ms. Ryan, President, Taxpayers for Common Sense...    80
Prepared statement of....................................    82
Boesch, Dr. Donald F., President of the University of
Maryland Center for Environmental Science, Former
Commissioner, National Commission on the BP Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling....................    54
Prepared statement of....................................    56
Dixon, Sean, Coastal Policy Attorney, Clean Ocean Action.....    72
Prepared statement of....................................    74
LeVine, Michael, Pacific Senior Counsel, Oceana.............    63
Prepared statement of....................................    65

Additional material submitted for the record:
Capps, Hon. Lois, Letter submitted for the record by.........    90
Castor, Hon. Kathy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida, Prepared Statement of....................    91
Jackson, Senator Hannah-Beth, Letter Submitted for the Record
by.........................................................    92
List of documents retained in the Committee's official files.    93
Price, Hon. David E., a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, Prepared Statement of.............    92

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2231, TO AMEND THE OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF
LANDS ACT TO INCREASE ENERGY EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION ON THE OUTER
CONTINENTAL SHELF, PROVIDE FOR EQUITABLE REVENUE SHARING FOR ALL
COASTAL STATES, IMPLEMENT THE REORGANIZATION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE
FORMER MINERALS MANAGEMENT SERVICE INTO DISTINCT AND SEPARATE AGENCIES,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. ``OFFSHORE ENERGY AND JOBS ACT'' PART 1

----------

Thursday, June 6, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Wittman, Fleming, Duncan,
Cramer, Holt, Horsford, Lowenthal, DeFazio, and Garcia.
Also Present: Representatives Hastings and Cassidy.
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which, under Committee rule
3(e), is two Members. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources is meeting today to hear testimony on a legislative
hearing on H.R. 2231 by Representative Hastings of Washington
to amend the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to increase
energy exploration and production on the Outer Continental
Shelf, provide for equitable revenue sharing for all Coastal
States, implement the reorganization of the functions of the
former Minerals Management Service into distinct and separate
agencies, and for other purposes, called ``The Offshore Energy
and Jobs Act.''
Under Committee rule 4(f) opening statements are limited to
the Chairman and Ranking Members of the Subcommittee. However,
I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members' opening
statements on the hearing record, if submitted to the clerk by
close of business today.
[No response.]
Mr. Lamborn. Hearing no objection?
Dr. Holt. No objection.
Mr. Lamborn. So ordered.
I also ask unanimous consent that Representative Bill
Cassidy of Louisiana be allowed to sit on the dais and
participate in today's hearing.
[No response.]
Mr. Lamborn. Hearing no objection, so ordered.
Dr. Holt. No objection.
Mr. Lamborn. I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. And, by
the way, we are going to get right into this and see how much
we can get done before the votes are called at an early hour,
maybe the next even----
Dr. Holt. Five minutes.
Mr. Lamborn [continuing]. Few minutes, that is right.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. Late last June, the Obama Administration had
the tremendous opportunity for the first time in more than a
generation to open new areas of the OCS for oil and gas
drilling. Available to them for the first time since 1982 was
the opportunity to access billions of barrels of oil that had
been held closed under lock and key for decades.
Unfortunately, their proposed final 5-year offshore leasing
plan for 2012 to 2017 to Congress closed off 85 percent of our
OCS regions, allowed no new development in the OCS, and dashed
the hopes and economic opportunity for the people of States
like Virginia.
Dr. Holt. I was off by 4 minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. The Obama plan put forward the lowest
number of lease sales since the Carter Administration. The plan
provided the American people of more of the same: drilling only
in the Gulf of Mexico and areas off the coast of Alaska.
However, the plan only dubbed these sales as potential sales,
leaving some question as to whether or not the Administration
would even follow through on that. And let's be honest. One
thing this Administration knows how to do is cancel lease
sales.
Nearly 1 year later we are here today to once again attempt
to change the course upon which this Administration has set our
Nation and our energy future. Last week, the Energy Information
Administration issued their report for energy production on
Federal lands for fiscal year 2012. I have a copy of it right
here. It is no surprise that the sale of crude on Federal lands
decreased 5 percent in 2012, with an 8 percent decrease in
Federal off-shore volumes.
When we see oil and gas production declining in the Federal
OCS, we must turn the corner to keep the United States
competitive, especially as other countries begin to develop
their own deepwater resources. The predominant way we can do
this is by fostering energy development in new areas.
Chairman Hastings bill, the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act,
will move our Nation forward to open up access to new areas to
create thousands of new jobs and more American energy. While
some revenue-sharing bills have sought to provide Coastal
States with a revenue-sharing scheme unequal to the four Gulf
States, the Chairman's bill provides parity to all Coastal
States, allowing them a share of the revenues equivalent to the
37.5 percent that the 4 Gulf States currently enjoy. The bill
also includes several much-needed reforms that this
Administration has requested, including organic legislation to
codify the reorganization of the former Minerals Management
Service.
While this Administration seems content with the status
quo, the Chairman's legislation is about making the right
choices now to foster new access and new energy in the future,
not 5 years from now in drafting the next plan, not 10 years
from now, but right now. We cannot keep ignoring the vast
resources potential of the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf. The
time to be bold is now, and I applaud the Chairman's
legislation and look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]
Prepared Statement of The Honorable Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Late last June, the Obama Administration had the tremendous
opportunity for the first time in more than a generation to open new
areas of the OCS for oil and gas drilling. Available to them for the
first time since 1982, was the opportunity to access billions of
barrels of oil that had been held closed under lock and key for
decades. Unfortunately, their proposed final 5 year offshore leasing
plan for 2012-2017 to Congress closed off 85 percent of our OCS
regions, allowed NO new development in the OCS and dashed the hopes and
economic opportunity for the people of States like Virginia. The Obama
plan put forward the lowest number of lease sales since the Carter
Administration. The plan provided the American people with more of the
same--drilling only in the Gulf of Mexico, and areas off the coast of
Alaska, however the plan only dubbed these sales as ``potential sales''
. . . leaving some question as to whether or not the Administration
would even follow through. And, let's be honest, one thing this
Administration knows how to do is cancel lease sales.
Nearly 1 year later, we are here today to once again attempt to
change the course upon which this Administration has set our Nation and
our energy future. Last week, the Energy Information Administration
issued their report for energy production on Federal lands for fiscal
year 2012--it is no surprise that the sale of crude on Federal lands
decreased 5 percent in 2012--with an 8 percent decrease in Federal
OFFSHORE volumes.
When we see oil and gas production declining in the Federal OCS, we
must turn the corner to keep the United States competitive, especially
as other countries begin to develop their own deep water resources. The
predominant way we can do this is by fostering energy development in
new areas. Chairman Hastings bill, the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act,
will move our Nation forward to open up access to new areas to
thousands of new jobs and more American energy. While some revenue
sharing bills have sought to provide Coastal States with a revenue
sharing scheme unequal to the four Gulf States, the Chairman's bill
provides parity to all Coastal States, allowing them a share of the
revenues equivalent to the 37.5 percent that the four Gulf States
currently enjoy. The bill also includes several much-needed reforms
that this administration has requested, including organic legislation
to codify the reorganization of the former Minerals Management Service.
While this Administration seems content with the status quo, the
Chairman's legislation is about making the right choices now to foster
new access and new energy in the future--not 5 years from now in
drafting the next plan, not 10 years from now, but right now. We cannot
keep ignoring the vast resources potential of the U.S. Outer
Continental Shelf. The time to be bold is now, and I applaud the
Chairman's legislation and look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
Thank you.
______

Mr. Lamborn. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Holt, for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Dr. Holt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the witnesses
for coming today. We all apologize for the voting schedule,
which will subject you to some inconvenience, I am afraid.
Americans have their own traditions when it comes to
celebrating the arrival of summer: cookouts, vacation, swimming
pools. Here, in the Natural Resources Committee, every summer
the Republican Majority tries to move legislation to open our
Nations' beaches and coastlines to oil drilling, even when
there is work that should be done before that drilling
commences.
The bill before us today was introduced only 2 days ago,
would allow the oil companies to put rigs off of our beaches in
California and off every State on the east coast, from Maine to
South Carolina, including my home State of New Jersey, where, I
will note, that even our Republican Governor has come out in
opposition to it. That is not meant as a campaign endorsement
of our Governor.
Mr. Lamborn. But he will take it.
Dr. Holt. He will take anything. It would require drilling
in important fisheries and sensitive environments like Bristol
Bay in Alaska and the Arctic Ocean, all without enacting key
drilling safety reforms, following one of the greatest
environmental disasters in our history.
Like most legislative proposals from the Majority, the bill
was drafted without any attempt at bipartisan or bicameral
cooperation. It is a mish-mash of provisions rejected by the
other body in the last Congress and rejected in this Congress.
Chairman Hastings has stated that somehow the legislative
process here in the House requires this rejection of
collaboration. And at some point we are going to have to stop
the convenient excuse of a legislative strategy designed to
produce political slogans, rather than public laws. I hope we
can get back to the expectation that we will come to completion
in legislation, rather than using bills for a message.
This package ignores the reality of the spill in the gulf.
It ignores the reality of our current domestic oil production.
Our domestic oil production is at a 20-year high. Natural gas
production is at an all-time high. We have more floating rigs
than before the BP spill operating. My colleagues would like to
make the claim that oil production is down on public lands. I
have good news for them. The Energy Information Administration
has a report on that very topic. And, according to this brand
new report, we are producing more oil from public lands than at
the end of the previous Administration. We are producing more
oil from public lands offshore. We are producing 20 percent
more oil from public lands onshore. And I would argue that,
even with that, we need to show even more care, given our
experience of recent years.
Today's hearing ignores these facts, continues this
troubling pattern of hastefully called hearings and recycled
energy legislation.
The Minority was informed at virtually the same time as the
public that this legislative hearing would occur. It is not a
good way to do business. The Administration was invited to
testify less than a week before the hearing on an un-introduced
bill, which, of course, prohibited the Interior Department from
being able to send a witness to comment on something that they
hadn't seen.
So, we, on the Minority, will be exercising our rights
under rule XI of the rules of the House to request a second day
of hearing on this bill, so that we can hear from the
Administration on this proposal, and hear from other witnesses
who can provide the Committee with considered testimony and
factual information about the current state of our domestic
energy production and the needs for action to enact safe
drilling reforms.
And so, let me present to the Chairman this request under
rule XI, and say I look forward to working with him in a
bipartisan way, and all the members of the Committee in a
bipartisan way, to have safe, assured energy production. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Holt follows:]
Prepared Statement of The Honorable Rush Holt, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources
Thank you.
Americans have their own traditions when it comes to celebrating
the arrival of summer; some have cookouts, some take vacation and some
head to the nearest swimming pool.
And here in the Natural Resources Committee, every summer the
Republican Majority tries to move legislation to open our Nation's
beaches and coastlines to unsafe oil drilling.
The bill before us today, which was only introduced 2 days ago,
would allow Big Oil to put drilling rigs off our beaches in California
and every State on the east coast from Maine to South Carolina,
including off the coast of my home State of New Jersey--a plan that
even our Republican Governor has come out in opposition to.
It would require drilling in important fisheries and sensitive
environments like Bristol Bay in Alaska and the Arctic Ocean. All
without enacting key drilling safety reforms following the BP Deepwater
Horizon disaster.
And like most legislative proposals from the Majority, this bill
was drafted without any attempt at bipartisan or bicameral cooperation;
the bill is a mishmash of provisions that were rejected by the Senate
last Congress and will be rejected again in this Congress.
Chairman Hastings has stated that somehow the legislative process
here in the House requires this rejection of collaboration or
cooperation with the Minority or the other body. But at some point,
that becomes a convenient excuse for a legislative strategy designed to
produce political slogans rather than public laws.
Not only does this recycled Republican package ignore the reality
of the BP spill, it also ignores the reality of our current, domestic
energy production. Our domestic oil production is at a 20-year high and
natural gas production is at an all-time high. I will repeat that: our
domestic oil production is at a 20-year high and natural gas production
is at an all-time high.
And for my colleagues on the other side who like to make the
inaccurate claim that oil production is down on public lands, I have
some good news. The Energy Information Administration has just come out
with a new report on that very topic.
According to that brand new report, we are producing more oil from
public lands than during the last year of the Bush Administration. We
are producing more oil from public lands offshore. We are producing
nearly 20 percent more oil from public lands onshore. And we are
producing 200 percent more oil from Indian lands.
That is thanks to the Interior Department and President Obama.
Today's hearing ignores these facts and continues this troubling
pattern of hastily-called hearings on recycled energy legislation,
drafted in secret and dead on arrival. The lack of sufficient notice
and time to review proposed legislation prevents witnesses, including
those representing the Administration, from being able to prepare
testimony in a timely fashion or participate in hearings. As a result,
too many of the Subcommittee's meetings consist largely of industry-
friendly witnesses repeating well-worn, and long-discredited, talking
points.
The Minority was informed at virtually the same time as the public
that this legislative hearing would occur. The Administration was
invited to testify less than a week before today's hearing on an
unintroduced bill, which prohibited the Interior Department from being
able to send a witness.
Therefore, the Minority will be exercising our rights under rule XI
of the rules of the House to request a second day of hearings on this
bill so that we can hear from the Administration on this proposal and
from other witnesses who can provide the Members of this Committee with
factual information about the current state of our domestic energy
production and the need for Congress to enact drilling safety reforms.
I yield back the balance of my time.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. And also, we will now hear from
the Chairman and Ranking Member of the Full Committee, we
always do so when they are here.
Chairman Hastings of Washington.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Hastings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thanks
for the courtesy of allowing me to be here.
Mr. Chairman, it is a fact. The United States is producing
more oil and natural gas than ever before. On State and private
lands throughout our country, increased energy production is
creating new, good-paying jobs. It is revitalizing and
strengthening our economy, and making the United States a new
player in the world energy market.
Some may look at this increase and think that means we
don't need further production on our Federal lands and waters.
This viewpoint is not only wrong, but it is incredibly short-
sighted. In reality, the increase in production on State and
private lands only further highlights the missed opportunities
on Federal lands. Jobs, revenue, and economic security are all
being forfeited because this Administration continues to block
energy production on a majority of our offshore areas.
Nearly 5 years ago, Congress and President Bush took action
to lift the drilling moratorium and open new areas for
drilling. Unfortunately, when President Obama assumed office he
tossed out that plan to develop these areas. He canceled lease
sales, and then imposed a new plan that keeps 85 percent of our
offshore areas off limits. President Obama's current plan
doesn't open one new area for leasing and energy production.
That is why it is not surprising that the House, in a
bipartisan vote last Congress, soundly rejected the President's
offshore drilling plan.
The bill before us today, H.R. 2231, the Offshore Energy
and Jobs Act, once again clearly states that the President's
plan is unacceptable and it requires him to put a new offshore
leasing plan in place by 2015. In contrast to the President's
no-new-energy plan, this is a drill-smart plan that focuses on
energy production in specific areas containing the greatest-
known oil and natural gas resources. What a novel idea. It
would safely open up new areas that were previously under
moratoria, such as the Mid-Atlantic, the Southern Pacific, and
the Arctic.
The bill also will require the Secretary to conduct
specific oil and natural gas lease sales, including offshore
Virginia, which was delayed and then canceled by the
Administration. This lease sale was originally scheduled to
take place in 2011, 2 years ago. But President Obama has
ensured that Virginians won't be able to produce energy or
enjoy economic benefits while he is in office, since the
earliest this lease sale could happen is 2017, under his plan,
unless Congress takes action.
The bill also establishes fair and equitable revenue
sharing for Coastal States. As was pointed out in Committee
hearings last Congress, it is important to recognize that
revenue-sharing will increase American energy production by
creating new incentives for opening new offshore areas for
drilling. More energy production will mean more jobs, a
stronger economy, and, obviously, more revenue to the
Government.
Finally, the bill would reorganize the Interior
Department's offshore energy agencies. While the Department has
already moved forward in this process, there has been
bipartisan recognition, including from this Administration, of
a need for organic legislation to codify these changes into
law. Reforms must increase accountability, improve efficiency,
promote safety, and ensure the highest ethical standards of
employees.
Much like the Administration has also done, this bill would
officially abolish the Mineral Management Service, or MMS, and
create three separate agencies, each with very clearly defined
missions. It would also establish an Under Secretary of Energy,
Land, and Minerals, which would be appointed by the President
in order to elevate the role of American energy production
within the Department.
The bill also includes a number of reforms to promote
safety and high ethical standards.
The majority of the proposals in this bill passed the House
in the last Congress, and it did so with bipartisan support.
Our Nation deserves better than the President's current
offshore energy plan. While State and private lands in the
United States are undergoing an energy revolution, there is no
good, credible reason why our offshore areas should be
relegated to the sidelines. Our Federal lands and waters can be
part of America's great energy story, and help contribute to
job creation and economic growth, if we only remove the
government barriers that keep them off-limits.
Once again, Mr. Chairman, thank you for the courtesy, and I
yield back my time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]
Prepared Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman, Committee
on Natural Resources
Fact: The United States is producing more oil and natural gas than
ever before. On State and private lands throughout the country,
increased energy production is creating new, good-paying jobs;
revitalizing and strengthening our economy; and making the United
States a new player in the world energy market.
Some may look at this increase and think that means we don't need
any further production on our Federal lands and waters. This viewpoint
is not only wrong, but incredibly shortsighted. In reality, the
increase in production on State and private lands only further
highlights the missed opportunities on Federal lands. Jobs, revenue and
economic security are all being forfeited because the Obama
Administration continues to block energy production in the majority of
our offshore areas.
Nearly 5 years ago, Congress and President Bush took action to lift
the drilling moratorium and open new areas for drilling. Unfortunately,
when President Obama assumed office, he tossed out a plan to develop
these areas, canceled lease sales and then imposed a new plan that
keeps 85 percent of our offshore areas off-limits. President Obama's
current plan doesn't open one new area for leasing and energy
production. That's why it's not surprising that the House, in a
bipartisan vote last Congress, soundly rejected the President's
offshore drilling plan.
The bill before us today, H.R. 2231, the Offshore Energy and Jobs
Act, once again clearly states that the President's plan is
unacceptable and it requires him to put a new offshore leasing plan in
place by 2015. In contrast to the President's no-new energy plan, this
is a drill-smart plan that focuses energy production in specific areas
containing the greatest known oil and natural gas resources. It would
safely open up new areas that were previously under moratoria--such as
the Mid-Atlantic, Southern Pacific and Arctic. This would create over a
million new American jobs and generate hundreds of millions of dollars
in new revenue to the Federal treasury.
The bill would also require the Secretary to conduct specific oil
and natural gas leases sales, including offshore Virginia which was
delayed and then canceled by this Administration. This lease sale was
originally scheduled to take place in 2011. But President Obama has
ensured Virginians won't be able to produce energy, or enjoy the
economic benefits, while he's in office since the earliest this lease
sale could happen is 2017, unless Congress takes action.
The bill also establishes fair and equitable revenue sharing for
Coastal States. As was pointed out in Committee hearings last Congress,
it's important to recognize that revenue sharing will increase American
energy production by creating new incentives for opening new offshore
areas to drilling. More energy production will means more jobs, a
stronger economy, and more revenue.
Finally, the bill would reorganize the Interior Department's
offshore energy agencies. While the Department has already moved
forward in this process, there has been bipartisan recognition,
including from the Administration, of the need for organic legislation
to codify these changes into law. Reforms must increase accountability,
improve efficiency, promote safety and ensure the highest ethical
standards of employees.
Much like the Administration has also done, this bill would
officially abolish the Minerals Management Service (MMS) and create
three separate agencies--each with very clearly defined missions. It
would also establish an Under Secretary of Energy, Land and Minerals,
which would be appointed by the President, in order to elevate the role
of American Energy production within the Department. The bill also
includes a number of reforms to promote safety and high ethical
standards.
The majority of the proposals in this bill passed the House last
Congress with strong bipartisan support.
Our Nation deserves better than the President's current offshore
energy plan. While State and private lands in the United States are
undergoing an energy revolution--there is no good, credible reason why
our offshore areas should be regulated to the sidelines. Our Federal
lands and waters can be part of America's great energy story--and help
contribute to job creation and economic growth--if we can only remove
the government barriers that keep them off-limits.
______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you for that statement, Mr. Chairman. We
now have to break for votes. We will reconvene immediately
after the votes. It will be the only interruption of the
hearing today. I am going to estimate it is going to be about
45 minutes or so.
The Subcommittee will be in recess.
[Recess.]
Mr. Lamborn. The Committee will reconvene. We shouldn't
have any more interruptions, so we can get to the next order of
business, hearing from a distinguished panel of witnesses.
The panel consists of Mr. John Felmy, Chief Economist for
the American Petroleum Institute; Mr. Richie Miller, President
of Spectrum Geo, Inc.; Mr. Christopher Guith, Vice President
for Policy, the Policy Institute for 21st Century Energy of the
U.S. Chamber of Commerce; and a guest of the Minority, Mr.
Michael Conathan, Director of Ocean Policy for the Center for
American Progress Action Fund.
So, I want to thank you all for being here. Like all of our
witnesses, your written testimony will appear in full in the
record. So I would ask that you keep your oral statements to 5
minutes. The microphones are not automatic, so you have to push
the button. When you do push the button, it is a green light at
first. Then, after 4 minutes, it becomes yellow, and after 5
minutes it turns red.
So, we would launch right in. I think Members will be
coming and going. It is a little hard to predict, because some
are heading to the airport, frankly. But I am happy to have you
all as guests, and I look forward to your testimony.
And, Mr. Felmy, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF JOHN FELMY, PH.D, CHIEF ECONOMIST, AMERICAN
PETROLEUM INSTITUTE

Mr. Felmy. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, good
morning. I am John Felmy, Chief Economist at the American
Petroleum Institute. API represents over 500 member companies
involved in all aspects of oil and natural gas industry. Thank
you for the opportunity to testify today.
API is encouraged that Congress is discussing ways to
increase offshore oil and natural gas development in the United
States. Putting these American resources to work will enhance
our energy security and transform the United States into a
dominant job-creator and energy powerhouse. It would provide a
major boost to domestic energy production, State and local
economies, and Government revenue.
The U.S. Outer Continental Shelf is estimated to contain
vast, undiscovered oil and natural gas resources, much of it
locked away in federally controlled offshore areas that are off
limits to energy exploration and development. No other
developed Nation in the world keeps so much of its offshore
energy resources out of reach.
The Bureau of Ocean Exploration and Management currently
estimates that 88.6 billion barrels of oil and 398.4 trillion
cubic feet of natural gas have yet to be discovered on our
Outer Continental Shelf. While these estimates are large, they
are also incredibly out of date, because a large share of the
estimates are based on seismic surveys that were conducted 30
years ago.
Consider this. In 1987 the Minerals Management Service
estimated only 9.57 billion barrels of oil in the Gulf of
Mexico. Thanks to advances in collecting and processing seismic
surveying data and continued exploration, that estimate rose in
2011 to 48.4 billion barrels of oil, a 400 percent increase.
Under current Administration policy, collecting much-needed
seismic data in Atlantic OCS may not happen. Why? Because
without a lease sale scheduled in the Atlantic for the
foreseeable future, there is very little prospect for the
companies that collect these data to sell it. It is important
to send positive signals on leasing in order to spur companies
to invest in collecting new data, so that they can be assured
that there will be a market for these data.
Moving forward with leasing in the Atlantic, as proposed in
this legislation, would be a step in the right direction. If
offshore energy production were extended to new areas, it could
generate a bounty of job creation and new revenues to the
Government, while improving America's energy security.
Earlier this year, a single lease sale in the Gulf of
Mexico generated $1.2 billion in revenue for the Federal
Government. As wells were drilled and the leases begin to
produce, the revenue impact will only grow, along with the
prospects for employment in the region and around the country.
Especially along the Atlantic coast, developing energy
resources safely and responsibly could bring new high-paying
jobs to States where our industry has not historically had a
major offshore presence. And if Congress enacts revenue-sharing
legislation, offshore energy development could also generate
substantial revenue for State and Federal Governments.
According to a recent study by Wood MacKenzie, policies
that promote domestic development of oil and natural gas
resources, including access to the vast Federal offshore areas
that have been off limits, could create more than 1 million new
jobs and generate $127 billion in Government revenue in under a
decade. And these jobs are a great potential for communities
not traditionally associated with oil and natural gas.
According to a study to IHS Global Insight, 166,000 of the
new oil and natural gas jobs created by 2020 could be expected
to be held by African American and Latino workers.
Delivering this energy to the American people is safer than
ever, as a result of industry's leadership and continuous
investments in safety, as evident in API's robust slate of
offshore standards and the work being done by the Center for
Offshore Safety.
There are three critical aspects to this network of safety
for offshore operations: one, prevention accomplished through
development of robust industry standards, and through the
promotion of robust safety and environmental management
systems, which is embodied in the Center for Offshore Safety;
two, new, innovative well containment and intervention
capabilities; and, three, improved planning and resources for
oil spill response.
We should also recognize that the significant changes in
the regulatory system to further enhance and codify equipment
technologies, operational standards, and management systems in
each of these three areas.
There is broad, bipartisan and growing support among
policymakers at the State and Federal level for unlocking the
energy opportunity off our coast. We urge policymakers at every
level to work together to take advantage of the valuable
opportunity presented by expanding access to offshore energy
production. The benefits for American families and businesses
are too great to let this opportunity slip away. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Felmy follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Felmy, Ph.D., Chief Economist, American
Petroleum Institute
Good morning. I am John Felmy, Chief Economist at the American
Petroleum Institute. API represents over 500 member companies involved
in all aspects of the oil and natural gas industry.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. API is encouraged
that Congress is discussing ways to increase offshore oil and natural
gas development in the United States. Putting these American resources
to work will enhance our energy security and transform the United
States into a dominant job creator and energy powerhouse. It would
provide a major boost to domestic energy production, State and local
economies, and Government revenue.
Offshore oil and natural gas production is a long-term effort that
requires long-term planning. Before the first well can be drilled and
any of these benefits realized, the Federal Government must schedule
lease sales and permit modern seismic surveys, which are essential for
locating undersea energy resources.
The U.S. Outer Continental Shelf is estimated to contain vast
undiscovered oil and natural gas resources, much of it locked away in
the 87 percent of federally-controlled offshore areas that are off-
limits to energy exploration and development. No other developed nation
in the world keeps so much of its offshore energy resources out of
reach.
The Bureau of Ocean Exploration and Management currently estimates
that 88.6 billion barrels of oil and 398.4 trillion cubic feet of gas
have yet to be discovered on our Outer Continental Shelf. While these
estimates are large, they are also incredibly out-of-date because a
large share of the estimates are based on seismic surveys that were
conducted 30 years ago.
Today, seismic surveys using modern technology produce sub-surface
images which are much clearer than those from decades ago and allow for
a better understanding of the potential resources available.
Consider this. In 1987, the Minerals Management Service estimated
only 9.57 billion barrels of oil in the Gulf of Mexico. Thanks to
advances in collecting and processing seismic surveying data and
continued exploration, that estimate rose in 2011 to 48.4 billion
barrels of oil--a 400 percent increase.
It is only through exploratory drilling that we can find potential
domestic resources, but the use of seismic surveys is critical for
determining the best prospects for drilling. Seismic surveys have been
used safely for decades--with little impact on marine life--to assess
the location and size of potential oil and natural gas deposits, which
often lay several miles beneath the ocean floor.
Under current administration policy, collecting much needed seismic
data in the Atlantic OCS may not happen. Why? Because without a lease
sale scheduled in the Atlantic for the foreseeable future, there is
very little prospect for the companies that collect these data to sell
it. It is important to send positive signals on leasing in order to
spur companies to invest in collecting new data, so that they can be
assured that there will be a market for these data. Moving forward with
leasing in the Atlantic as proposed in this legislation would be a step
in the right direction.
If offshore energy production were extended to new areas, it could
generate a bounty of job creation and new revenues to the Government
while improving America's energy security. Earlier this year, a single
lease sale in the Gulf of Mexico generated $1.2 billion in revenue for
the Federal Government. As wells are drilled and the leases begin to
produce, the revenue impact will only grow, along with the prospects
for employment in the region and around the country.
Especially along the Atlantic coast, developing energy resources
safely and responsibly could bring new well-paying jobs to States where
our industry has not historically had a major offshore presence. And if
Congress enacts revenue sharing legislation, offshore energy
development could also generate substantial revenue for the State and
Federal Governments. According to a study by Wood Mackenzie, policies
that promote domestic development of oil and natural gas resources--
including access to vast Federal offshore areas that have been kept
off-limits--could create more than 1 million new jobs and generate $127
billion in Government revenue in under a decade. And these jobs are a
great potential for communities not traditionally associated with oil
and natural gas production. According to a study by IHS Global Insight,
166,000 of the new oil and natural gas jobs created by 2020 could be
expected to be held by African American and Latino workers.
We can also break out the numbers specifically for the eastern Gulf
of Mexico and the Atlantic and Pacific Outer Continental Shelf. If
these areas were opened for energy development, the United States could
see an increase of 4.2 million barrels of oil equivalent per day in
domestic oil and natural gas production in less than 20 years. These
activities could support 420,000 total jobs, about 30 percent being
direct jobs in the industry. And the cumulative government revenue over
that period could total $313 billion, with the annual take for the
Government at $44 billion and growing at the end of the period.
Delivering this energy to the American people is safer than ever as
a result of industry's leadership and continuous investments in safety,
as evident in API's robust slate of offshore standards and the work
being done by the Center for Offshore Safety. There are 3 critical
aspects to this network of safety for offshore operations:

(1) Prevention, accomplished through the development of robust
industry standards, and through the promotion of robust safety and
environmental management systems, which is embodied in the Center for
Offshore Safety;
(2) New innovative well containment and intervention capabilities;
and
(3) Improved planning and resources for oil spill response.

We should also recognize the significant changes in the regulatory
system to further enhance and codify equipment technologies,
operational standards, and management systems in each of these three
areas.
There is broad, bipartisan and growing support among policymakers
at the State and Federal level for unlocking the energy opportunity off
our coasts. We urge policymakers at every level to work together to
take advantage of the valuable opportunity presented by expanding
access to offshore energy production. The benefits for American
families and businesses are too great to let this opportunity slip
away.
______

Dr. Wittman [presiding]. Thank you very much. We will go to
the next witness.

STATEMENT OF RICHIE MILLER, PRESIDENT, SPECTRUM GEO INC.

Mr. Miller. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, members
of the Subcommittee, good morning. I appreciate the opportunity
to be here today to discuss the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act,
and the need for America to access offshore oil and gas
resources. I am President of Spectrum Geo Inc., a company
engaged in acquiring non-exclusive seismic data, processing it,
and licensing these products to the oil and gas companies. We
are pleased that Congress is considering legislation like the
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act to make new areas of the Federal
OCS available for oil and gas exploration, and we encourage its
passage.
The United States has safely been exploring and developing
its offshore oil and gas resources since 1947. While the
deepwater plays in the western and central Gulf of Mexico
continue to be productive, the United States needs to begin
exploring new areas in order to continue to fuel our vital
economy, and ensure we have energy security. It takes years for
oil and gas exploration to result in new production. Seismic
data acquired today might result in actual energy to market in
10 to 20 years. This is due to the many steps that need to take
place.
Modern seismic imaging provides the lens through which
scientists can better understand what lies beneath the surface
of the earth. It is an amazing useful scientific tool that
allows us to accurately image the earth's crust down to depths
in excess of 40,000 feet. Over the past few decades, advances
in modern seismic imaging and interpretation have been
tremendous. Today, seismic acquisition and processing are able
to produce subsurface images that are much clearer and more
accurate than those from decades ago, or even 5 years ago.
Modern seismic imaging reduces risk, both economic and
environmental. It provides the early understanding of the
geological structures that have the potential to produce oil
and gas, their location, and the size of the resources. It
increases the likelihood that exploratory wells will
successfully tap hydrocarbons, and helps us avoid drilling for
oil and gas in areas where we won't likely be successful. It
also reduces the number of wells that need to be drilled in a
given area, thus reducing the overall footprint for
exploration.
To better understand the resource potential in other areas
like the Atlantic OCS, we need to acquire modern seismic data.
The last surveys of the Atlantic OCS were conducted over 30
years ago. Older, low-tech data that exists does not image the
medium-to-deep plays, and does not image the basin's
architecture, which is imperative to understanding the Atlantic
margin play.
Existing resource estimates for the Atlantic OCS are 3.3
billion barrels of oil and over 31 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas. While these are impressive estimates, it is widely
believed that modern seismic imaging, using the latest
technology, will show much greater resources. It will also be
able to pinpoint where the most abundant resources are likely
located.
There are reasons why geologists and geophysicists believe
that the Atlantic OCS could have much more abundant oil and gas
resources than we previously believed. Data from around the
Atlantic margin indicate energy productive geologic structures
likely exist along the east coast.
BOEM is in the process of producing a programmatic
environmental impact statement for geophysical activity on the
Atlantic OCS. We are hopeful that the BOEM will push for a
timely issuance of a positive record of decision, so that we
can begin to understand what kind of resource may exist in the
Atlantic.
The best decisions are generally made when we have the
facts and the best data. This is true of our Nation's oil and
gas resources. It only makes sense for us to understand what
the resource base and what resource value is. By pursuing
seismic data in the southern and Mid-Atlantic, we can
understand what resources exist in that area, as well.
Americans deserve public policy decisions that are made based
on the best information possible. Modern seismic surveys
provide that information.
Let's allow science to help us understand what resources we
have. We owe it to ourselves. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before this Subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Miller follows:]
Prepared Statement of Richie Miller, President, Spectrum Geo Inc.
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, Members of the Committee:
Good morning. I appreciate the opportunity to be here today to discuss
the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act and the need for America to access
offshore oil and gas resources.
I am President of Spectrum Geo Inc., a company engaged in acquiring
non-exclusive seismic data, processing it and licensing these products
to oil and gas companies. The Spectrum Group is built on the company's
reputation as a reliable seismic service provider and serves a global
clientele. The Group provides innovative non-exclusive Services and
high quality seismic imaging from regional offices in the United
States, the UK, Norway, Singapore and Australia. Spectrum is also a
member of the International Association of Geophysical Contractors, a
global trade association representing our industry.
We are pleased that Congress is considering legislation, like the
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act, to make new areas of the Federal OCS
available for oil and gas exploration, and we encourage its passage.
The United States has remained successful in producing its oil and gas
resources because we have historically been willing to explore in new
areas. And the United States has safely been exploring and developing
its offshore oil and gas resources since 1947. For decades, the U.S.
Gulf of Mexico has provided significant oil and natural gas resources
for American consumers, currently supplying approximately 27 percent of
domestic oil production and 15 percent of domestic natural gas
production. The Gulf of Mexico, one of the world's premier petroleum
provinces, has proved to be resilient. Over the years producers have
explored and produced at greater depths and in plays far below the
ocean floor to find some of the world's most remote and abundant
hydrocarbons.
While the deep water plays in the western and central Gulf of
Mexico continue to be productive, the United States needs to begin
exploring new areas in order to continue to fuel our vital economy and
ensure we have energy security. In 2011, the U.S. Bureau of Ocean
Energy Management (BOEM) estimated that the Federal OCS is home to a
mean of 88.6 billion barrels of undiscovered technically recoverable
reserves (UTRR) of oil and 398.4 trillion cubic feet of UTRR of natural
gas.\1\ As the BOEM image below demonstrates, significant reserves of
oil and natural gas are believed to exist under areas outside the
western and central Gulf of Mexico.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management, ``Resource Evaluation Program.'' http://www.boem.gov/Oil-
and-Gas-Energy-Program/Resource-Evaluation/Resource-Assessment/2011-RA-
Assessments.aspx.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: http://www.boem.gov/uploadedFiles/BOEM/
Oil_and_Gas_Energy_Pro
gram/Resource_Evaluation/Resource_Assessment/
2011_National_Assessment_Map
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
.pdf

Even though nearly half of the estimated OCS resources exist
outside the western and central Gulf of Mexico, abundant resources in
the Atlantic, Pacific, Alaska, and eastern Gulf of Mexico are not
available for new leasing.
It takes years for oil and gas exploration to result in new
production. Seismic data acquired today might result in actual energy
to market in 10 to 20 years. This is due to the many steps that need to
take place. Modern seismic imaging provides the lens through which
scientists can better understand what lies beneath the surface of the
Earth. It is an amazingly useful scientific tool that allows us to
accurately image the earth's crust down to depths in excess of 40,000
feet below the mud line (more than 8 miles down). Over the past few
decades, advances in modern seismic imaging and interpretation have
been tremendous. Today, seismic surveys that use modern data
acquisition techniques and then process that data by applying the
massive computing power that is now affordable are able to produce sub-
surface images which are much clearer and more accurate than those from
decades ago, or even 5 years ago. This ability serves many needs beyond
oil and gas exploration. For the energy industry, modern seismic
imaging reduces risk--both economic risk of exploration and production,
but also the associated safety and environmental risks. It provides the
early understanding of the geological structures that have the
potential to produce oil and gas, where those hydrocarbons are trapped
and how much likely exists. Modern seismic imaging provides greater
certainty for explorers. It increases the likelihood that exploratory
wells will successfully tap hydrocarbons and helps us avoid drilling
for oil and gas in areas where we won't likely be successful. It also
reduces the number of wells that need to be drilled in a given area,
thus reducing the overall footprint for exploration.
As mentioned earlier, our company is engaged in acquiring non-
exclusive seismic data, processing it and licensing these products to
oil and gas companies. That means we do the work (and take the
financial risks) needed to deliver oil and gas companies the ability to
use modern seismic imaging to explore an area new to them (or new to
the entire industry). They also use our products to develop reserves
they discover in the process. We repeatedly license the seismic data to
oil and gas companies for a fee, but retain the underlying ownership.
By acquiring the data once and making it available to any oil and gas
company, our industry avoids duplicating these surveys, and thus avoids
unnecessary duplication of temporary disturbance caused by our surveys.
We also provide the same products to BOEM for their use in evaluating
the OCS resource base, in ensuring they receive fair market value when
they lease OCS lands, and in making the many conservation decisions
required of them as they administer their obligations under the OCS
Lands Act.
Modern seismic imaging can dramatically improve our understanding
of how much resources exist. Exploration and development activities
generally lead to increased resource estimates. For example, in 1987
the Minerals Management Service estimated only 9.57 billion barrels of
oil in the Gulf of Mexico. With more recent seismic data acquisition
and additional exploratory drilling, that estimate rose in 2011 to 48.4
billion barrels of oil--a 500 percent increase!
To better understand how much resources exist in other areas like
the Atlantic Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) we need to obtain modern
seismic data. The last surveys of the Atlantic OCS were conducted 30
years ago. Due to technological advances, existing estimates of the
available energy are out-of-date.
Existing resource estimates for the Atlantic OCS are 3.3 billion
barrels of oil and 31.3 trillion cubic feet of natural gas. While these
are impressive estimates, it is widely believed that modern seismic
imaging using the latest technology will show much greater resources.
It will also be able to pinpoint where the most abundant resources are
likely located.
There are reasons why geologists and geophysicists believe that the
Atlantic OCS could have much more abundant oil and gas resources than
we previously believed. For one, the Atlantic Margin is proving to be
quite productive in hydrocarbon production in areas like West Africa,
Brazil and Nova Scotia.
Between 200 to 300 million years ago there was one supercontinent
that we refer to as Pangea. It began to break apart 200 million years
ago. At the time the U.S. and Canadian east coast, West Africa and
Brazil were connected as a single land mass. The energy productive
geologic structures in West Africa and Brazil have been correlated and
determined to be the same age and structure with those that exist along
the U.S. east coast. Further investigation will likely show that they
are similar in their hydrocarbon-bearing geologic structures.

Pangea

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Understanding the Atlantic Resource
The best decisions are generally made when we have the facts and
the best data. This is true of our Nation's oil and gas resources. It
only makes sense for us to understand what the resource base and
resource value is.
For the Atlantic OCS, we need to update our understanding of the
resource, and modern seismic imaging is needed to make this evaluation.
Older, low tech data that exists does not image medium to deep plays,
and does not image the basin's architecture, which is imperative to
understanding the Atlantic Margin play. We now have an array of new
tools in the toolbox, reflection, gravity, magnetics, electromagnetic,
which can better help us understand the potential resource. By
utilizing these tools and by applying increasingly accurate and
effective interpretation practices, we can be better locate and dissect
prospective areas, identify the types of plays we are locating, and
help us evaluate the potential resource base. All of these factors
demonstrate how modern seismic imaging creates a better understanding
of what lies below the surface of the Earth before a single well is
drilled. It is the least intrusive and most cost-effective way to
understand where recoverable oil and gas resources likely exist in the
Southern- and Mid-Atlantic.
Because acquiring and interpreting modern seismic data provides a
greater understanding of where oil and gas reserves exist and how much
are likely in place, having modern seismic data prior to a lease sale
will allow industry to make more informed bids. This will likely result
in more bids and higher bids since industry is reluctant to bid on
blocks where there is little or no seismic data. Modern seismic imaging
consistently brings more players to bid on offshore leases, creating
more competition and driving the cost of leases higher. This is a
phenomenon we are seeing globally as occurred recently in Uruguay with
the government receiving $1.2 billion lease bids and in Brazil where
with $2.0 billion in lease bids were received. Lebanon, Cyprus and
Somalia are holding lease sales later this year that are expected to
bring in significant revenues for the host countries. Oil and gas
producers have the capital to explore frontier areas and are always
looking for new opportunities.
As mentioned, having modern seismic data available also creates
greater efficiency for the Government as it allows the BOEM to better
evaluate the blocks it is offering and the bids that it receives. With
higher quality data about the resource, BOEM will have a great
understanding of the resource value. This will ensure that the taxpayer
get a greater return from Federal OCS acreage.
Ongoing Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement
BOEM is in the process of producing a Programmatic Environmental
Impact Statement (PEIS) to evaluate ``potential significant
environmental impacts of multiple geological and geophysical activities
on the Atlantic Outer Continental Shelf''. A draft PEIS was published
in the Federal Register on March 30, 2012 and underwent a 94-day
comment period.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

A record of decision (ROD) was initially posted to be released
in October 2013, however, we now understand that the ROD is being
pushed to March 2014. We are concerned about potential delays in the
issuance of an ROD as these delays create difficulties in scheduling
for permits and vessels. New procedures and processes will likely be
introduced after ROD which will inevitably result in more delays in the
permitting process. We hope that BOEM will issue these procedures and
processes as they are determined so that industry can start working on
permit applications. We are hopeful that BOEM will push for a timely
issuance of a positive record of decision so that we can begin to
understand what kind of resource may exist in the Atlantic.
Conclusion
Our offshore oil and gas resources can provide us with enormous
energy resources if we choose to pursue them. Recent history shows us
that the more we explore the more we find. In the decades we have
developed the Gulf of Mexico we have moved from the shelf, to the deep
water, to the deep water Oligocene play, to the shelf deep gas play.
The basin keeps giving as we learn more and seismic imaging plays a big
part of this success. The same evolution is occurring in other regions
like the North Sea, Middle East and even here at home. A mere 5 years
ago, the Eagle Ford play in South Texas was virtually unknown. Now it
is one of the world's most prolific plays and we are targeting two more
horizons in the play and resource estimates continue to rise. This
would have never happened if industry had been denied the use of modern
seismic imaging tools.
By pursuing seismic data in the Southern- and Mid-Atlantic we can
understand what resources exist in that area as well. If given the
chance, our industry can safely and efficiently determine if and where
hydrocarbon resources exist in the Atlantic. We can do it in a way that
reduces the need for exploration drilling and increases the likelihood
that future drilling will be successful. As it stands today our
understanding of this potential resource base depends on data that is
30 years old or older. Interpreting it is analogous to a blind person
trying to judge a beauty contest. Americans deserve public policy
decisions that are made based on the best information possible. Modern
seismic surveys provide that information. Let's allow science to help
us understand what resources we have. We owe it to ourselves.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee.
______

Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Miller. And we will now go to
Mr. Guith.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER GUITH, VICE PRESIDENT FOR POLICY,
INSTITUTE FOR 21ST CENTURY ENERGY, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Guith. Thank you, Congressman Wittman. I am Christopher
Guith, Vice President for Policy at the Institute for 21st
Century Energy, an affiliate of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce,
the world's largest business federation representing the
interests of more than 3 million businesses of all sizes,
sectors, and regions, as well as State and local chambers and
industry associations around the country.
I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the Offshore
Energy and Jobs Act. Offshore energy development has been
unnecessarily constrained for several decades across multiple
administrations from both parties. I commend Chairman Hastings
for continuing to push Congress to reconsider America's
offshore energy policy, and frankly, America's energy policy in
toto.
While many in this country, and most inside the beltway,
are just waking up to the reality that the core assumption
underlying our energy policy is no longer valid, to the extent
it ever was, our energy policy is decades behind. The United
States has the largest fossil fuel resource base in the world,
yet our energy policy is based on the assumption that we are an
energy-poor Nation that is subject to the whims of the world's
energy exporters. Our energy policy must reflect the present
and future reality, and the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act would
help put us on a path toward that goal.
The United States is blessed with an extremely large oil
and gas resource base. The Federal Government estimates that
the United States holds about 1.4 trillion barrels of oil and
2.7 quadrillion cubic feet of natural gas that are technically
recoverable. At current consumption rates, that is enough oil
to last over 200 years, and natural gas to last 115 years.
Moreover, this is a larger amount of oil than the world has
consumed since commercial production began in the mid-19th
century.
Today, due to administrative withdrawal or legislative
prohibition, more than 86 percent of the United States' Outer
Continental Shelf is off limits to any oil and natural gas
production. And, more importantly, exploration. The Bureau of
Ocean Energy Management estimates are based on exploratory work
done in the 1970s and 1980s, and many generations of technology
ago.
As has been stated, modern seismic graphing will invariably
demonstrate much greater reserves in the OCS, using modern
technology and economic conditions. This is precisely why the
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act is vital to securing America's
energy future. By increasing access to the OCS and establishing
long-term production targets for the Department of the Interior
to plan around when formulating oil and gas leasing programs,
the country can begin to systematically increase its energy
security and reap the economic benefits that entails.
The oil and natural gas industry is a tremendous economic
growth engine that has represented one of the only positive
growth industries over the Great Recession. One of the primary
reasons for this is that the industry is labor-intensive,
relative to most other sectors of the economy. Additionally,
the supply chain that supports this industry is quite long,
stretching across the entire country, to include States that do
not even produce oil and natural gas. These characteristics are
especially true in the offshore exploration and production
segment of the industry.
Offshore development supports about 240,000 direct and
indirect jobs across the country. But nowhere is this more
evident than the gulf coast economy. IHS Global Insight
estimated in 2009 that the offshore oil and natural gas
industry represented about 9.3 percent of total employment, and
12 percent of the entire gulf coast economy, and generated
almost $6 billion in State and local taxes and over $13 billion
in Federal revenue. While the gulf coast knows full well how
bad Federal policy like the 2010 moratorium can create
devastating economic consequences, we also know that sound
policy that allows greater production of our immense resources
presents tremendous beneficial impacts on the Nation's economy.
Oil production from Federal waters accounted for more than
20 percent of all U.S. production in 2012. More than 95 percent
of that came from the Gulf of Mexico. However, with limited
exception, those Coastal States receive less than 5 percent of
the revenues the Federal Government receives from offshore
development adjacent to those States. However, States hosting
oil and natural gas development on Federal lands within their
borders receive 50 percent of all royalties collected. While
splitting the royalties onshore represents good policy,
providing almost no share to adjacent Coastal States is quite
the opposite.
Current law allows for limited revenue sharing in the
eastern gulf, and this model should be expanded to all areas of
Federal offshore production, which is one of the reasons we
support the revenue-sharing section of the Offshore Energy and
Jobs Act.
The United States is in the midst of an unprecedented oil
boom. In 2013 we are on track to exceed 7.5 million barrels of
oil per day in production, if we haven't already, a level that
we have not seen in 24 years. The United States has witnessed
more than a 40 percent increase in domestic oil production
since 2008, alone. While we are on a path to greater self-
reliance, we still have a long way to go. At some point this
year, the United States is expected to see its domestic
production outstrip imported oil for the first time in decades.
That we are only 50 percent dependent on imported oil after
such massive increases in domestic production is illustrative
of why we also need to increase offshore production.
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act goes a long way toward
securing America's energy future, and we strongly support its
passage and enactment. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Guith follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher Guith, Vice President--Policy,
Institute for 21st Century Energy, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of
the Committee. I am Christopher Guith, Vice President for Policy at the
Institute for 21st Century Energy (Institute), an affiliate of the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce, the world's largest business federation
representing the interests of more than 3 million businesses of all
sizes, sectors, and regions, as well as State and local chambers and
industry associations, and dedicated to promoting, protecting, and
defending America's free enterprise system.
The mission of the Institute is to unify policymakers, regulators,
business leaders, and the American public behind common sense energy
strategy to help keep America secure, prosperous, and clean. In that
regard we hope to be of service to this Committee, this Congress as a
whole, and the administration.
I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the draft version of the
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act. Offshore energy development has been
unnecessarily constrained for several decades and across multiple
administrations from both parties. I commend Chairman Hastings for
continuing to push Congress to reconsider America's offshore energy
policy, and frankly America's energy policy in toto.
While many in this country, and most inside the Beltway, are just
waking up to the reality that the core assumption underlying our energy
policy is no longer valid, to the extent it ever was, our energy policy
is decades behind. The United States has the largest fossil fuel
resource base in the world. Yet, our energy policy is based on the
assumption that we are an energy poor nation that is subject to the
whims of the world's energy exporters. Our energy policy must reflect
the present and future reality, and the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act
would help put us on the path towards that goal.
RESOURCE BASE
The United States is blessed with an extremely large oil and
natural gas resource base. The Federal Government estimates the United
States holds about 1.4 trillion barrels of oil and 2.7 quadrillion
cubic feet of natural gas that are technically recoverable. At current
consumption rates, that's enough oil to last over 200 years and natural
gas to last 115 years. Moreover, that is a larger amount of oil than
the world has consumed since commercial production began in the mid-
19th century.
Like statistics in general, reserve estimates can be misconstrued
or misused and require proper context. For example, as of 2010, the
U.S. proved oil reserves were estimated at 23 billion barrels which
amounts to roughly 3 percent of the world's proved reserves and would
last less than 5 years at current consumption rates. So which is it? Do
we have more than 200 years of oil or 5? Actually, the real answer
based on current assessments is we have 535 years worth of oil but not
all of it is recoverable given current technology, oil prices, and
access policy.
Proved reserves have a very specific definition, largely governed
by Securities and Exchange Commission reporting requirements for energy
companies. They include resources that have been discovered and can be
recovered economically with a significant level of certainty. Proved
reserves are a dynamic measure that fluctuate with the price of the
resource and the availability and cost of technology with which it can
be recovered.
In 1950, the U.S. proved oil reserves were 25.3 billion barrels of
oil. Yet, between 1950 and 2012 the U.S. produced over 167 billion
barrels of oil, or 660 percent more than the proved reserve of 1950.
The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) estimates that the
U.S. Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) contains 90 billion barrels of oil
and nearly 400 trillion cubic feet of natural gas that is undiscovered
technically recoverable resources. These numbers are impressive or
unimpressive depending upon the context. Not only do reserve estimates
fluctuate based on financial conditions, but the availability and cost
of improved technology alter the reserve estimates considerably.
Today, due to administrative withdrawal or legislative prohibition,
more than 86 percent of the U.S. OCS is off-limits to any oil and
natural gas production and, more importantly, exploration. The BOEM
estimates are based on exploratory work done in the 1970s and 1980s,
many generations of technology ago. Modern 3-D seismic graphing will
invariably demonstrate much greater reserves in the OCS using modern
technology and economic conditions.
This is precisely why the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act is vital to
securing America's energy future. By increasing access to the OCS and
establishing long-term production targets for the Department of the
Interior to plan around when formulating oil and gas leasing programs,
the country can begin to systematically increase its energy security
and reap the economic benefits that entails.
ECONOMIC IMPACT
The oil and natural gas industry is a tremendous economic growth
engine that has represented one of the only positive growth industries
over the Great Recession. One of the primary reasons is that this
industry is labor intensive relative to most sectors of the economy.
Additionally, the supply chain that supports this industry is quite
long, stretching across the country to include States that do not even
produce oil or natural gas. These characteristics are especially true
in the offshore exploration and production segment of the industry.
Offshore development supports over 240,000 direct and indirect jobs
across the country, but nowhere is this more evident than the gulf
coast economy. IHS Global Insight estimated that in 2009 the offshore
oil and natural gas industry represented 9.3 percent of total
employment and 12 percent of the economy, and generated almost $6
billion in State and local taxes and over $13 billion in Federal
revenue.
Offshore development is the lifeblood of the gulf region directly
and indirectly supporting thousands of small businesses that would not
exist without it. We saw just how closely the gulf economy is tied to
offshore development when in 2010 the Department of Interior
effectively ceased offshore activities for over 1 year after the
Macondo oil spill and by many measures has yet to reach a pre-spill
rate of processing leasing programs and applications for permits to
drill.
Precipitously shutting down 12 percent of the gulf's economy has
severe immediate impacts, many of which will continue to be felt for
years to come. Dr. Joseph Mason at Louisiana State University initially
estimated that just a 6-month moratorium could result in a loss of more
than $2.1 billion to the gulf economy and more than 8,100 jobs.
While the gulf coast knows full well how bad Federal policy can
create devastating economic consequences, we also know that sound
policy that allows greater production of our immense resources in a
safe and environmentally safe manner can have tremendously beneficial
impacts on the Nation's economy.
REVENUE SHARING
Oil production from Federal waters accounted from more than 20
percent of all U.S. production in 2012. More than 95 percent of that
offshore production comes from the Gulf of Mexico. However, with
limited exception, those Coastal States receive less than 5 percent of
the royalties the Federal Government receives from offshore development
adjacent to those States.
However, States hosting oil and natural gas development on Federal
lands within their borders receive 50 percent of all royalties
collected. While splitting the royalties onshore represents good
policy, providing almost no share to adjacent Coastal States is quite
the opposite. The Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act (GOMESA), which
became law in 2006, created a new model for the sharing of Federal
royalties from offshore development with adjacent States in a very
limited geographic area. This model should be expanded to all areas of
Federal offshore production, which is why we support the revenue
sharing section of the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act.
This legislation follows the 37.5 percent allocation already
established in GOMESA and would ensure the States who shoulder the
largest burden of offshore oil and gas development receive an equitable
share of Federal revenues just like States that host onshore
development on Federal lands. The country owes a debt of gratitude to
these offshore producing States for the economic and energy security
benefits the entire country realizes and they should receive an
equitable share of the Federal revenue derived from those activities.
ENERGY SECURITY
The United States is in the midst of an unprecedented oil boom. In
2013 we are on track to exceed 7.5 million barrels per day of
production, a level not seen in 24 years. The United States has
witnessed more than a 40 percent increase in oil production since 2008
alone. While we are on a path to a more secure energy future where we
are much more self-reliant, we still have a long way to go. At some
point later this year, the United States is expected to see its
domestic production outstrip imported oil. Each additional barrel of
oil we produce is one less barrel that needs to be imported, and
ensures nearly all of the money paid for that barrel of oil stays in
the United States, as opposed to less than 5 percent as is the case of
imports from some countries.
That we are only 50 percent dependent on imported oil after such
massive increases in domestic production is illustrative of why we also
need to increase offshore production. While onshore production has
increased exponentially, and net U.S. production continues to increase,
offshore production has declined. Offshore production on Federal lands
in 2012 was about 10 percent lower than it was in 2009. The OCS
represents a tremendous resource base which could fuel production much
greater than current rates. However, more than 86 percent of the OCS is
not available for lease. The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act would allow
greater access to this resource by expanding access to areas that have
been off limits for decades, including its explicit inclusion of Lease
Sale 220 adjacent to Virginia.
Onshore production is quickly moving the country towards greater
energy security, but we still have a long way to go. Responsibly
increasing offshore production is the next important step towards less
imported oil and less energy security risk.
______

Mr. Lamborn [presiding]. All right, thank you. Mr.
Conathan?

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL J. CONATHAN, DIRECTOR OF OCEAN POLICY,
CENTER FOR AMERICAN PROGRESS ACTION FUND

Mr. Conathan. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt,
members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act. The issues
this legislation addresses are vital to the well-being of our
Nation. Yet its approach fails to reflect the reality of
current activity in the oceans and our coasts or the economic
and environmental risks posed by massive increases in offshore
oil and gas production.
Our oceans and coasts are fundamental economic drivers.
According to the National Ocean Economics Program, in 2011 the
ocean economy accounted for 2.7 million jobs and contributed
more than $250 billion to our GDP. Nearly 2 million of those
jobs occur in fisheries, tourism, and recreation: all
industries that would be put at tremendous risk by expanded
offshore drilling activity. Meanwhile, offshore minerals
production supported approximately 143,000 workers. In other
words, jobs that depend on healthy, unpolluted, undeveloped
ocean space outnumber oil and gas jobs 15 to 1.
Although safe well-regulated oil and gas production is a
necessary part of today's economy, its expansion into protected
places puts other parts of the ocean economy at tremendous
risk. The Gulf of Mexico is still recovering from the 2010 BP
Deepwater Horizon disaster, and the full extent of the damage
may not be known for decades.
In March of 2011, the National Commission on the BP
Deepwater Horizon oil spill released its final recommendations
to improve management of offshore drilling. They painted a
bleak picture of failed congressional oversight. The
commissioners found that Congress had developed a ``false sense
of security''--this is a quote--``about the risks of offshore
drilling and gas development. Congress showed its support for
offshore drilling in a number of ways, but did not take any
steps to mitigate the increased perils that accompany drilling
in ever-deeper water.''
Fast-forward 2 years, and just last month the Wall Street
Journal reported that the offshore oil and gas industry in the
Gulf of Mexico is booming. But Congress has yet to pass a
single piece of legislation to address the failure of
oversight. Instead, some members of this Committee would like
to advance legislation that would force the opening of massive
new areas, exposing them to the same dangers that led to the
Deepwater Horizon disaster.
Perhaps the most glaring example of congressional inaction
is that the liability cap for offshore oil spills remains at a
pathetically low $75 million, while damages from Deepwater
Horizon have already exceeded $14 billion. The big five oil
companies made over $118 billion in profits in 2012 alone. So
that means together they could pay for the maximum legal
liability for four offshore oil spills every day for a year,
and still have profits left over. BP waived its liability cap,
but there is no guarantee that the next company will be solvent
enough to pay more than the law requires. It is Congress's job
to take care of this problem.
Fortunately, other opportunities exist to create jobs and
increase our domestic offshore energy production. Offshore wind
is a proven source of commercially scalable power that carries
far fewer environmental risks. The United States has yet to
construct its first offshore wind farm, but countries like
Denmark, Germany, and the UK have installed thousands of
megawatts of offshore wind capacity in their coastal waters.
And industries are developing in China, South Korea, India, and
other parts of the world.
The Department of Energy has set a goal of developing 54
gigawatts of offshore wind energy by 2030, which it says would
create 43,000 jobs in the engineering, construction, and
manufacturing sectors. And earlier this week the Department
opened its first auction process for an offshore wind area off
the coast of Rhode Island and Massachusetts.
Finally, this legislation simply ignores the reality that
our current energy habits are changing the climate of our
planet. According to a recent NASA study, 97 percent of climate
scientists now agree that climate change is happening, and is
very likely caused by human activity, 97 percent of scientists
at NASA. Science is not political. Science doesn't care who can
afford more commercial air time on television. Science is
reality. And until we start reducing our reliance on fossil
fuels and carbon pollution, and seeking alternative forms of
electricity and energy to fuel our economy, we are putting our
own future and our children's future in dire peril.
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act is not part of a true all-
of-the-above energy strategy. It is an anything-goes energy
strategy that ignores our past failures and creates a game that
means, for big oil, to play is to win. But the losers in this
game are sustainable ocean and coastal industries, our marine
environment and some of our most beloved places for rest and
recreation and recuperation. American prosperity will come from
diversifying our economic growth, not supporting one industry
at the expense of all others, and tilting the playing field
dramatically in favor of oil and gas companies that already
dominate our economic landscape.
Once again, I thank you, and I look forward to the
opportunity to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conathan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael J. Conathan, Director of Ocean Policy,
Center for American Progress
h.r. 2231--offshore energy and jobs act
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act of 2013.
Our Nation's ocean space is one of our greatest treasures. It gives
us sustenance in the form of the seafood we consume and two-thirds of
the oxygen we breathe. It provides a trade route that brings 90 percent
of the material goods we import to our shores. It regenerates our souls
with one of our most popular destinations for vacation, rest, and
restoration of spirit and mind. And as we are here to discuss today, it
also provides much of the energy that fuels our economy.
And in providing all of these services, our oceans and coasts are
also fundamental economic drivers. According to the National Ocean
Economics Program and the Monterey Institute of International Studies'
Center for the Blue Economy, in 2011 the ocean economy--which consists
of construction, living resources, minerals, ship and boat building,
tourism and recreation, and transportation--accounted for 2.7 million
jobs and contributed more than $250 billion to our gross domestic
product.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Center for the Blue Economy, ``Market Data: OceanEconomy Search
Results,'' available at http://www.oceaneconomics.org/Market/ocean/
oceanEconResults.asp?IC=N&selState=0&sel
County=All&selYears=2010&selToYear=none&selSector=8&selIndust=All&selVal
ue=All&selOut=
display&noepID=unknown (last accessed June 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Particularly in today's economic environment, we must strive to
protect all the sources of revenue we receive from our ocean. The
legislation we are here to consider today unfortunately prioritizes one
industry over all the rest, to the detriment of both our economic and
environmental well-being.
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act of 2013 focuses on increasing
energy production and, to that end, seeks to prioritize job creation
exclusively in the energy field. But one cannot truly consider the
potential effect of expanded oil and gas production on the economy and
on employment without looking beyond just a single industry. The ``all
of the above'' energy strategy espoused by members of both political
parties and echoed from both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue must mean
exactly that--all sources of energy production must be included. The
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act is an incomplete bill for an ``all of the
above'' energy strategy.
The fact is, accelerating offshore oil and gas production in an
attempt to create more jobs might be a fine idea if nothing else took
place in our exclusive economic zone. But the ocean is a busy place,
and prioritizing one industry will surely come at the expense of
others.
So the first thing I would ask this Committee to consider is a
revision of perspective. Instead of asking how to create more oil and
gas jobs, take a step back and ask how to create more good jobs in
industries that rely on the ocean. The options are suddenly far
stronger.
Here is the reality of today:

Offshore oil and gas production is already a growth
industry. According to The Wall Street Journal, ``today . . . offshore
drilling is booming in the Gulf of Mexico.''\2\ Every year of the Obama
Administration, there has been more oil produced on the outer
continental shelf than the last year of the previous Administration,
and every year but 2012 saw more production than any year of George W.
Bush's presidency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Should the U.S. Expand Offshore Oil Drilling?'', The Wall
Street Journal, April 12, 2013, available at http://online.wsj.com/
article/SB10001424127887324020504578398610851042612
.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In 2010 the Gulf of Mexico experienced the worst
accidental offshore oil spill in the history of the world. Since then,
Congress has passed exactly zero laws to strengthen oversight of
offshore oil production or increase pathetically low liability limits
of $75 million.

Despite this massive quantity of production, this
legislation would stomp on the gas pedal, accelerating production even
further and forcing the opening of new areas in the Atlantic, the
Pacific, and the gulf coast, including areas where local residents
resoundingly oppose having their coastlines threatened by oil
production.

In many of these regions, the current economy depends on
clean, healthy oceans. The increase in industrial activity and the risk
of blowouts, spills, and pollution that comes with offshore drilling
would threaten oceans.

Instead of creating offshore energy jobs by doubling down
on dirty energy policies of the 20th century, we should be investing in
the future: renewable energy. Shallow water offshore wind is ready for
prime time in U.S. waters, and other offshore renewable technologies
are right behind.
Offshore Oil and Gas Production is Already Booming
Production in Offshore Waters is Currently Outpacing Production Under
the Bush Administration
There has been quite a bit of rhetoric from the oil industry about
the decline of oil production from Federal lands and waters under the
Obama Administration. These claims are disproved by the data from the
Energy Information Administration as analyzed by the Congressional
Research Service.\3\ Oil production from federally owned places was
higher in every one of the past 4 years compared to 2008 when oil hit a
record-high price of $142.50 per barrel.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Marc Humphries, ``U.S. Crude Oil and Natural Gas Production in
Federal and Non-Federal Areas'' (Washington: Congressional Research
Service, 2013), available at http://energycommerce
.house.gov/sites/republicans.energycommerce.house.gov/files/
20130228CRSreport.pdf.
\4\ Energy Information Administration, Weekly Cushing, OK WTI Spot
Price FOB (Department of Energy, 2013), available at http://
www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=
RWTC&f=W.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Increasing Production Will Not Lower Gas Prices
One of the issues Americans care about most fervently when it comes
to oil production is the price of gasoline. But the fact is that
increasing production will do nothing to lower prices at the pump. In
2012 the Associated Press, or AP, tested the theory of whether more
U.S. drilling would lower gasoline prices. It conducted an exhaustive
analysis of 36 years of monthly U.S. oil production and gasoline price
data. AP found ``[n]o statistical correlation between how much oil
comes out of U.S. wells and the price at the pump.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The Center for Public Integrity, ``Fact Check: More U.S.
drilling didn't drop gas prices'' (2012), available at http://
www.publicintegrity.org/2012/03/21/8474/fact-check-more-us-drilling-
didnt-drop-gas-prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As fundamental as the law of supply and demand might be to
macroeconomic theory, the on-the-ground reality is that more drilling
will not lower gas prices. The Energy Information Administration finds
that even if we wave the green flag for our entire exclusive economic
zone, it will do nothing more than reduce the cost of gasoline by 2
cents and not until 2030.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Energy Information Administration, Impact of Limitations on
Access to Oil and Natural Gas Resources in the Federal Outer
Continental Shelf (Department of Energy, 2009), available at http://
www.eia.gov/oiaf/aeo/otheranalysis/aeo_2009analysispapers/aongr.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Here is why:

As of 2012 U.S. oil production was at an 8-year high,\7\
and the most recent ``Short-Term Energy Outlook'' from the Energy
Information Administration projects production to continue growing at
least through 2013 based on current activity.\8\ By the end of
President Obama's recently issued 5-year drilling plan, fully 75
percent of our undiscovered, technically recoverable offshore reserves
will be open for drilling.\9\ All that additional activity has not
brought down the price of gasoline at the pump.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ ``Barack Obama says U.S. oil production is at 8-year high,''
Politifact.com, January 24, 2012 available at http://
www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2012/jan/24/barack-obama/
barack-obama-says-us-oil-production-eight-year-hig/.
\8\ Energy Information Administration, Short-Term Energy Outlook
(Department of Energy, 2013), available at http://205.254.135.7/
forecasts/steo/pdf/steo_full.pdf.
\9\ Department of the Interior, ``Secretary Salazar Announces 2012-
2017 Offshore Oil and Gas Development Program,'' Press Release,
September 8, 2011, available at http://www.doi.gov/news/pressreleases/
Secretary-Salazar-Announces-2012-2017-Offshore-Oil-and-Gas-Development-
Program.cfm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

If oil companies wanted to increase production, they
could. In March 2011 the Department of the Interior released a report
revealing that two-thirds of oil-and-gas companies' offshore leases and
more than half of their onshore leases are not being produced.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Department of the Interior, ``BOI Releases Report on Unused
Oil and Gas Leases,'' Press Release, March 29, 2011, available at
http://www.doi.gov/news/pressreleases/DOI-Releases-Report-on-Unused-
Oil-and-Gas-Leases.cfm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Gasoline supply is ultimately constrained not by oil
production but by refining capacity. More than half of the Nation's
refineries are controlled by five companies, and in the spring of 2011
as gas prices surged close to $4 per gallon, the Los Angeles Times
reported that domestic refineries were ``operating at about 81 percent
of their production capacity,'' and that exports of refined products
such as gasoline were increasing because foreign buyers were ``willing
to pay a premium.''\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Ronald D. White, ``Oil companies are making more money and
less fuel,'' Los Angeles Times, April 28, 2011, available at http://
articles.latimes.com/2011/apr/28/business/la-fi-oil-refineries-
20110429.

Richard Newell, then-administrator of the Energy Information
Administration, testified before the full House Natural Resources
Committee in 2011 to explain that ``[w]e do not project additional
volumes of oil that could flow from greater access to oil resources on
Federal lands to have a large impact on prices given the globally
integrated nature of the world oil market.''\12\ In other words,
because the price of oil is set on a global market rather than a
domestic market, opening up protected lands and waters to more drilling
would not substantially affect oil prices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Richard Newell, Testimony before the Committee on Natural
Resources, March 17, 2011, available at http://www.eia.gov/neic/
speeches/newell_03172011.pdf#page=7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Legacy of the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
Congressional Inaction
In the spring and summer of 2010, horrified Americans watched as
the worst oil spill in America's history gushed uncontrollably into the
Gulf of Mexico more than a mile below the surface. By the time BP's
Macondo well was finally plugged 89 days after the explosion that
killed 11 men and sunk the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig, nearly 5
million barrels of oil had polluted the gulf, compounded by the
application of millions of gallons of chemical dispersant.
In the aftermath of the incident, President Obama convened the
National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill to
investigate what happened in the accident and how the country could
improve future operations and reduce the chances of another such
disaster. In January 2011 the commission published its final report,
including a 60-page summary document with recommendations for Congress,
the industry, and the Administration to overhaul our drilling
procedures and make adequate reparations in the aftermath of the spill.
In the more than 2 years since this report was published, Congress
has enacted exactly zero bills to strengthen our oversight of offshore
drilling activities, even those carried out in ultra-deep water like
the Deepwater Horizon operation.
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act would partially address one of
these recommendations: codifying changes to the former Minerals
Management Service to increase Federal oversight and ensure separation
between the Government's permitting and revenue collection authorities
and its enforcement arm. Yet even this change would be late in coming.
The Obama Administration has acted swiftly to resolve this issue with
the creation of the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management and the Bureau of
Safety and Environmental Enforcement.
Yet numerous other issues remain unaddressed, and we should not be
aggressively accelerating offshore oil and gas development until we
have fixed the problems that either led to or were exposed by the BP
disaster in 2010. Perhaps the most glaring area in need of
congressional attention is the issue of oil companies' liability for
spills.
The current liability cap for offshore oil spills remains at a
pathetically low $75 million per incident. According to the
Congressional Research Service, BP has already paid approximately $14
billion on cleanup operations alone.\13\ Early on in the process, BP
agreed to waive the $75 million cap and pay all costs of the clean up,
but they were not legally required to do so.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Jonathan L. Ramseur and Curry L. Hagerty, ``Deepwater Horizon
Oil Spill: Recent Activities and Ongoing Developments'' (Washington:
Congressional Research Service, 2013), available at http://www.fas.org/
sgp/crs/misc/R42942.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Opponents of raising the liability cap argue that it would prevent
smaller companies from entering into the industry because they would be
unable to get insurance to cover the extent of their liability. Even
disregarding the counterargument that if a company cannot afford to
clean up the potential mess, they should not attempt the action in the
first place, there are ways around this conundrum. One would be to
create a shared risk pool that would make all oil companies jointly
liable for major accidents. A similar structure already exists for the
nuclear industry under the Price-Anderson Act that, as of 2011, would
cover the first $12 billion of liability for a nuclear accident.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission, ``Fact Sheet on
Nuclear Insurance and Disaster Relief Funds'' (2011), available at
http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/fact-sheets/funds-
fs.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To date, the only meaningful piece of legislation Congress has
passed following the spill was the RESTORE the Gulf Coast Act, which
ensures 80 percent of BP's fines under the Clean Water Act will be
distributed to the Gulf Coast States for economic and environmental
restoration activities. This action was called for by the Commission
and in ``Beyond Recovery''--a report released in February 2011 by the
Center for American Progress and Oxfam America \15\--and it will ensure
the bulk of the funds received by the Federal Government are repurposed
to specifically repair some of the damage caused by BP and its
partners' mistakes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Kate Gordon and others, ``Beyond Recovery: Moving the Gulf
Cost Toward a Sustainable Future'' (Washington: Center for American
Progress, 2011), available at http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/
green/report/2011/02/09/9048/beyond-recovery/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Impacts of the BP Disaster
The Gulf of Mexico is one of the Nation's most productive fishing
grounds. But in 2010 at the peak response to the oil spill, about 40
percent of gulf waters were closed to all commercial and recreational
fishing--a huge blow to area fishermen, many of whom have yet to
rebound. Louisiana oysterman Terrence Shelley recently told Bloomberg
that total losses from his family's 18,000 acres of oyster reefs could
reach $20 million by 2017--the year their oyster leases are projected
to fully recover.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Allen Johnson Jr., Laurel Calkins, and Margaret Cronin Fisk,
``BP Spill Victims Face Economic Fallout Two Years Later,'' Bloomberg,
February 23, 2012, available at http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-02-
23/bp-oil-spill-haunts-gulf-business-owners-almost-two-years-after-
disaster.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And while long-term damage estimates vary, a new study published in
the Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences determined that
over 7 years, the oil spill could have an $8.7 billion impact on the
economy of the Gulf of Mexico including losses in revenue, profit,
wages, and close to 22,000 jobs.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ ``Deepwater Horizon Disaster Could Have Billion Dollar
Impact,'' Science Daily, February 17, 2012, available at http://
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/02/120217115553.htm.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The ultimate environmental and human health effects of the oil
still emerging from the beaches and wetlands are to this day unknown.
Auburn researchers, however, found that Deepwater Horizon tar balls
contained 10 times more of the bacteria Vibrio vulnificus, which is the
leading cause of death from seafood contamination, than the surrounding
sand and up to 100 times more than nearby seawater.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Stephanie Pappas, ``Deadly bacteria lurk in Deepwater Horizon
tar balls, NBC News, April 4, 2012, available at http://
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/46958825/ns/technology_and_science-science/%22%5Cl
%22.T4X5ctniFXs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another alarming discovery came in the ``State of the Beach''
report released this week by the Surfrider Foundation. The report found
that the mixture of toxic dispersants and crude oil has now weathered
into tar product. The ``unholy mix'' is allowing potentially
carcinogenic concentrations of organic pollutants to remain in the
environment and is absorbed by wet skin twice as fast as by dry
skin.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Julia Whitty, ``BP's Corexit Oil Tar Sponged Up by Human
Skin,'' Mother Jones, April 17, 2012, available at http://
motherjones.com/blue-marble/2012/04/microbes-arent-eating-oil-gulf-
beaches-thanks-corexit-dispersant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The BP oil spill shocked the gulf coast's already compromised
ecosystem, which will continue to degrade until comprehensive coastal
restoration is undertaken. A new report from the National Wildlife
Federation determined that 3,000 miles of beaches and wetlands along
the gulf coast were contaminated by oil and that ``oil contamination or
efforts to clean it up can damage wetlands, killing vegetation and
thereby causing accelerated erosion and conversion of land to open
water.''\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Douglas B. Inkley, ``Restoring a Degraded Gulf of Mexico''
(Washington: National Wildlife Federation, 2013), available at http://
www.nwf.org/news-and-magazines/media-center/reports/archive/2013/04-02-
13-restoring-a-degraded-gulf-of-mexico.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coastal wetlands serve as critical buffers to storm surges and sea
level rise, as well as filtering pollution and providing habitat for
juvenile fish that ultimately mature and fill the nets of commercial
fishermen. The financial impacts of these environmental services are
difficult to quantify, but efforts to protect them will clearly have a
positive effect on the region's economy.
Legislation Would Open Inappropriate Areas to Production
Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the Offshore Energy and Jobs
Act is its sheer scope. Drilling is already prominent in the Gulf of
Mexico where about 95 percent of our offshore oil and gas is
produced.\21\ But in most other parts of the country, the ocean and
coastal economy depends on activities that would be put at risk by the
imposition of offshore oil and gas drilling.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Institute for Energy Research, ``U.S. Oil Production Up, But
On Whose Lands?'' (2012), available at http://
www.instituteforenergyresearch.org/2012/09/24/u-s-oil-production-up-
but-on-whose-lands-2/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The coastal economies of States along the Atlantic and Pacific
coasts are driven by such industries as tourism and recreation,
fisheries, shipping, and military installations. Most of these uses are
incompatible with oil and gas development as proposed in the Offshore
Energy and Jobs Act.
In Virginia, for example--a State that the bill would specifically
require to be included in a revised 5-year leasing plan--tourism is a
massive economic driver. A recent PricewaterhouseCoopers analysis of
Virginia's tourism industry reported that the sector supports more than
200,000 jobs, which yielded an economic impact of more than $20 billion
in 2011.\22\ Virginia's coast and ocean also support thriving
fisheries; in 2011 fishermen in Virginia landed 247,000 tons of seafood
worth more than $191 million, ranking it the third largest seafood
producer in the country by weight.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ PricewaterhouseCoopers, ``Virginia State Tourism Plan''
(2013), available at http://www.vatc.org/uploadedFiles/
Partnership_Alliance_Marketing/VirginiaStateTourismPlanVTC
3292013.pdf.
\23\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, ``Annual
Commercial Landings by Group,'' available at http://
www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/st1/commercial/landings/gc_runc.html (last
accessed June 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The bill would also force the expansion of drilling operations into
areas of Alaska where the risk posed by offshore drilling operations is
simply too high, primarily in the Bristol Bay region and along the
Arctic coast. Despite potentially large reserves of petroleum in those
places, they should remain off-limits.
In 2011 Alaska fishermen hauled in about 35 percent of America's
catch by value--more than three times as much as Massachusetts, the
State in second place.\24\ Alaska fishing also provides more than half
of total U.S. landings by weight--more than four times as much as
Louisiana, the runner-up.\25\ Even by Alaska's standards, Bristol Bay's
salmon fishery is a huge economic driver. One study from the University
of Alaska found that in 2010 Alaska created the equivalent of nearly
10,000 full-time jobs across the United States and $1.5 billion in
total economic output.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ ``National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, ``Annual
Commercial Landing Statistics,'' available at http://
www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/commercial-fisheries/commercial-landings/annual-
landings/index (last accessed June 2013).
\25\ Ibid.
\26\ Gunnar Knapp, Mouhcine Guettabi, and Scott Goldsmith, ``The
Economic Importance of the Bristol Bay Salmon Industry'' (Anchorage:
University of Alaska Anchorage Institute of Social and Economic
Research, 2013), available at http://www.bbrsda.com/wp-content/uploads/
2013/05/Economic-Importance-of-Bristol-Bay-Full-Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The thriving Bristol Bay ecosystem underpins all of these jobs by
supporting an astounding number of wild fish. Since the early 1990s
annual upriver runs of sockeye salmon from Bristol Bay have averaged
more than 37 million fish, the biggest run of sockeyes anywhere in the
world.\27\ As a result, this sockeye run is also the world's most
valuable. Since 1991 Bristol Bay's commercial sockeye fishermen have
landed an average of 25.6 million fish annually,\28\ which is about 51
percent of the global sockeye catch; British Columbia's Fraser River
region takes a distant second place, contributing about 11 percent.\29\
And exports of the salmon return $250 million to the U.S. economy,\30\
comprising nearly 6 percent of all U.S. exports of seafood in 2010.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Alaska Department of Fish and Game Division of Commercial
Fisheries, ``2012 Bristol Bay Salmon Season Summary,'' Press release,
September 21, 2012, available at http://www.adfg.alaska.gov/static/
home/news/pdfs/newsreleases/cf/226013052.pdf.
\28\ Matt Jones and others, ``2011 Bristol Bay Area Annual
Management Report'' (Anchorage: Alaska Department of Fish and Game,
2012), available at http://www.adfg.alaska.gov/FedAidPDFs/FMR12-21.pdf.
\29\ Nature Conservancy, ``Global Sockeye Salmon Production,''
available at http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/sockeye-
piechart_0.jpg (last accessed June 2013).
\30\ Knapp, Guettabi, and Goldsmith, ``The Economic Importance of
the Bristol Bay Salmon Industry.''
\31\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Seafood
Export Facilitation: The Latest and Greatest on What you Need to Know
(Department of Commerce, 2011), available at www.seafood.nmfs.noaa.gov/
Boston_2011_EUPresentation.pptx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act would also likely have the result
of accelerating offshore drilling in the Arctic Ocean despite the fact
that recent operations in that region have proven that the industry is
currently incapable of carrying out safe operations in one of the
harshest environments on earth. In the summer of 2012, after committing
5 years and investing nearly $5 billion in the process, Royal Dutch
Shell finally received the green light to begin drilling in the
Beaufort and Chukchi Seas off Alaska's north slope. The result was an
unmitigated failure.
Over the course of 2012:

A February report from the Government Accountability
Office identified a slew of environmental, logistical, and technical
challenges associated with Arctic offshore drilling and concluded that
Shell's ``dedicated capabilities do not completely mitigate some of the
environmental and logistical risks associated with the remoteness and
environment of the region.''\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Government Accountability Office, ``Oil and Gas: Interior Has
Strengthen Its Oversight of Subsequent Well Containment, but Should
Improve Its Documentation'' (2012), available at http://www.eenews.net/
assets/2012/03/30/document_gw_04.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In July Shell briefly lost control of its Noble
Discoverer rig when the vessel slipped its mooring and came close to
running aground in Dutch Harbor, Alaska.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Kiley Kroh, ``Shell Loses Control of Arctic Drilling Rig in
Alaskan Harbor,'' ThinkProgress, July 16, 2012, available at http://
thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/07/16/521391/shell-loses-control-of-
arctic-drilling-rig-in-alaskan-harbor/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Later in July Shell's oil spill response barge, a key
piece of oil spill response equipment, repeatedly failed to obtain
Coast Guard certification. In conjunction with late lingering sea ice
that blocked access to the drill sites, these delays prevented Shell
from beginning drilling work on schedule.\34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ ``Shell's Arctic Oil Spill Response Still Behind Schedule,''
ThinkProgress, July 20, 2012, available at http://thinkprogress.org/
climate/2012/07/20/556141/shells-arctic-oil-spill-response-still-
behind-schedule/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In August Norwegian oil and gas company Statoil announced
that it would suspend its own plans to drill offshore in the Alaskan
Arctic Ocean after watching Shell's struggles in the region.\35\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Lisa Demer, ``Oil company delays exploration in Arctic waters
off Alaska,'' Anchorage Daily News, September 6, 2012, available at
http://www.adn.com/2012/09/06/2614308/oil-company-delays-arctic-
exploration.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In September, after repeatedly failing to receive Coast
Guard approval for its containment barge, Shell was forced to postpone
exploratory drilling operations until 2013 and settle instead for
beginning to drill two non-oil-producing preparatory wells.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ Kiley Kroh, ``Shell Postpones Arctic Offshore Drilling For The
Year Due To Technical Problems And Rough Ice Conditions,''
ThinkProgress, September 17, 2012, available at http://
thinkprogress.org/climate/2012/09/17/859091/shell-postpones-arctic-
offshore-drilling-for-the-year-due-to-technical-problems-and-rough-ice-
conditions/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In December internal emails between Department of the
Interior officials revealed that the September test of Shell's oil
spill containment system was not just a failure but a complete
disaster. The containment dome ``breached like a whale'' and was
``crushed like a beer can''--and all in the comparatively temperate
waters of Puget Sound.\37\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Kiley Kroh, ``Shell's Failed Arctic Oil Spill Equipment:
`Breached Like A Whale' And `Crushed Like A Beer Can,' ''
ThinkProgress, December 5, 2012, available at http://thinkprogress.org/
climate/2012/12/05/1284301/shells-failed-arctic-oil-spill-equipment-
breached-like-a-whale-and-crushed-like-a-beer-can/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

And on the last day of the year, in a rush to avoid
paying Alaska State taxes on its rig for 2013, Shell lost control of
the rig in heavy weather, and it ended up running aground.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Lisa Demer, ``Shell rig left Alaska port to avoid taxes,
company official testifies,'' FuelFix, May 26, 2013, available at
http://fuelfix.com/blog/2013/05/26/shell-rig-left-alaska-port-to-avoid-
taxes-company-official-testifies/.

As a result of this lengthy series of mistakes and failures, Shell
has announced that it will not attempt to drill in the Arctic in 2013
as both of its rigs are now in Asia awaiting repairs.
As a 2012 report from the Center for American Progress points out,
the United States currently lacks adequate response capacity in the
Arctic region. No rail lines and only one highway connect the north
slope of Alaska to the rest of the State. There is no deepwater port
facility, and the closest Coast Guard station is more than 500 miles
away in Kodiak. Should a spill occur in the Arctic region of Alaska,
mounting a response would be all but impossible with limited
accessibility and nowhere to house response personnel. There is equally
scant scientific knowledge about how oil behaves in frigid water or how
we might go about cleaning it up.
The bottom line is that Alaska's waters are among the most pristine
and productive on earth, and whether the region in question is the
fish-rich area around Bristol Bay or the remote, unknown, and untested
Arctic, they should remain off-limits to oil and gas exploration.
Blue Economy Is More Vibrant Than Drilling
The motive to create more jobs in America is a good one. With
unemployment stubbornly hovering around 8 percent, we clearly need
them. There is, however, more than one way to generate employment from
our oceans and coasts, and, in many cases, accelerating offshore oil
and gas development will hinder job creation in other industries. We
have already seen how one accident 3 years ago devastated the coastal
economy of an entire region. We must do all we can to ensure that we
protect and grow the jobs currently supported by vibrant, healthy
oceans and coastal regions.
Commercial and Recreational Fisheries
Fishing is perhaps the first vocation that comes to mind when
considering ocean and coastal economic activity. We also have better
data for the fishing industry than many other ocean industries. A
report released in March by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, or NOAA, found that ``U.S. commercial and recreational
saltwater fishing generated more than $199 billion in sales and
supported 1.7 million jobs in the Nation's economy in 2011.''\39\ By
comparison, the oil and gas extraction and refinement industry employed
approximately 641,000 people, according to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Adding in employees of gasoline service stations to account
for supply chain employment, that figure reached 1.4 million jobs but
still falls short of the jobs created from fishing.\40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Fisheries
Economics of The U.S. 2011 (Department of Commerce, 2011), available at
http://www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/economics/publications/feus/
fisheries_economics_2011.
\40\ Bureau of Labor Statistics' sectors used in this report
include: Oil and gas extraction; Support activities for oil and gas
operations; Oil and gas pipeline construction; Petroleum refineries;
and Pipeline transportation. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
``Employment,'' available at http://www.bls.gov/data/#employment (last
accessed June 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, as the members of the Committee on Natural Resources--
which has jurisdiction over our Nation's fisheries--know very well, we
have effectively ended deliberate overfishing in the United States.
NOAA's most recent ``Status of Stocks'' report to Congress showed a
record number of domestic fish populations rebuilt to sustainable
levels.\41\ In her testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation in 2011, former NOAA Administrator Jane
Lubchenco estimated that rebuilding all U.S. fish populations to
sustainable levels could generate ``an additional $31 billion in sales
impacts, support an additional 500,000 jobs and increase the revenue
fishermen receive at the dock by $2.2 billion . . . more than a 50
percent increase from the current annual dockside revenues'' (emphasis
in original).\42\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Status of
Stocks 2012 (Department of Commerce, 2013), available at http://
www.nmfs.noaa.gov/sfa/statusoffisheries/2012/2012_SOS_RTC.pdf.
\42\ Jane Lubchenco, ``New England Groundfish Management,''
Testimony before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and
Transportation, October 3, 2011, available at http://
www.noaanews.noaa.gov/stories2011/20111003_testimony.html#_ftnref2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recreation and Tourism
Visiting the beach is the greatest connection to our oceans for
many Americans, and coastal tourism and recreation sustain our coastal
economies. Traveling to the shores along our coasts and Great Lakes and
snorkeling, boating, and surfing are activities that directly
contribute to local economies. According to the Joint Ocean Commission
report titled ``America's Ocean Future,'' in 2007 the leisure and
hospitality industry in U.S. Coastal States supported almost 11 million
jobs and more than $214 billion in wages.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Joint Oceans Commission Initiative, ``America's Ocean Future:
Ensuing Healthy Oceans to Support a Vibrant Economy'' (2011), available
at http://www.jointoceancommission.org/resource-center/1-Reports/2011-
06-07_JOCI_Americas_Ocean_Future.pdf.

Benefits of Coastal Tourism and Recreation
[Contributions of ocean tourism and recreation establishments by region, 2009]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Region                Establishments         Employment             Wages                 GDP
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Great Lakes                               12,223              217,265         $3.6 billion         $7.9 billion
Gulf of Mexico                            14,938              229,466         $4.2 billion         $9.1 billion
Mid-Atlantic                              36,097              514,668        $11.4 billion        $25.1 billion
North Pacific (Alaska)                     1,238               13,045        $0.25 billion        $0.51 billion
Northeast                                 10,833              147,319         $2.9 billion         $5.9 billion
Pacific (Hawaii)                           3,543               86,198         $2.2 billion         $4.6 billion
Southeast                                 14,210              248,422         $4.8 billion        $10.7 billion
West                                      23,239              405,486         $8.6 billion        $18.3 billion
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total                                116,321            1,861,869       $37.95 billion        $82.1 billion
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Data courtesy of NOAA Coastal Service Center, Economics: National Ocean Watch.

Coastal tourism generates significant economic activity every year.
As David Beckman, water program director for the Natural Resources
Defense Council, told the Christian Science Monitor, ``Beach going and
resort attendance is big business in America--especially on Fourth of
July weekend. Some 450 million people will visit over 3,000 U.S.
beaches this year [2011].''
Florida is a prime example of the great economic value of
nonextractive ocean and coastal activities. Florida's tourism, fish and
wildlife, ports, and defense-related industries generate more than $175
billion in economic benefits and over 2.2 million jobs annually.\44\
Tourism alone is Florida's leading industry, employing around 1 million
people and accounting for more than one-fifth of the State's total
sales tax revenue and 9.3 percent of its gross domestic product.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ Mitch Stacy, ``Florida tourism rebounds in 2011, overseas
visits up,'' USA Today, December 30, 2011, available at http://
travel.usatoday.com/destinations/story/2011-12-31/Florida-tourism-
rebounds-in-2011-overseas-visits-up/52295150/1.
\45\ Catherine Hollander, ``Florida's Housing Mess Puts GOP
Hopefuls on Uncomfortable Turf,'' National Journal, January 23, 2010,
available at http://www.nationaljournal.com/2012-presidential-campaign/
florida-s-housing-mess-puts-gop-hopefuls-on-uncomfortable-turf-
20120123?mrefid=election2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The oceans and Great Lakes are not an everlasting source of
recreation and GDP, however. All of these activities and industries
require healthy oceans and coasts to prosper. Who wants to relax on a
contaminated beach or surf through an oil slick?
This is why Floridians have long been wary of offshore drilling and
its potential to kill the tourism industry--the goose that lays the
State's golden eggs. Even in the face of mounting pressure to open more
areas to drilling, Florida has maintained a two-decade-old ban on
drilling in State waters.\46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ ``Offshore Oil Drilling `Not In Florida Waters,' Lawmaker
Says,'' CBS Miami, June 30, 2011, available at http://
miami.cbslocal.com/2011/06/30/offshore-oil-drilling-not-in-florida-
waters-lawmaker-says/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Oil spills and other disasters are inevitable consequences of
offshore drilling, and the Deepwater Horizon disaster took a huge toll
on Florida's economy. In the immediate wake of the spill, for example,
``many Panhandle hotels and restaurants reported seeing sales down by
50 percent in the peak summer months'' and in Franklin County, located
in the northwestern panhandle, tourism in July 2010 declined by 25
percent from the previous year, according to the county's tourism
bureau.\47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\47\ Laura Figueroa, ``A year after BP oil spill, Panhandle towns
seeing signs of recovery,'' Tampa Bay Times, June 6, 2011, available at
http://miami.cbslocal.com/2011/06/30/offshore-oil-drilling-not-in-
florida-waters-lawmaker-says/; Alana Semuels, ``Oil skips most Florida
beaches, but so do many tourists,'' Los Angeles Times, July 21, 2010,
available at http://articles.latimes.com/2010/jul/21/nation/la-na-oil-
spill-florida-tourism-20100721.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Joint Ocean Commission's report also found that as of 2007,
more than 85 percent of California's gross domestic product and nearly
12 million jobs derived from economic activity in the State's coastal
estuarine areas. California's beaches are also vital assets to the
State's economy with total value estimated between $1.5 and $3 billion
per year.\48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ Joint Oceans Commission, ``America's Ocean Future.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Offshore Renewable Energy
Energy must unquestionably be part of America's ocean economy, but
even in the energy sector, we can create tremendous growth in
employment without solely prioritizing the oil and gas sector.
Countries throughout the world are embracing offshore wind energy
from traditional players such as Denmark, Germany, and the United
Kingdom to newcomers such as China, India, and South Korea. Countries
the world over are acknowledging the economic and environmental
benefits of turning sea breezes into electricity. Yet the United States
has yet to install the first offshore wind turbine in our waters
despite offshore wind's proven economic viability.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The 2008 report from the Department of Energy set a target of
developing 54 gigawatts of offshore wind energy in U.S. waters by
2030--slightly more than 1 percent of the total 4,150 GW of potential
energy identified in areas out to 50 miles from shore.\49\ A follow-up
report released in 2011 that focused exclusively on a potential
offshore wind industry found that those 54 GW ``would create more than
43,000 permanent operations and maintenance jobs and would require more
than 1.1 million job-years to manufacture and install the
turbines.''\50\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\49\ National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 20% Wind Energy by 2030:
Increasing Wind Energy's Contributions to the U.S. Electricity Supply
(Department of Energy, 2008), available at www.nrel.gov/docs/fy08osti/
41869.pdf.
\50\ Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, A National
Offshore Wind Strategy: Creating an Offshore Wind Industry in the
United States (Department of Energy, 2011), available at http://
www1.eere.energy.gov/wind/pdfs/national_offshore_wind_strategy.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last Tuesday, June 4, the Department of the Interior began the
first auction process for developers to bid on leases for a designated
offshore wind area off the coast of Rhode Island and Massachusetts.\51\
While the results of that process will not be known for some time, it
is encouraging to see the Administration moving forward with the
offshore leasing process. But the fact is, offshore wind developers
need certainty on the tax breaks and subsidies that will be required to
grow this burgeoning industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\51\ CIT TK.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last year, Congress made offshore wind projects eligible for the
investment tax credit--a critical policy. That policy will
unfortunately expire at the end of 2013 unless Congress acts again to
renew it. With the threat of expiration dangling over the industry, it
will be extremely difficult to attract the investments required to
build these projects. And since the vast majority of the cost of
offshore wind energy production comes in the construction and
development phase, without adequate upfront capital investment, the
industry will not become viable.
The Federal Government has a long history of subsidizing energy
development. The oil and gas industry has received $442 billion in
subsidies over the past 90 years,\52\ and even today it still receives
about $4 billion per year even as the five largest oil companies
reported $118 billion in profits in 2012 alone.\53\ It is time to
refocus our priorities and diversify our energy supply to truly
implement an ``all of the above'' energy policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\52\ Nancy Pfund and Ben Healy, ``What Would Jefferson Do?'' (San
Francisco: DBL Investors, 2011), available at http://
www.dblinvestors.com/documents/What-Would-Jefferson-Do-Final-
Version.pdf.
\53\ Daniel J. Weiss and Jackie Weidman, ``Speed Trap: Big Oil
Profits from High Gasoline Prices'' (Washington: Center for American
Progress, 2013), available at http://www.americanprogress.org/issues/
green/news/2013/02/06/51967/big-oil-profits-from-high-gasoline-prices/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A Word About Climate Change
We ultimately cannot talk about energy production without talking
about climate change. The science is clear and the facts are in. Human-
induced climate change is here, it is real, and we are simply not doing
enough to address it. Glaciers and Arctic ice sheets are retreating to
levels never before recorded. Extreme weather events driven by warmer,
moister air are pummeling the planet more than ever before. Our oceans
are more acidic than they have been in tens of millions of years,
threatening the very foundations of the ocean food chain. Sea levels
are rising. And this past month the concentration of atmospheric carbon
shot past a terrifying benchmark--400 parts per million, a level last
seen between 2 million and 4 million years ago.
These are facts not theories. The National Aeronautics and Space
Administration reports that ``97 percent of climate scientists agree
that climate-warming trends over the past century are very likely due
to human activities, and most of the leading scientific organizations
worldwide have issued public statements endorsing this position.''\54\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\54\ National Aeronautics and Space Administration, ''Consensus: 97
percent of climate scientists agree,'' available at http://
climate.nasa.gov/scientific-consensus (last accessed June 2013).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If we continue down the path of unending devotion to fossil fuels,
our children and grandchildren will inherit a planet that is far more
volatile. Livelihoods, our food supply, and even global stability will
be put at risk as the planet's population blossoms to 9 billion people
by 2050. The rising oceans are stealing our land. Volatile weather
patterns will make agriculture less stable, as we have already seen in
the form of epic droughts in the American Midwest and grain shortages
in Russia. Less land, less food, more people; the math does not add up
to a prosperous future.
Now is the time we should be drawing the line. Rather than rushing
headlong down the path to short-term profits, we have to step back and
consider the long game. Smart, targeted investment in renewable energy
technology is the way to a prosperous future. Perpetuating the same old
policies of yesterday is a road to ruin.
______

Mr. Lamborn. OK. I want to thank each of you for being
here. We are going to start a round of questions now by the
members of this Committee. And I will start off. And this
question is directed to Mr. Felmy, Mr. Miller, and Mr. Guith.
For nearly a generation, the Gulf of Mexico was the only
offshore game in the world. But not anymore. Around the world,
more and more countries are making significant headway
developing their own deepwater energy resources, driven largely
by technology developed here in the United States. Russia's
Gazprom recently announced a partnership with Shell to explore
the Russian Arctic. Brazil continues to move full steam ahead
with both economic and political support from President Obama.
Meanwhile, China is becoming more focused on their offshore
resources, recently changing maps to propose a radical claim of
most of the South China Sea. Canada already has development in
the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Nova Scotia, and has issued
leases in the Arctic. Mexico has signaled interest in getting
commercial development in their deepwater Gulf of Mexico, and
eagerly await the approval of a Transboundary Agreement which
we passed in this Committee several weeks ago. And we are not
even mentioning offshore development off Africa, Israel, Japan,
Australia, and other countries.
In the face of all this global development, this
Administration has proposed an offshore Outer Continental Shelf
plan that left 85 percent of the OCS closed to development. Do
you believe that the Administration's 5-year plan includes
enough leasing to make our Nation competitive with other
nations, and to produce enough energy, number one? And, number
two, does this bill that we are looking at today set the
framework to improve the situation? And the three of you, could
you please answer?
Mr. Felmy. Well, I will start. I think it does. I think, in
the words of Chairman Hastings, we are missing opportunities
that, if you look around the globe of where everything is being
discovered around all those places, exciting and interesting
places like the Falklands, for example, or other parts, we are
leaving our resources in the ground. And that is a loss of
opportunity, in terms of jobs, in terms of revenue, in terms of
energy security.
We have known about this for a long time. This is a vast
amount of resources. We will need these resources. And it is
nice to talk about alternative energy sources and so on, but
let's remind ourselves that electricity doesn't power cars at
this point. And so we are going to need these resources, going
forward.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. You mentioned Brazil, Canada, and Africa. And
just recently, Brazil had $2 billion invested, Canada had $2
billion invested in new leases, and west Africa is seeing lots
of activity. Uruguay picked up $1.2 billion investment last
year. These are all dollars that the E&P industry is taking out
of the United States to spend internationally. What we need is
access to the east coast, and then we would have some of those
dollars spent in this country.
The one part of the bill that we would like to see is the
eastern gulf put back into it. This one just covers the east
coast, the mid and south, but there is still a lot of activity
to be seen in the eastern gulf.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Mr. Guith.
Mr. Guith. To your first question, whether or not the
current Department of the Interior 5-Year Plan is enough to
provide competitiveness for the United States, I would say
absolutely not.
I mean as you went through the litany of places that are
exploring off their coasts, I think it is important to realize
that in almost every one of those instances, you were talking
about a state-owned company exploring for state-owned
resources. Congress loves to bring oil companies up here and
berate them when prices get too high. But I think it is very
important for people to understand that the real ``Big Oil'' is
nationally owned oil companies who control over 90 percent of
the proved reserves in the world. And that is who we are
competing against. And by putting 86 percent of our own
resources off limits, it is very difficult to compete, going
into the future.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And it is also interesting, people
come and they highlight the vast profits made by the oil
companies, and they don't mention the vast amount of taxes paid
by the oil companies, which are maybe even vaster.
Mr. Felmy, can we do the offshore production of oil and gas
and yet still be environmentally responsible?
Mr. Felmy. I believe we can. If you talk about the programs
that I mentioned earlier, in terms of what are approaches, in
terms of prevention, intervention, and response, we have worked
very hard in terms of understanding what happens in the past,
and that it not be repeated.
This is a core asset of our industry, in terms of
environmental performance and safety. We understand that we
need to do it right, we need to do it in the context of also
remembering there are tremendous opportunities.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you all for your answers. I will now
recognize Mr. Lowenthal.
Excuse me, we had a wrong notation here. I apologize.
Mr. DeFazio. This week--I don't know what I have to do. But
anyway----
Mr. Lamborn. Representative DeFazio.
Mr. DeFazio. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Conathan, the
Chairman just noted that the oil industry pays a vast amount of
taxes. I do know they pay some taxes. But what was the recent
tax rate on profits? Do you have any numbers?
Mr. Conathan. I apologize, Congressman. I don't have those
numbers in front of me now. I will attempt to get them and
supply them to you for the record. I know that my colleagues at
the Center for American Progress have done a lot of work in
this area, and I do know that the oil companies are actually
quite adept at figuring out how to avoid paying a lot of the
taxes that they----
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, I have seen a lot of single-digit or zero
numbers for income taxes.
Mr. Conathan. They are lower than I pay. The rate is lower
than I pay. I will put it that way.
Mr. DeFazio. Yes, OK.
Mr. Conathan. And I would also point out that we are quite
good at giving them additional tax breaks, as well, on the
order of about $4 billion a year----
Mr. DeFazio. Right, OK, thank you.
Mr. Conathan [continuing]. To add to those coffers.
Mr. DeFazio. Mr. Felmy, you made a statement I thought was
interesting, ``leaving resources in the ground,'' in talking
about the need to expand leasing. Yet, I would note as of
February 1, 2013, the industry holds drilling rights to 30
million acres offshore; 85 percent of the acreage under lease
is not producing.
According to the Interior Department, the area under lease
in the Gulf of Mexico, you mentioned specifically you wanted
more leasing in sensitive areas near Florida, where there is a
huge tourism industry, not subject to pending developments
estimated to contain 17.9 billion barrels of undiscovered,
technically recoverable oil, and 49.7 trillion cubic feet of
natural gas.
So, very briefly, why do you need more acreage, when you
haven't developed that which you have?
Mr. Felmy. Because it is a lengthy thing you go through to
develop. If you have 100 prospects, by the time you work
through all the time required in terms of seismic, in terms of
measurement, in terms of assessment, you may not find any oil.
Mr. DeFazio. OK. Well, thank you.
Mr. Felmy. The critics of it----
Mr. DeFazio. Thank you, thank you. That is enough, because
I don't have much time here. But the estimates are 17.9 billion
barrels under these leases that have not been exploited. We
have the same situation up in the former naval petroleum
reserve, where there has been no development.
So, I have a question there. But let's go to another point.
We are talking about market forces here. And this is going to
be more of a statement, and I will see if there is time left
for a question.
But we are seeing the annual celebration by the oil
industry on Memorial Day. Unfortunately, I think it is kind of
unpatriotic. They jack up the prices for Memorial Day, $.50 a
gallon they went up in 2 weeks on the west coast. Now, oh,
there are reasons for it. There is actually scheduled refinery
shut-downs, there is unscheduled refinery shut-downs. What we
have here is a refinery shortage, not an oil shortage. The oil
is sitting there, waiting to be processed into gasoline. There
is actually no shortage at the gas stations, no red flags,
nobody is out of gas. But the price has to go up $.50 a gallon
because the industry does this every year to celebrate the
beginning of the driving season, which happens to fall on
Memorial Day.
Now, if this Committee and Congress wanted to do something,
they would support my request to Chairman Issa of the Oversight
and Government Reform Committee that he investigate what is
going on with restrictions and collusion in and among the
refinery capacity in this country, which is driving up prices
unnecessarily.
They also might want to join me in my request to this
Administration, which, unfortunately, they have ignored, as has
past Administrations, that we file a complaint against OPEC, a
number of those countries are members of the World Trade
Organization, for illegal collusion to drive up the price of
oil.
I note as we increase production over the last 2 years,
Saudi Arabia dropped it, because they want to keep the price
up. That is not a free market. That is a collusive, manipulated
market, which you are all going along with, because it is
wildly profitable. Isn't that a sweet thing? So, I would urge
Members, if they really want to do something, join me in my
request to this Administration, and they file a WTO complaint
against the illegal activities of those member states of OPEC
that are in it.
And then, finally, last year we had testimony from the
Chair of ExxonMobil, and he was being very defensive about the
high prices at Memorial Day. At a Senate hearing, I think it
was 2 years ago actually, he said, ``Don't blame me. Blame Wall
Street. It is $.75 a gallon speculative, useless, speculative
activity by non-producers, non-consumers, just Wall Street
hedge funds.'' And I would urge people to join me in trying to
reign in that market, too, and move ahead with the position
limits that were in the Financial Services reform.
I mean this is not a supply shortage in the United States.
We have projections of being energy-independent within 20 years
without doing all the stuff we are talking about here today. We
have that projection. It is about a manipulated market for
profit. And I will tell you they aren't paying a hell of a lot
of taxes, and I am disappointed the witness didn't have those
numbers, I thought he would, on those profits. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Fleming.
Dr. Fleming. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all,
let me say that this conspiratorial stuff that we have heard
for decades now about the manipulation of all oil prices and
all of that is aluminum hat stuff. And this has been
investigated time after time after time. Oil is a commodity and
it is subject to price changes, based on the market. Can't help
that; that is just the way it is.
However, I will say this. As we move forward, gentlemen,
toward the next decade that hopefully will be fully energy
independent, we will be taking away the power of OPEC to
function in a cartel, and really free the market up completely.
But to suggest that somehow American oil companies are in some
way manipulating prices, that has all been investigated many
times.
I also have another bone to pick with my colleagues. They
were complaining that the Administration is not represented
here. Well, that is certainly not surprising, considering the
fact that they continue, time after time, to disperse
inaccurate information. Let's be clear about the facts from the
May 2013 EIA report on fossil fuels from Federal lands. Federal
offshore oil production is down, down, I say, 8 percent in
2012, and oil production from all Federal lands decreased to 26
percent of total U.S. production, down, down, from 31 percent
in 2011.
Our colleagues keep saying that oil production is up on
Federal lands, and we keep coming back with the facts. Federal
offshore natural gas production was down, down, 19 percent in
2012. All the while, the Administration in 2012 closed 85
percent of our OCS regions to offshore development. It comes as
no surprise that they are not here to defend this terrible
record.
So, really, I want to open it up to the panel in the 3
minutes or so that I have to respond to this, and also the
comment that there is supposedly oil or natural gas way down
deep in the earth that you have already leased. And, for
heaven's sakes, gentlemen, why don't you just go and get that
substance out of the ground? Please respond to that.
Mr. Felmy. If I could start, there is little reason to
believe that. I find it amazing when politicians think they
know where oil is, and geoscientists don't. I find this
amazing. There is little reason to believe these estimates, and
so on. The fact of the matter is if companies have spent
billions of dollars to lease land, to develop it, and so on,
the notion that they wouldn't develop it is just silly.
Dr. Fleming. So you are telling me that it doesn't make
business sense to go out and spend a lot of money to lease land
and not attempt to get some return on investment, then?
Mr. Felmy. That is exactly right. And irrespective of that,
what is wrong with additional leasing? The government collects
money, you collect more activity, you move forward. And so, why
don't we just move forward on these things where we know there
is a lot of opportunity?
Dr. Fleming. So you go where the oil is, right?
Mr. Felmy. I am just an old country boy, but I think that
would be my philosophy.
Dr. Fleming. It is empirical. Great. Anyone else like to
respond?
Mr. Guith. Yes, if I may. I mean you go where the oil is,
where you are allowed to go.
Dr. Fleming. Yes.
Mr. Guith. I mean the Department of the Interior loves to
play with statistics and mislead the public. But it is
important to understand that right now, under this 5-year
leasing plan, more than 86 percent of all the OCS acreage is
off limits; 86 percent of what you and I, as American citizens
own, has not been available for even exploration in more than
30 years.
So, when they say that X percent of what's available is
open, I mean that is playing with numbers.
Dr. Fleming. Yes.
Mr. Miller. Just one point I would like to make is our
industry needs access to acquire this seismic data off the east
coast, and the BOEM is working on this programmatic EIS very
slowly, but we anticipate that this may come to a record of
decision in March or April of next year.
That seismic data is not going to produce oil the next
year, but we need to understand what resources we have off of
the east coast. And it takes years for that data to become
production. The longer we wait to acquire this data, the longer
it pushes that off.
Dr. Fleming. Right.
Mr. Conathan. Congressman, I would just like to point out
that while production was down slightly in 2012, we are still
producing at higher levels than we were at the end of the Bush
Administration, that there are 50 percent more oil rigs
operating right now in the Gulf of Mexico than there were prior
to Deepwater Horizon, and we still have not codified reforms to
drilling safety and operations in the aftermath of that
accident.
Dr. Fleming. Well, I can tell you I was here during and in
the immediate aftermath of the Macondo incident. And I am from
Louisiana. And I can tell you that what production we have, and
been able to stand up, was a real battle right here in this
room. So we drug the Administration, kicking and screaming,
through court battles and all of that.
So, again, I am very hesitant to give the Government credit
for opening up those lands. And again, remember that this
massive increase in production is a function of the new
technology, particularly horizontal drilling, that is going on.
And so, again, while that may be benefiting us somewhat on
Federal lands, it is not because of what the Administration is
doing to be helpful, it is because of the advance in
technology.
And with that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Lowenthal.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been here
just a few months, and I am starting to see a pattern. We seem
to be repeating fairly fruitless exercises. And I have to ask.
Why are we doing this?
Why are we continuing to spend our time looking at old,
rejected ideas, ideas that don't stand a chance in the Senate,
and will not be signed into law by the President? But here we
are again, spending our time trying to open up more Outer
Continental Shelf, the OCS lands, for oil and gas drilling off
southern California and other States, and to maintain the
leasing of all OCS areas over an arbitrary resource threshold.
And, of course, skipping meaningful environmental review.
This is a tired strategy, one that has been rejected, and,
in my opinion, is not productive. Let's just talk about one
section of the bill that is of particular concern to me, since
I represent the area just right near there, and that is opening
up new OCS leases off southern California.
First, expanded drilling in the OCS is not supported by
local Californians, nor the State itself. I just was recently
speaking to my dear friend, the State Senator from that region
in the California State Senate, Senator Hannah-Beth Jackson.
And she wanted me to share this statement with you and the
Committee. ``The people of Santa Barbara County and the State
of California have a long history of opposing offshore oil
drilling along our magnificent coast. We vehemently oppose any
further efforts to despoil our beautiful and pristine waters in
the name of oil or other fossil fuels. Now is the time to wean
ourselves off dirty and polluting oil, and find clean and
sustainable ways to provide the energy that we need. At a time
when we are seeing severe weather events throughout the Nation
and the world, we should be working to reduce our use of fossil
fuels, not drilling even further in our pristine waters for
more of them. It would be irresponsible to allow our coast to
be despoiled by such folly. Not now, not ever again.''
The County of Ventura, along with the coast in these areas,
has expressed its opposition to the Offshore Energy Jobs Act,
stating that, ``The Board of the Ventura County Supervisors
believe that any additional offshore energy exploration and
production will negatively impact the air quality of Ventura
County, harm the scenic, recreational, economic, and
environmental resources, and the value of our coast, and have
the potential to lead to an ecological disaster similar to what
happened in the Deepwater Horizon explosion in 2010.'' I ask
that letter be placed into the record.
[The letter submitted by Dr. Lowenthal follows:]
Letter for the Record Submitted by Thomas P. Walters to the
Hon. Alan S. Lowenthal
County of Ventura,
County Executive Office,
Washington, DC, June 3, 2013.
The Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Natural Resources,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources,
Washington, D.C. 20515.

Dear Congressman Lowenthal:

I am writing on behalf of the Ventura County Board of Supervisors
to express its concerns with provisions in the draft Offshore Energy
and Jobs Act that would allow offshore drilling in the Santa Maria and
Santa Barbara! Ventura Basins.
Since 2005, the Board has opposed Federal efforts that reduce the
role or authority of State and local governments in the siting and
approval of offshore energy facilities or diminish the public and
environmental review process. The Board also opposes time extensions of
existing undeveloped offshore oil and gas leases. Furthermore, the
Board believes that any additional offshore energy exploration and
production will negatively impact the air quality of the Ventura County
air shed, harm the scenic, recreational, economic, and environmental
resource values of our coast and has the potential to lead to an
ecological disaster similar to what happened to the Deepwater Horizon
explosion in 2010.
As your Committee begins consideration of the Offshore Energy and
Jobs Act, please take into consideration the views of the Ventura
County Board of Supervisors and their constituents.
Sincerely yours,
Thomas P. Walters,
Washington Representative.
______

Dr. Lowenthal. Also, in the 5-year OCS leasing program, the
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management explained why the Pacific
Coast States were not included for lease sales, by stating,
``The exclusion of the Pacific coast is consistent with the
long-standing interest of Pacific Coast States as framed in an
agreement that the Governors of California, Washington, and
Oregon signed in 2006. This agreement expressed the Governors'
opposition to oil and gas development off their coasts, and the
States continued to voice these concerns, including in formal
comments in the 2009 DPP.''
And then, there is the President. President Obama strongly
opposes these measures that are contained in this bill, as
evidenced when they were contained in the H.R. 6082 last
Congress. As the President stated in his 2012 Statement of
Administrative Policy, ``H.R. 6082 would require the Department
of the Interior to open up a number of new areas on the OCS.
The actions would be directed without secretarial discretion to
determine whether these areas are appropriate for leasing
through balanced consideration of factors such as resource
potential, State and local views and concerns, and the maturity
of the infrastructure needed to support oil and gas
development, including in the event of an oil spill. The bill
would mandate OCS lease sales along the east and west coast and
elsewhere, without regard for significant issues such as State
and local concerns and impacts upon important fishing areas and
with an inadequate consideration.''
Yet, here we are again on this fruitless exercise, spending
Congress's time and energy on a bill that has no chance of
support from local affected populations. So I don't have a real
question at this moment, but I wanted to express my frustration
that we are doing this and not spending our time on issues
where we can work together, on which there is some agreement
on, not which the communities that are impacted feel most angry
about. And maybe there are other parts of the bill that we
might be able to work on together. But having this makes it
impossible for me to support. Thank you, and I yield back.
Dr. Wittman [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Lowenthal. We now
go to Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. All right, guys. You
may not be able to see it from there, but we have got three
areas with some sort of resource in them. And we are going to
allow you to explore and produce from these resources. And so,
we are going to offer a lease sale in this area, and you are
already producing out of that area. So, you are going to invest
money in a lease sale. And you know that there is a good chance
there is going to be resources here, so you are going to invest
your money there.
But we have got this area over here that you can't tell
from there whether it has got any resources or not. And we are
going to allow you to possibly research that, or possibly
produce there. But in order to find out, you are going to have
to invest a heck of a lot of money to find out if there is any
resource there. And we may or may not open this area up for you
to produce.
Are you going to invest that money to just discover whether
there might be a resource, oil or natural gas, in that area
without any hope, promise, or understanding from the Government
that area will ever be included in a future lease sale?
The answer is no. You are not going to invest the money
that it would take to drag the seismic in the Atlantic to find
out what resources may be there, without some sort of promise
from the Government that is going to be included in a future
lease sale. That is why it is so important to open up this area
for exploration, Mr. Chairman, because the last time that
seismic was drug in the Atlantic off the coast of your State or
my State was in the 1980s. And that was with 1980, 20th
century, 30-year-old technology, what is known as 2D technology
now.
Mr. Miller, what kind of technology is there now, in the
21st century?
Mr. Miller. The technology that industry is proposing off
of the east coast, the southern and mid-section, is
substantially different than what was employed at that time, in
the 1980s. Industry has come a long way with the imaging of
deeper targets, with longer equipment, further offsets, moving
from 2D to 3D.
The investment will be there. We actually feel that the
investment will increase in this area, as access is given to
the E&P business. But there is too----
Mr. Duncan. Are you all going to spend money? And I am
talking millions of dollars----
Mr. Miller. There is----
Mr. Duncan. To go out off the Atlantic coast and find out
whether there are resources there, without any sort of hope,
promise, or certainty that area is going to be opened up at
some point in time?
Mr. Miller. That is why we are pushing the BOEM to get this
programmatic EIS out, so we can acquire this data. There are
two reasons right now to acquire that data. One of them is for
a regional architecture of the Atlantic east coast. We are
competing for dollars with west Africa, with Brazil. Everyone
is trying to put this Trans-Atlantic margin together. But the
missing puzzle right now is the east coast of the United
States. There are companies that will license the seismic data
to understand the regional geology of the east coast United
States.
At the same time, the larger E&P's, they do their homework
not the day before a lease sale. They do it years and years
before a lease sale. So we need this data out early, and that
is what we are pushing for, is to get this programmatic passed
and a record of decision made on it.
Mr. Duncan. All right. In the Marcellus shale, in 2002,
they did some seismic work and they estimated there was 1.9
trillion cubic feet of natural gas. Just recently, in 2011, a
decade or so later, do you know how much the increase,
projected increase, is in the Marcellus with new technology?
Forty-four times greater. Forty-four times greater than what
they projected was there in 2002.
So, just in a decade, changes in technology for just
seismic, not necessarily the changes that we are talking about
by the gentleman from Louisiana, with horizontal drilling and
other ways to recover those resources.
I would say this in my last seconds here, that South
Carolina, my home State, Virginia, and other areas around the
country that have areas in their OCS want to see those areas
opened up and offered in a lease sale. And they also want to
see the royalties come back to the State at 37.5 percent that
are currently available. That is what this bill does. It
provides Virginia an opportunity to receive revenue back to the
State. This could be used for infrastructure, the bridges and
roads that we need to drive our economy, provide the jobs that
the Chamber of Commerce talks about that we know result from
energy exploration. South Carolina wants that, as well.
And so, I urge passage of this. I enjoyed the testimony; I
look forward to hearing more of it. I yield back.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Duncan. We will now go to Mr.
Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Good morning, gentlemen. I was intrigued by
your statement, Mr. Guith, that the Department of the Interior
likes to play with numbers. Right? So we are looking at some
numbers here, and I just want to get an understanding.
Hasn't oil production increased in the United States?
Mr. Guith. Not on Federal lands, no.
Mr. Garcia. No, but oil production has increased in the
United States, to the highest levels since----
Mr. Guith. Since 1987, yes, on public and private lands.
But both Federal onshore and Federal offshore have declined
over the last 4 years. I mean the Federal OCS----
Mr. Garcia. On Federal lands.
Mr. Guith. Correct. Federal OCS and the gulf----
Mr. Garcia. But, overall, production is up.
Mr. Guith. Yes, on private lands and State lands.
Mr. Garcia. Correct.
Mr. Guith. Net.
Mr. Garcia. Right. But we are still producing more.
Mr. Guith. And we are still importing 50 percent of the
crude that we are using in this country.
Mr. Garcia. I wanted to check that number. Isn't oil
production down almost 40 percent from our levels in 1988, I
think I have got here?
Mr. Guith. Oil production?
Mr. Garcia. Oil importation. Isn't it down to the lowest
levels that we have ever had before?
Mr. Guith. The high-water mark was 2006, where it was
roughly about 60 percent, 65 percent was imported. Now we are
down to 50 percent.
Mr. Garcia. Right. We are down to 40 percent, is what I
have got.
Mr. Guith. No, that is incorrect. Fifty percent of crude
oil. Yes, it is 7.5 million barrels a day produced
domestically, 7.5 million barrels a day imported.
This is the part of playing with number things, people
don't always understand the difference between crude oil and
crude oil as well as products. We are now a net----
Mr. Garcia. You wouldn't argue with me that the President's
strategy of all-of-the-above, which is a strategy that we can
argue about, but is, in essence, a strategy that has produced,
there is more oil being produced in the country. We are
importing less oil than we have in the past. Right?
Mr. Guith. Correct.
Mr. Garcia. And that is a success, wouldn't you say?
Mr. Guith. For the----
Mr. Garcia. I mean because you are here, and you are upset,
you are huffing and puffing, but the reality is we are making
substantial gains on this, and you should be happier. But I
assume you want to be angry about this. But we are headed in
the right direction.
Mr. Guith. Congressman, do you think importing 50 percent
of our crude is a success? Because we at the Chamber don't.
Mr. Garcia. No, I don't. I think having an energy policy
that goes all-of-the-above, that properly distributes
electricity through the country, that we use the natural
resources, I would rather we didn't import anything. But I also
know that we have got enough natural gas to replace most of
that crude, we wouldn't need to look for it because of the huge
success we have had. But thank you.
I wanted to ask Mr. Conathan. You have heard my questions.
I look at these numbers and we may try to shade them our way,
but I like driving as much as the next guy. I drive a Cube,
which is not as efficient as it should be, but I am sure much
more efficient than most. But when I look at these numbers, or
at least the numbers that staff counsel has given us, or staff
Committee has given us, I think we are headed in the right
direction. What would you say about that?
Mr. Conathan. Well, I think there is no question that
reduction on reliance on foreign oil is heading in the positive
direction. I think there are a lot of gains that we can make in
terms of demand in this country, and efficiency in this
country, that will assist in that means. And the policies that
the Obama Administration has implemented in terms of fuel
efficiency and other standards that they have implemented since
taking office have certainly moved us in that right direction
and helped reduce demand, which I think is the other part of
the equation.
An additional policy that would be extremely useful in this
regard would be to keep oil produced on American lands and keep
American oil on American soil, and reduce the ability to export
oil that is produced on public land, and to keep it domestic.
Mr. Garcia. There I disagree with you, right? This is a
commodity, right? And it doesn't matter where it ends up in the
same place, but I wanted to ask Mr. Miller, or, better yet, Mr.
Felmy.
I am reading here that we are up 50 percent more in the
Gulf of Mexico, in terms of oil production from where we were
since BP. Is that correct?
Mr. Felmy. We have had an increase, because you had a
virtual shut-down of the gulf in post-incident.
Mr. Garcia. Right. Oh, so you are saying we are up 50
percent from we stopped producing?
Mr. Felmy. I am not verifying that number. I do not know
that exact number, in terms of----
Mr. Garcia. Does anyone know if that number is right or
wrong?
Mr. Guith. It is about right. I will say that if you look
at the EIA data, in 2009 to 2012, Federal production in the
gulf is down 10 percent. From 2009, pre-Macondo, to last year,
when we had the last full data, down 10 percent, from 1.56
million barrels a day to 1.4 million barrels a day.
Now, we expect it to go up----
Mr. Garcia. What do you account that for?
Mr. Guith. I am sorry?
Mr. Garcia. What----
Mr. Guith. Well, it was the moratorium. But I mean, let's
be clear here. I am not suggesting that you are, Congressman,
but people play with numbers. It is clear right now that in the
Gulf of Mexico, production is lower than it was 4 years ago. It
is on its way up, and we are thankful to see that. But let's
not say that it is up when it is not, especially when it is
going up.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your generosity on
time. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn [presiding]. OK. And thank you for those good
questions.
And now, a gentleman who has been very helpful to me this
morning and has been very patient, Representative Wittman.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and panel members.
Thank you so much for joining us. We appreciate it.
I want to begin just talking a little bit about Virginia.
We heard from some other Members from other States that have
said that they and their counties within the State are not in
favor of offshore development. I can tell you Virginia is, in a
grand bipartisan way, fully in favor of the development of our
offshore energy resources. And, as you know, we have been
somewhat frustrated by Virginia not being included and at least
allowing for the planning and development of those resources.
As you know, the 2012 to 2017 Outer Continental Shelf oil
and gas leasing program did not include the OCS off of the east
coast, which is of deep concern to us. Virginia is ready to go.
I think we are perfectly situated. We are, in a bipartisan way,
in favor of making sure that we develop these energy resources.
We know that there is an awful lot of economic potential there.
We know just there, in Virginia, there is about $19.5 billion
in economic production, and that goes to folks working,
building those oil rigs, maintaining those oil rigs, tending
those oil rigs, and gas production in that area.
So, we are very, very interested in seeing this effort go
forward. That is why I am so happy and honored to join with
Chairman Hastings in supporting and cosponsoring H.R. 2231, the
Offshore Energy and Jobs Act, which we believe will get us back
on track to open up the leasing there off of Virginia and the
east coast, and make sure that we extend revenue-sharing to
those States. I think those things are particularly important.
I want to talk a little bit about some of the concerns that
you all expressed earlier. Mr. Miller, you expressed some
concern about the delay that BOEM has put in place in
completing the programmatic environmental impact statement for
the Atlantic OCS, and their delay in issuing a record of
decision. As you know, the ROD was supposed to be released in
October of 2013, and now is scheduled for March of 2014. That
delay is, I think, of significance.
So, I wanted to get your perspective. And how does this
delay impact your planning and efforts to collect seismic data
in the Atlantic? And you heard some other Members talk about
it. Mr. Duncan alluded to the fact that if there is no
certainty in what you can expect on the development side, how
does that impact, well, all these elements. Obviously, these
delays. But how do you see these decisionmaking delays
impacting your efforts there in the Atlantic?
Mr. Miller. That is a very good question. I think if we
look back, the original record of decision was supposed to be
March of 2013.
Dr. Wittman. Right.
Mr. Miller. We have to go back. So it is continually being
delayed. It looks to be on track now to get a record of
decision in March or April of next year. What is delaying
things further? Is there going to be new rules for us to
operate on? Which we respect and we appreciate. Not knowing
those until they make that record of decision is just going to
delay our permitting process further, because we cannot, our
industry cannot, permit these surveys until this programmatic
EIS is complete, and a record of decision is made.
When we find out the rules, on the day that is announced,
it may take another year before we have to file our permits
through NMFS, and et cetera. Knowing that information now, we
know it is in the documentation, but it can't be released, that
would help speed things up. But we have to schedule vessels, we
have to schedule budgets, we have to work with the E&P business
that help fund these surveys. That takes time. So that is what
is causing the delays.
Dr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Miller. I do want to ask a
quick question about the economic impact. Both Mr. Felmy and
Mr. Guith talked about the economic impact of offshore energy
development. And you spoke about, Mr. Guith, the overall
numbers in the United States. I think about 240,000 jobs,
direct and indirect.
Can you give me a little perspective, when you boil that
down, to a State like Virginia, and what Virginia could expect,
as far as economic growth or jobs or whatever metric you might
have that you are comfortable with, as a result of offshore
energy production there in Virginia?
Mr. Guith. I can try. As a current Virginian, I hope to see
it successfully grow.
Dr. Wittman. Yes.
Mr. Guith. Or start, to begin with. But if you look
comparison-wise, I mean, obviously the Gulf of Mexico is a much
larger resource base than any area adjacent to any of the Mid-
Atlantic States. But within the Gulf of Mexico we know that
somewhere in the neighborhood of 12 percent of the entire
economy is reliant upon offshore development.
So, until folks like Mr. Miller can get out there and we
can tell precisely what that resource base is, and start that
market going, it is difficult for anyone to tell you what sort
of development is going to be there. But when you look at your
friends further south, 12 percent of their economy is dependant
solely upon this one function. I think it bodes well for
Virginians.
Dr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. Now the gentleman from the
State with the lowest unemployment in the country,
Representative Cramer from North Dakota.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all of
the witnesses. And let me say I agree when I hear my friends on
the other side talk about tired, old arguments. And one of
those tired, old arguments is based on a different world order
than the one we live in today. It is an argument based on
scarcity, rather than abundance. And many of the arguments they
make are not relevant in today's abundance of natural
resources. And North Dakota is the evidence of that.
The other argument that I get tired of hearing about is
that, ``What are we all complaining about? After all, oil
production is up.'' And let me say, on behalf of the citizens
of North Dakota, you are welcome.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Cramer. But the other argument I have grown weary of is
this argument of those awful speculators, and it is one that
should be put to rest.
And we have an Administration that has, without question,
wants to limit supply, so that they can force reduction of
demand. And they want to limit demand. I mean the President, in
his State of the Union Address just this year said, ``I propose
we use some of our oil and gas revenues to fund an energy
security trust that will drive new research and technology to
shift our cars and trucks off oil for good.''
Now, I don't know about you, but when we take oil and gas
money to make oil and gas extinct, I am not sure how that is
going to continue to be funded. So he wants to attack the
demand side and he wants to attack the supply side. When the
former Secretary of Energy calls for $7 gasoline, you know that
is a priority.
So, to put this topic to rest, I want to submit, Mr.
Chairman, to the record this MIT study, ``The Simple Economics
of Commodity Price Speculation.''
Mr. Lamborn. If there is no objection, that will be
submitted into the record.
[The MIT study submitted for the record by Mr. Cramer has
been retained in the Committee's official files and can also be
found at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18951.pdf?new--window=1:]
Mr. Cramer. Now, this is one of the better things to come
out of Massachusetts in quite a while. And the author's key
finding was, ``Although we cannot rule out that speculation had
any effect on oil prices, we can indeed rule out speculation as
an explanation for the sharp changes in prices since 2004.
Unless one believes the price elasticities of both oil supply
and demand are close to zero, the behavior of inventories and
future spot spreads are simply inconsistent with the view that
speculation has been a significant driver of spot prices. If
anything, speculation has a slight stabilizing effect on
prices.'' So the facts speak for themselves.
Another thing I want to get to in terms of questions, we
have heard a lot about big oil. We hear about it all the time,
speaking of tired, old arguments. I come from a State where
people could claim that big oil is getting rich. I would like
to ask each of you. Which economic class benefits most from
enhanced oil production? In North Dakota, I have noticed the
middle class that has done the best. We have got more people in
the middle class, we have seen people move up within the middle
class.
What would be your response to this, the rich-keep-getting-
richer argument?
Mr. Felmy. Well, let me start with I am a native of
Pennsylvania, a former dirt-poor country boy. And driving
through the Marcellus right now, I see things I never saw
growing up: Help Wanted signs. You had an area that was very,
very poor for 100 years. And now, folks can graduate from high
school with some technical training, and support a family. And
that is something we have never seen before. And so, those are
the first folks who benefit: the direct workers, the suppliers,
all the local communities from restaurants to car dealers to
everybody. It is the full community that is benefiting from it.
And it is also the retirees who happen to have their
investments in those companies to support their retirement.
Mr. Guith. Mr. Cramer, we spent some time with API and some
other groups, trying to quantify the overall impact that the
Unconventional Revolution up in the Bakken and elsewhere have
had on this country. And perhaps the numbers that were most
striking were what the average wages were in this industry
throughout the country.
Say, for example, in West Virginia it is over $97,000 a
year. That is the average. I mean that is not to say that
people don't make less than that, but they are making well in
excess of double the statewide average. In Pennsylvania it was
about $96,000. In North Dakota, it was about $94,000. So these
are very high-paying jobs. Many of them are very highly
skilled, but don't require college degrees, and therefore
present one of the only jobs markets, especially in a flagging
economy.
Mr. Conathan. Congressman, I would say that the greatest
nexus for the middle and lower class to oil production is
largely what they pay at the pump, which is entirely unaffected
by increases in production. Their energy costs and their cost
at the pump will not go down as production increases.
I would also say that they are the ones who suffer the most
from the external costs of oil production, be they pollution or
increasing events of extreme weather and climate change that
affect the middle and lower classes far more than the upper
classes do.
Mr. Felmy. May I challenge that? That is absurd. If you
look at the average gas consumers in the United States, they
have seen significantly lower natural gas costs. That is an
absurd statement.
Mr. Guith. Not just natural gas, but also gasoline. I mean
people are operating under the same metric of 10 years ago,
that United States could never produce enough to change the
price. Well, it is clear that it has, to the point where WTI
has dislocated from crude to the point where we are realizing
upwards of a 20 to 30 percent discount for oil paid here. And
that has empirically translated into lower gasoline prices in
this country than we otherwise would have had. And certainly,
in comparison to other states around the world. That may very
well come back into equilibrium some time in the near future.
But to say that it hasn't had an impact is just patently false.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you. Obviously, my time has expired, Mr.
Chairman, and I regret that we can't get into a discussion
about the difference between a subsidy for one form of energy
and a deduction of expenses for another.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, I still have a lot of questions, so
let's do a very short follow-up round of, like, 3-minute
questions.
And, Mr. Miller, I would like to ask you about seismic. In
1995, the USGS thought that the Bakken Formation had 151
million barrels of oil. Now we know that there is about 7.4
billion, a fiftyfold increase. You mentioned the gulf, how
there has been a 500 percent increase. Do you think that this
would happen in the Atlantic coast, off the Atlantic coast?
Mr. Miller. Well, what we have seen happen in the Gulf of
Mexico is with enhanced and new technology on the seismic
imaging was the discovery of the lower tertiary trend, which
was the very significant resource. We still don't understand
completely how large it is. You can also push it back onto the
shelf, where the deep gas trend is developing. So, with this
new technology in a proven basin, that is where there is
reserve estimates pushed upwards.
In the Eastern United States, off the eastern coast, the
old data, it does not image at depth. And what we are seeing,
where we work internationally in Brazil and West Coast Africa,
is a deep play that they are trying to pull that same play into
the east coast of the United States, but they cannot image that
because there is no new data. So that is what we expect to see
off the east coast of the United States, is definitely an
increase in reserves when they are able to image the deeper
area----
Mr. Lamborn. So no modern seismic has been done off the
Atlantic coast.
Mr. Miller. No, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. And how much better is the technology today
than back when it was done previously?
Mr. Miller. I mean, the science is very similar, but the
equipment that we use is leaps and bounds. I mean, if you look
at the same time in 1984, that is, I think, when Motorola came
out with the bag phone that some of us may have recognized we
used, and now we do everything on our cell phone. It is not
just the seismic, but since it is a drilling business, it is
the IT business, that was also Windows version 1 was in 1984.
Seismic has kept up with that technology.
Mr. Lamborn. And along with that, from an environmental
perspective, if you have better seismic and pinpoint formations
better, does that reduce the environmental footprint of
extraction?
Mr. Miller. Yes, sir. We acquire a regional data set to
help understand the basin architecture, and you develop your
plays. And that is where the argument that we keep hearing
about, ``Why is every lease not drilled?'' There is not oil
under every lease. But seismic allows you to pinpoint the areas
where the resource will be.
Mr. Lamborn. OK. Thank you so much. Representative Cramer.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you. I do want to explore a little bit
this argument about subsidies versus deductions. And perhaps
somebody can just take it from there, because I suspect you
know exactly what I am talking about.
Mr. Felmy. I will start. The oil industry is accused of
getting subsidies. That is certainly not true. We don't get
subsidies in any way, shape, or form. We get to deduct our
costs, just like every other business. And, yes, those costs
are specific to oil, because we produce oil. If we produced
widgets, we would be deducting costs for widgets. This is just
political spin in Washington that has absolutely no basis in
fact.
Mr. Conathan. Congressman, it is $40 billion worth of
political spin. It is not spin, it is money. It is money that
the oil companies are not paying into the Federal coffers that
they should be paying into the Federal coffers to provide the
American people a proper return on the natural resources that
we allow them to extract that belong to all of the American
people.
Mr. Cramer. Would you be surprised if it was over 50
percent, and all the taxes that the oil industry and everything
related to it pays, including those service companies, income
taxes, sales taxes, State taxes? Would you be surprised if it
was 50 percent or more that they actually pay in to the benefit
of our Government?
Mr. Conathan. What I know is that I received some of the
numbers that Congressman DeFazio was asking for earlier.
ExxonMobil paid a 13 percent tax rate last year, 13 percent.
That is about a third of what I pay in taxes.
Mr. Cramer. And you are talking about corporate income tax
rate, not all the other taxes that they pay at every other
level. Is that right?
Mr. Conathan. Federal taxes.
Mr. Cramer. All right. So, you talked about the wind
development. I cited about 1,500 megawatts of wind in North
Dakota when I was an energy regulator there. And I think you
state in your testimony that but for the production tax credit,
there probably wouldn't be wind development. I think that is
probably pretty accurate. We have seen a dramatic increase in
electricity prices for those States that have mandated it, and
we have built it for them and are happy to sell it to them if
they are willing to pay more for it. That is up to them.
But are you suggesting that the ability of the oil industry
to deduct their expenses and lower their rate, as a result of
that, by the way, utilizing the capital they spend to pour back
into the jobs that they create, is somehow equal to a subsidy
for wind that could not possibly be built, but for that
taxpayer subsidy?
Mr. Conathan. No----
Mr. Cramer. Coming from the oil industry, perhaps, in many
cases?
Mr. Conathan. Congressman, I don't think they are equal at
all. I think that, in fact, an industry that is emerging and
developing from zero in this country, as the oil industry got
when they began their production early on, then at that time
subsidies were appropriate. At this time, for the wind
industry, those subsidies are appropriate, because that is how
we develop an industry in this country that creates jobs and
creates additional energy independence.
Mr. Cramer. And I have supported those emerging technology
subsidies. And at some point, though, we have to get off of
them. We just can't, especially if it is proven to not be very
efficient.
Mr. Conathan. Exactly. We have to get off of them for oil,
but we can't get off of them for wind, because they haven't
started yet.
Mr. Cramer. That said, let me just close, Mr. Chairman,
because we hear a lot about independence, in 20 years, I think
Mr. DeFazio said. I prefer to be energy secure next year. Not
necessarily independent, but secure. And I think that we can do
that, if we stop the demagoguery and get down to business and
have a discussion based on not scarcity, but abundance. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. OK, thank you. And I want to thank each
member, each and every member of the panel for your helpful
testimony. I have learned a lot. I think the public has learned
a lot through this. We got various perspectives, and it has
been very illuminating.
Members of the Committee may have additional questions for
the record, and I ask that you would respond to those in
writing.
If there is no further business, without objection the
Committee will be in recess until further announcement.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the Subcommittee recessed,
subject to the call of the Chair.]

[Additional Material Submitted for the Record]

Prepared Statement of The Honorable Edward J. Markey, Ranking Member,
Committee on Natural Resources
Thank you.
From Cape Cod to Cape Ann; New Bedford to Newburyport;
Massachusetts fishing families are hurting. Our fishermen in
Massachusetts have been pushed to the brink by the economic disaster
declared for the New England groundfish fishery last year in
anticipation of severe cuts to fishing quotas for cod, haddock, and
flounder.
House Republicans already turned their backs on coastal communities
in the Commonwealth earlier this year when they refused to allow my
amendment on the House Floor to provide millions of dollars in economic
disaster assistance to fishermen and coastal communities. The bill that
we are considering today from the Majority would add insult to injury
by opening up Georges Bank off the coast of New England to oil
drilling.
Under this legislation, New England fish stocks and their habitat
would be threatened with oil spills that could wipe out the fishing
industry for good. Protecting Georges Bank from drilling is critical to
ensuring that efforts to rebuild and manage New England groundfish
stocks are not in vain.
Georges Bank is one of our Nation's most fragile and important
marine ecosystems and a key economic driver for the region. This
special place is home to more than 100 species of fish and shellfish,
whales, dolphins and porpoises. That is why President Obama and the
Interior Department have protected Georges Bank from drilling through
2017.
But Georges Bank remains a top target of the oil and gas industry.
The Majority's legislation would put Georges Bank back in the
crosshairs by forcing the Interior Department to lease at least half of
the waters off of New England for drilling.
In Massachusetts, the commercial fishing industry is responsible
for over $2 billion in annual income and supports more than 73,000 jobs
in the State. For New England as a whole, the commercial and
recreational fishing industries generate more than $3 billion in annual
income and 112,000 jobs. Georges Bank is the heart of that New England
fishery.
In addition, tourism generates tens of billions of dollars every
year for Massachusetts and supports more than 200,000 jobs.
We saw the devastating impact that the BP spill had on the tourism
and fishing industries in the gulf. One study concluded that the total
impact of the spill to the tourism industry in the Gulf States could
exceed $20 billion. At the height of the disaster, roughly 40 percent
of gulf waters were closed to commercial and recreational fishing. As
our economy is finally starting to recover, we can't afford to face
that type of situation in New England.
Georges Bank represents a tiny fraction of the Outer Continental
Shelf--less than \1/2\ of 1 percent--but it is massively important to
our region.
Georges Bank is named for Saint George, the patron saint of
England, but that doesn't mean we should hand it over to British oil
giant BP.
We much ensure that Georges Bank is never turned into Big Oil's
Bank and that it can forever remain a home to shellfish, and not Shell
Oil.
We should reject this bill and protect this important place.
I yield back the balance of my time.

# # #

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 2231, TO AMEND THE OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF
LANDS ACT TO INCREASE ENERGY EXPLORATION AND PRODUCTION ON THE OUTER
CONTINENTAL SHELF, PROVIDE FOR EQUITABLE REVENUE SHARING FOR ALL
COASTAL STATES, IMPLEMENT THE REORGANIZATION OF THE FUNCTIONS OF THE
FORMER MINERALS MANAGEMENT SERVICE INTO DISTINCT AND SEPARATE AGENCIES,
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. ``OFFSHORE ENERGY AND JOBS ACT'' Part 2

----------

Tuesday, June 11, 2013

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, D.C.

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 11 a.m., in
room 1324, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doc Hastings
[Chairman of the Full Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Hastings, Lowenthal, Horsford and
Garcia.
The Chairman. The Committee on Natural Resources will
convene.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOC HASTINGS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

The Chairman. The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources is meeting again today to hear additional testimony
on H.R. 2231. To amend the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to
increase energy exploration and production on the Outer
Continental Shelf, to provide for equitable revenue sharing for
all Coastal States, to implement the reorganization of the
functions of the Former Minerals Management Service into
distinct and separate agencies, and for other purposes.
The name of the act is the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act.
This is a continuation, or part 2 of a legislating hearing
that was held on June 6. And we will go straight to the
witnesses. But first I want to make an announcement. One of our
former colleagues, Congresswoman Barbara Vucanovich from
Nevada, just recently passed away. And I would like to just
make a brief announcement, considering that this is an Energy
and Mineral Resources hearing. The Committee is saddened to
learn that Congresswoman Barbara Vucanovich passed away
yesterday after a brief illness. She served the 2nd district of
Nevada from 1983 until her retirement in 1997. Mrs. Vucanovich
was the Ranking Member of this Subcommittee from 1991 through
1994, and then Chairwoman of this Subcommittee until her
retirement.
Mrs. Vucanovich also served on the House Administration
Committee, the Appropriations Committee, and was Secretary of
the Republican Conference from 1995 until her retirement in
1997. I know everyone on the Committee will join me in offering
our sincerest condolences to the family.
I would like to introduce the witnesses and have them come
forward. We have Mr. Donald Boesch, who is President,
University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science; Mr.
Michael LeVine, who is a Pacific Senior Counsel for Oceana; Mr.
Sean Dixon, who is a Coastal Policy Attorney; and Ms. Ryan
Alexander, President of Taxpayers for Common Sense.
Your full statements that you have submitted to the
Committee will appear in its entirety in the Committee records.
And so I would like for you to keep your oral statements to 5
minutes. And the way these lights here work in front of you,
when the green light is on you are doing fabulously well, when
the yellow light comes on, it means you are down to 30 seconds,
and then when the red light comes on, well, we usually don't go
to the red light. So if you could keep your statements in that
way, I would appreciate it very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hastings follows:]
Prepared Statement of The Honorable Doc Hastings, Chairman, Committee
on Natural Resources
House Republicans are committed to advancing legislation that will
open up new offshore areas to energy production and create new American
jobs. H.R. 2231, the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act, has moved through
the Committee under regular order. One week notice was given before a
legislative hearing was held, as is required under House Committee
rules, and both majority and minority witnesses came to testify on the
bill.
While certain Members of this Committee may strongly oppose this
bill, the fact remains that similar legislation has received bipartisan
support both in passage out of Committee and on the House Floor last
Congress.
Last year, the House of Representatives soundly rejected the
President's 5-year offshore leasing plan by a bipartisan vote because
it keeps 85 percent of our offshore areas off-limits. The American
people and a bipartisan majority of House Members believe we need to do
better--and that's exactly what this bill does.
The majority of Americans support expanded offshore energy
production and this Committee will not give up on our efforts to remove
government barriers that block access to our Nation's energy resources.
______

The Chairman. We will start now with Dr. Donald Boesch and
I hope I pronounce that correctly. And you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DR. DONALD F. BOESCH, PRESIDENT, UNIVERSITY OF
MARYLAND CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, FORMER COMMISSIONER,
NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE BP DEEPWATER HORIZON OIL SPILL AND
OFFSHORE DRILLING

Dr. Boesch. Thank you, Chairman Hastings. My name is Donald
Boesch. And I, in addition to being President of my unit within
the University of Maryland, I served as one of the seven
members of the National Commission on the Deepwater Horizon and
Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling. And it is in that perspective
I am offering this testimony on House Resolution 2231.
The Oil Spill Commission delivered its report on January
2011. And our Chairman, Bob Graham and Bill Riley testified
before your Committee, Mr. Hastings, and on the Commission's
recommendation, shortly after that, delivering the report.
Since that time, the Commission has been active and following
through on recommendations, working with many actors in
government and industry to improve safety of offshore drilling
and monitoring what changes have taken place as a result. As a
result of that, we issued a report card 2 years in a row. The
latest one is here, and I would like to offer it for the
record. And it helps you put this in perspective of how far we
have come as a result of learning from that disaster.
The industry has done many important things, including
developing a deepwater containment system, creation of a Center
for Offshore Safety. The Government, the Department of the
Interior, has reorganized to form the Minerals Management
Service to separate safety, environmental enforcement
considerations from those related to development and revenue
generation, much as we had recommended. In addition, they have
put many things into place to improve safety and enforcement
and inspection.
We are, therefore, very pleased to see the introduction of
legislation that addresses two of our other recommendations
that Congress must attend to. One, reorganization of the
offshore energy management structure within the Department of
the Interior; and, second, establishment of a funding scheme to
support the oversight of offshore energy industry. My written
testimony includes our perspectives on the bill in much greater
length; I will offer a brief summary.
First, with regard to restructuring regulatory oversight
under title IV of the bill, the Commission recommended an even
greater separation of the offshore energy management and the
safety and environmental enforcement functions than was
accomplished under the Department of the Interior's
administrative reorganization or included in this bill. We
recommended an offshore safety authority, independent,
reporting directly to the Secretary and headed by an officer
appointed for a fixed term that cuts across Administrations.
Specifically, the Committee recommended that the authority
have primary statutory responsibility for overseeing the
structure, structural or operational integrity of the offshore
energy-related facilities and activities, including both oil
and gas offshore drilling and renewable energy facilities.
House Resolution 2231 reduces rather than increases the
separation and independence of the energy development function
and the safety function compared to the present organization.
The Directors of both the Bureau of Ocean Energy and Ocean
Energy Safety Service under the bill would both report to the
Assistant Secretary for Ocean Energy and Safety, who would be
one level deeper than the present Assistant Secretary
responsibility within the Department. It would, in effect,
return the organizational model to the Minerals Management
Service structure by placing both responsibilities within an
officer whose responsibility is the development of energy and
minerals on the Outer Continental Shelf.
Second, with regard to ensuring adequate resources, we are
very pleased to see that House Resolution 2231 addresses some
of the agency funding issues that we pointed out; however, we
would recommend that the proposed system be modified in several
respects: Fees should pay for the entire management and
oversight process, we believe, not just inspections, and would
be dedicated for this purpose without requirement on annual
appropriations.
Third, with regard to the expansion and acceleration of
offshore leasing and development, under titles I and II, our
Commission was not charged to address that issue specifically,
but we did recognize that was a distinct possibility and that a
new offshore areas would be opened for exploration production.
However, we argue that before these areas are opened they
should be carefully studied to determine their environmental
sensitivity, and guide responsible planning within the region,
and define a baseline. Our concern is that the time scale
within this bill is not adequate for that purpose.
And fourth and finally, there are many recommendations in
our report, for the Congress to act, we would urge you to take
on, not the least being the liability limits under the Oil
Pollution Act. We recognize it is a different Committee, but we
urge you, Congress, to take this up. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Dr. Boesch. I hope I
said it correctly. Did I say it correctly?
Dr. Boesch. Boesch.
The Chairman. I will never remember it. I apologize for
that.
Dr. Boesch. No problem.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Boesch follows:]
Prepared Statement of Dr. Donald F. Boesch, President of the University
of Maryland Center for Environmental Science
I. Introduction
Chairman Hastings, Ranking Member Markey, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking
Member Holt and members of the Subcommittee, my name is Donald F.
Boesch, President of the University of Maryland Center for
Environmental Science. I was one of seven commissioners who comprised
the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and
Offshore Drilling. I thank you for the opportunity to testify today in
respect to H.R. 2231, the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act.
The explosion that tore through the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig
on April 20, 2010, as the rig's crew completed drilling the exploratory
Macondo well deep under the waters of the Gulf of Mexico, began a
human, economic, and environmental disaster.
Eleven crew members died, and others were seriously injured, as
fire engulfed and ultimately destroyed the rig. And, although the
Nation would not know the full scope of the disaster for weeks, the
first of more than 4 million barrels of oil began gushing uncontrolled
into the gulf--threatening livelihoods, the health of gulf coast
residents and of those responding to the spill, precious habitats, and
even a unique way of life. A treasured American landscape, already
battered and degraded from years of mismanagement, faced yet another
blow as the oil spread and washed ashore. Five years after Hurricane
Katrina, the Nation was again transfixed, seemingly helpless, as this
new tragedy unfolded in the gulf. Now, 3 years later, the costs from
this one industrial accident are still not yet fully counted, but it is
already clear that the impacts on the region's natural systems and
people were enormous, and that economic losses will total tens of
billions of dollars.
On May 22, 2010, President Barack Obama announced the creation of
the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and
Offshore Drilling (the Commission): an independent, nonpartisan entity,
directed to provide thorough analysis and impartial judgment. The
President charged the Commission to determine the causes of the
disaster, and to improve the country's ability to respond to spills,
and to recommend reforms to make offshore energy production safer. And
the President said we were to follow the facts wherever they led.
After an intense 6-month effort to fulfill the President's charge,
the Commission released its final report on January 10, 2011. As a
result of our investigation, we concluded:

The explosive loss of the Macondo well could have been
prevented.

The immediate causes of the Macondo well blowout could be
traced to a series of identifiable mistakes made by BP, Halliburton,
and Transocean that reveal such systematic failures in risk management
that they place in doubt the safety culture of the entire industry.

Deepwater energy exploration and production, particularly
at the frontiers of experience, involve risks for which neither
industry nor government has been adequately prepared, but for which
they can and must be prepared in the future.

To assure human safety and environmental protection,
regulatory oversight of leasing, energy exploration, and production
require reforms even beyond those significant reforms the Department of
the Interior (DOI) has already initiated since the Deepwater Horizon
disaster.

The technology, laws and regulations, and practices for
containing, responding to, and cleaning up spills lag behind the real
risks associated with deepwater drilling into large, high-pressure
reservoirs of oil and gas located far offshore and thousands of feet
below the ocean's surface. Government must close the existing gap and
industry must support that effort.

Scientific understanding of environmental conditions in
sensitive environments in deep gulf waters, along the region's coastal
habitats, and in areas proposed for more drilling, such as the Arctic,
is inadequate. The same is true of the human and natural impacts of oil
spills.

We reached these conclusions and made our recommendations in a
constructive spirit. Our goal was to make American offshore energy
exploration and production far safer, today and in the future.
Since we released our report, several other highly qualified
committees and organizations have also completed analyses of what went
wrong with the Macondo well and what should be done to protect against
such a catastrophe happening again. These include the Department of the
Interior--Coast Guard Joint Investigation, a National Academy of
Engineering study, and even some industry analyses. We are pleased that
all of these studies have supported and often reinforced the
Commission's findings and recommendations.
The Commissioners, however, were not satisfied with merely issuing
a report. Too many task forces and commissions, after devoting
significant time and effort to their assignments, watch the value of
their contribution diminish as other issues and priorities command
public attention. As a group, we vowed not to let the spotlight fade
from our work and elected to do what we can to advance the
implementation of our recommendations so that the Nation can move
forward to secure the oil off our shores in a safer, more
environmentally responsible manner.
To this end, we established an Oil Spill Commission Action (OSCA)
project to monitor progress in making offshore drilling safer and more
environmentally protective, and to meet with many of the actors
responsible for implementing the recommendations. On the second and
third anniversaries of the explosion, OSCA issued ``report cards''--the
most recent was released on April 17--addressing the progress that has
been made in implementing the Commission's recommendations. I have
brought copies of this report for Committee members and would like to
request that it be entered into the record (http://oscaction.org/osca-
assessment-report-2013/).
As our report cards have indicated, we have been pleased with the
positive response to many of our recommendations. The oil industry, for
instance, has established a Center for Offshore Safety, implementing
one of our major recommendations. Similarly the Department of the
Interior has implemented many of our recommendations to reduce
conflicting incentives that had existed in the Minerals Management
Service (MMS), and improve the efficacy of its regulatory programs.
Just last month, it announced the implementation of its own Ocean
Energy Safety Institute.
As noted in our report cards, however, the lack of response to many
of our recommendations by Congress has largely been a disappointment.
Many of the management and safety improvements should be codified and
some of our recommendations, such as liability limits, are yet to be
addressed.
On the positive side, Congress did pass the RESTORE Act last year
which, as the Commission recommended, will channel 80 percent of the
fines administered under the Clean Water Act to restoration efforts in
the gulf. We are concerned that these funds may be diverted from the
purpose the Commission intended--restoring the gulf's natural
ecosystems--and intend to monitor their use closely to diminish such
diversions to the extent we can. The gulf has suffered serious
degradation over the past decades, and the RESTORE Act provides perhaps
our last opportunity to restore its natural health.
We are also pleased to see that H.R. 2231 addresses two of our
other major recommendations: reorganizing the offshore energy
management structure in the Department of the Interior and establishing
a funding scheme to support the oversight of the offshore energy
industry.
Before commenting on those elements of H.R. 2231 which are found in
title IV of the proposed legislation, let me make a brief comment about
titles I and II which would substantially expand the areas of the outer
continental shelf being leased for oil and gas development. The
Commission recognized the possibility that new offshore areas will be
opened to oil and gas exploration and production. However, before these
areas are opened they should be carefully studied to determine their
environmental sensitivity, guide responsible planning within the
region, and define a baseline against which damages caused by offshore
energy development can be accurately assessed. The compressed schedules
set forth in titles I and II do not seem sufficient to accommodate such
a properly informed process.
II. Restructuring Regulatory Oversight
As I already indicated, DOI has administratively implemented many
of the Commission's recommendations on how its offshore energy
management, safety and environmental enforcement operations should be
structured. However, we believe it to be very important to have the
improved structure codified in legislation.
As you are aware, over the course of many years, political pressure
generated by industry and a demand for lease and royalty revenues to
expand access and expedite permit approvals and other regulatory
processes often combined to push MMS to elevate revenue and permitting
goals over safety and environmental goals. As a result, the safety of
U.S. offshore workers has suffered. The United States has the highest
reported rate of fatalities per hours worked in offshore oil and gas
drilling among its international peers (the U.K., Norway, Canada, and
Australia) but has the lowest reporting of injuries. This striking
contrast suggests a significant under-reporting of injuries in the
United States.
These problems were compounded by an outdated organizational
structure, a chronic shortage of resources, a lack of sufficient
technological expertise, and the inherent difficulty of coordinating
effectively with all of the other government agencies that have had
statutory responsibility for some aspect of offshore oil and gas
activities. Besides MMS, the Departments of Transportation, Commerce,
Defense, and Homeland Security, and the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) were involved in some aspects of the industry and its many-
faceted facilities and operations, from workers on production platforms
to pipelines, helicopters, drilling rigs, and supply vessels.
To remedy this conflict of interest, we recommended that Congress
create an independent agency with enforcement authority to oversee all
aspects of offshore drilling safety (operational and occupational) as
well as the structural and operational integrity of all offshore energy
production facilities, including both oil and gas production and
renewable energy production. The Department of the Interior took steps
to accomplish this by the administrative creation of the Bureau of
Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE) separate from the Bureau of
Ocean Energy Management (BOEM).
Title IV of H.R. 2231 accomplishes some of the Commission's
recommendations with respect to the reorganization of the former
Mineral Management Service. For instance, to a degree, it would codify
the separation of the management, regulatory and revenue collection
functions as the Commission recommended. We are also pleased to see
that it establishes a robust training program within the new Bureau,
and makes the Outer Continental Shelf Energy Safety Advisory Board a
permanent advisory board.
The training program is important because of the rapid
technological and environmental changes that are occurring in offshore
drilling. Both the regulators and the new generation of operators will
require high quality training to manage these new challenges
effectively. We would expect to see many opportunities for cooperation
between industrial organizations such as the Center for Offshore Safety
and the regulators in providing this training.
For the same reasons, we would support the permanent establishment
of an Outer Continental Shelf Energy Safety Advisory Board (which I
presume is a replacement for the Ocean Energy Safety Advisory Committee
that BSEE established administratively). The regulators need this
informed input in order to remain current with all the changes taking
place in the industry and the appropriate manner of addressing the
challenges the industry is facing and creating.
Regarding the reorganization proposed in H.R. 2231, it is
instructive to compare it both to the reorganization put into place
administratively by the Department of the Interior and to the
Commission's recommendations. H.R. 2231 would elevate the present
Assistant Secretary for Land and Minerals Management to Under Secretary
for Energy, Lands, and Minerals, create a new Assistant Secretary of
Ocean Energy and Safety, and establish a Bureau of Ocean Energy (BOE)
and an Ocean Energy Safety Service (OESS), both reporting to the
Assistant Secretary. BOE and OESS have responsibilities seemingly
consistent with BOEM and BSEE, both reporting to the Assistant
Secretary for Land and Minerals Management under the present
administrative arrangement.
The Commission recommended an even greater separation of these
management and safety and environmental enforcement functions, with an
Offshore Safety Authority, reporting directly to the Secretary and
headed by an officer appointed to a fixed term that cuts across any one
Presidential term. Specifically, the Commission recommended that this
authority have primary statutory responsibility for overseeing the
structural and operational integrity of all offshore energy-related
facilities and activities, including both oil and gas offshore drilling
and renewable energy facilities. We recommended that Congress should
enact an organic act to establish its authorities and responsibilities,
consolidating the various responsibilities now under the OCSLA, the
Pipeline Safety Act, and Coast Guard authorizations. This should
include responsibility for all workers in energy related offshore
activities. The Department of the Interior separated and consolidated
such functions into BSEE, but kept this responsibility under the
Assistant Secretary for Land and Minerals Management.
From the perspective of the Commission's recommendation, H.R. 2231
reduces rather than increases the separation and independence of
offshore energy development and safety compared to the present
administrative organization. The directors of both BOE and OESS would
report to Assistant Secretary for Ocean Energy and Safety, who would be
one level deeper in the organization of the Department of the Interior
than under the present structure. It would be in effect a return to the
organization model of the Minerals Management Service by placing both
responsibilities to an officer whose responsibility is the development
of energy and minerals on the Outer Continental Shelf.
The Commission also recommended the formation of a Leasing and
Environmental Science Office, with responsibilities roughly analogous
to the present BOEM and proposed BOE. It would be charged with
fostering environmentally responsible and efficient development of the
Outer Continental Shelf and would act as the leasing and resource
manager for conventional renewable energy and other mineral resources
on the OCS. The Office would also be responsible for conducting reviews
under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). The Commission
further recommended that this bureau include an Office of Environmental
Science, led by a Chief Environmental Scientist, with specified
responsibilities in conducting all NEPA reviews, coordinating other
environmental reviews, and whose expert judgment on environmental
protection concerns would be accorded significant weight in leasing
decision-making. Given the importance of ensuring environmental
responsibility at every state of planning, leasing and development, we
would urge consideration of inclusion of these functions into the
statute.
We also recommended that Congress review and consider amending
where necessary the governing statutes for all the agencies involved in
offshore activities to be consistent with the responsibilities
functionally assigned to those agencies. For example, under the Outer
Continental Shelf Lands Act (OCSLA), it is up to the Secretary of the
Interior to choose the proper balance between environmental protection
and resource development. In making leasing decisions, the Secretary is
required to solicit and consider suggestions from any interested
agency, but he or she is not required to respond to the comments or
accord them any particular weight. Similar issues arise at the
individual lease sale stage and at the development and production plan
stage. As a result, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA)--the Nation's ocean agency with the most
expertise in marine science and the management of living marine
resources--effectively has the same limited role as the general public
in the decisions on selecting where and when to lease portions of the
OCS. The Commission recommended that Congress amend OCSLA to provide a
more robust and formal interagency consultation process in which NOAA,
in particular, is provided a heightened role, but ultimate decision-
making authority is retained at DOI.
III. Ensuring Adequate Resources
A second major focus of the Commission's recommendations was on
ensuring that there would be adequate resources available for funding
effective and efficient offshore energy oversight programs and for
responding to any spills that might occur.
Here we had three major recommendations:

1. Congress should enact legislation creating a mechanism for
offshore oil and gas operators to provide ongoing and regular funding
of the agencies regulating offshore oil and gas development.
2. Congress should significantly increase the liability cap and
financial responsibility requirements for offshore facilities.
3. Congress should increase the limit on per-incident payouts from
the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.
Funding the Government Oversight Agencies
One of the Commission's major concerns was that the agencies
overseeing offshore oil exploration and production have adequate
resources to accomplish their responsibilities effectively and
efficiently. The agency responsible for ensuring the safety of offshore
energy production cannot be expected to succeed in meaningfully
overseeing the oil and gas industry if Congress does not ensure it has
the resources to do so. Agencies cannot conduct the scientific and
environmental research necessary to evaluate impacts of offshore
development if they do not receive adequate support from Congress. In
short, Congress needs to make funding the agencies regulating offshore
oil and gas development a priority in order to ensure a safer and more
environmentally responsible industry in the future.
The Commission strongly recommended that the oil and gas industry
be required to pay for its regulators, as is the case with some other
regulated industries. For instance, the fees paid by the
telecommunications industry largely support the work of the Federal
Communications Commission. Regulation of the oil and gas industry
should no longer be funded by taxpayers but instead by the industry
that is being permitted to have access to a publicly owned resource.
This includes the costs of agencies such as BSEE and BOEM primarily
charged with overseeing the offshore energy operations--ensuring their
safety and compliance with environmental protection requirements--and
also the incremental costs of other agencies such as NOAA who help in
the review and oversight of offshore operations.
We are pleased to see that H.R. 2231 addresses the agency funding
issue. However, we would recommend that the proposed system be modified
in several respects:

(a) The fees should pay for the entire management and oversight
process, not just inspections. Inspections are only one component,
though of course a very important component, of an effective oversight
system. Substantial resources are also necessary for research,
investigation, planning, training, and the many other activities that
combine to create an effective oversight program. The Commission
recommended that the fees be sufficient to cover all these aspects. And
this should include those activities undertaken by other agencies, not
just the Department of the Interior.
(b) The fees should be dedicated to this purpose and should not
require annual appropriation by Congress.
(c) We see no reason for the fees to sunset in 2022. The costs will
continue well beyond that year.
(d) We recommended that the fees be based on actual costs. The
amount of funding needs to keep pace as industry moves into ever-more
challenging depths and geologic formations because the related
challenges of regulatory oversight likewise increase. If Congress is to
set the fee amounts, it should also establish a process for annually
reviewing the adequacy of those fees. The annual report required in
section 409 requires a thorough accounting of the fees received, but no
accounting of the costs of carrying out the responsibilities the fees
are intended to pay for. We would recommend that this information
combined with an annual Congressional assessment of the adequacy of the
fees be included in the legislation.

We note that the legislation does specify the fees that would be
charged in the initial year the legislation would take effect and
allows them to be adjusted based on the consumer price index for the
subsequent years. We do not have the capability to judge either whether
the initial fee levels are adequate or whether the consumer price index
is an appropriate adjustment. As indicated above, we would recommend
that the fees be adjusted to reflect actual costs rather than using
some arbitrary price index.
Oil Spill Liability and Financial Responsibility Limits
Oil spills cause a range of harms, including personal, economic and
environmental injuries, to individuals and ecosystems. The Oil
Pollution Act makes the party responsible for a spill liable for
compensating those who suffered as a result of the spill--through human
health and property damage, lost profits, and other personal and
economic injuries--and for restoring injured natural resources.
The Oil Pollution Act, however, imposes limits on the amount for
which the responsible party is liable. It caps liability for damages
from spills from offshore facilities at $75 million unless it can be
shown that the responsible party was guilty of gross negligence or
willful misconduct, violated a Federal safety regulation, or failed to
report the incident or cooperate with removal activities, in which case
there is no limit on damages.
The Oil Pollution Act also requires responsible parties to
establish and maintain evidence of financial responsibility, generally
based on a worst-case discharge estimate. In the case of offshore
facilities, necessary financial responsibility ranges from $35 million
to $150 million.
In the case of the Deepwater Horizon spill, BP (a responsible
party) placed $20 billion in escrow to compensate private individuals
and businesses through the independent Gulf Coast Claims Facility. But
if a less well capitalized company had caused the spill, neither a
multi-billion dollar compensation fund nor the funds necessary to
restore injured resources, would likely have been available.
There are two main problems with the current liability cap and
financial responsibility dollar amounts. First, the relatively modest
liability cap and financial responsibility requirements provide little
incentive for oil companies to improve safety practices. Second, as
noted, if an oil company with more limited financial means than BP had
caused the Deepwater Horizon spill, that company might well have
declared bankruptcy long before paying fully for all damages.
Any discussion of increasing liability caps and financial
responsibility requirements must balance two competing public policy
concerns: first, the goal of ensuring that the risk of major spills is
minimized, and in the event of a spill, victims are fully compensated;
and second, that increased caps and financial responsibility
requirements do not drive competent independent oil companies out of
the market. A realistic policy solution also requires an understanding
of the host of complex economic impacts that could result from
increases to liability caps and financial responsibility requirements.
To address both the incentive and compensation concerns noted
above, Congress should significantly raise the liability cap. Financial
responsibility limits should also be increased, because if an oil
company does not have adequate resources to pay for a spill, the
application of increased liability has little effect. Should a company
go bankrupt before fully compensating for a spill, its liability is
effectively capped. If, however, the level of liability imposed and the
level of financial responsibility required are set to levels that bear
some relationship to potential damages, firms will have greater
incentives to maximize prevention and minimize potential risk of oil
spills and also have the financial means to ensure that victims of
spills do not go uncompensated.
The Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund
The Oil Pollution Act also establishes an Oil Spill Liability Trust
Fund, and provides an opportunity to make claims for compensation from
this fund when the responsible party is not able to cover the
legitimate claims. Claims up to $1 billion for certain damages can be
made to, and paid out of, this Trust Fund, which is currently supported
by an 8-cent per-barrel tax on domestic and imported oil.
However, in the case of a large spill, the Oil Spill Liability
Trust Fund would likely not provide sufficient backup. Thus, a
significant portion of the injuries caused to individuals and natural
resources, as well as government response costs, could go
uncompensated.
Therefore, the Commission recommended that Congress increase the
limit on per-incident payouts from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund.
If liability and financial responsibility limits are not set at a level
that will ensure payment of all damages for spills, then another source
of funding will be required to ensure full compensation. The Federal
Government could cover additional compensation costs, but this approach
requires the taxpayer to foot the bill. Therefore, Congress should
raise the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund per-incident limit. Raising
the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund's per-incident limit will require
the Fund to grow through an increase of the per-barrel tax on domestic
and imported oil production. An alternative would be to increase the
Trust Fund through a surcharge by mandatory provisions in drilling
leases triggered in the event that there are inadequate sums available
in the Fund.
In addition to these three areas, the Commission also recommended
that Congress ensure that adequate funding is provided:

(a) For oil spill research and development. This should be
mandatory funding (not subject to the annual appropriations process;
(b) To support a comprehensive Federal research effort to provide a
foundation of scientific information on the Arctic;
(c) To establish adequate Coast Guard response capabilities in the
Arctic, based on the Coast Guard's review of current and projected gaps
in capacity.
IV. Continuing Congressional Oversight
In the years between the Exxon Valdez spill and the spring of 2010,
Congress, like much of the Nation, appeared to have developed a false
sense of security about the risks of offshore oil and gas development.
Congress showed its support for offshore drilling in a number of ways,
but did not take any steps to mitigate the increased perils that
accompany drilling in ever-deeper water or into icy Arctic seas. Until
the Deepwater Horizon exploded, 11 rig workers lost their lives, and
millions of barrels of oil spilled into the Gulf of Mexico, Congress
had not introduced legislation to address the risks of deepwater
drilling.
The congressional committee structure makes it much harder to focus
on safety and environmental issues associated with offshore oil and gas
development. In the 111th Congress, multiple committees in both
chambers claimed jurisdiction over offshore energy development. The
House Natural Resources Committee, for example, had jurisdiction over
``mineral land laws and claims and entries thereunder'' and ``mineral
resources of public lands.'' Your Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources was specifically charged with oversight of ``conservation and
development of oil and gas resources of the Outer Continental Shelf.''
But the House Committee on Energy and Commerce oversaw ``exploration,
production, storage, supply, marketing, pricing, and regulation of
energy resources, including all fossil fuels,'' as well ``national
energy policy generally.'' Similarly, the jurisdiction of the Senate
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources included ``extraction of
minerals from oceans and Outer Continental Shelf lands,'' and its
Subcommittee on Energy was responsible for oversight of ``oil and
natural gas regulation'' generally. By contrast, the Senate Committee
on Environment and Public Works claimed oversight over ``environmental
aspects of Outer Continental Shelf lands.'' Yet, none of the
subcommittees of environment and public works claimed oversight
specifically over OCS lands issues.
In neither the House nor the Senate are any of these committees
charged with directly overseeing the safety and environmental impacts
of offshore development, separate from the conflicting goal of resource
development and royalties. The House Committee on Education and Labor
and the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions both
emphasize occupational safety and health. But neither committee appears
to focus on process safety--the vital approach identified by the
Commission's investigation that encompasses procedures for minimizing
adverse events such as effective hazard analysis, management of risk,
communication, and auditing. Finally, no oversight of any of these
matters has been conducted by any of the several House or Senate
committees or subcommittees responsible for the Nation's tax policies
or overall appropriations process, notwithstanding the significant
impact those policies and appropriations have on both the extent of
energy industry activities on the OCS and the government's ability to
oversee that activity effectively.
After the Deepwater Horizon explosion and resulting oil spill,
numerous committees took an interest in offshore safety and
environmental issues and held hearings. In short, it took a catastrophe
to attract congressional attention. In order to avoid this problem in
the future, the Commission recommended that Congress increase and
maintain its awareness of the risks of offshore drilling in two ways.
First, create additional congressional oversight of offshore safety and
environmental risks. Second, require the appropriate congressional
committees to hold an annual oversight hearing on the state of
technology, application of process safety, and environmental protection
to ensure these issues receive continuing congressional attention. The
Commission recommended that the House and Senate Rules Committee each
assign a specific committee or subcommittee to oversee process safety
and environmental issues related to offshore energy development.
These committees should require the Secretary of the Interior to
submit an annual public report on energy offshore development
activities to the applicable congressional committees. This report
should focus on the Department's progress in improving its prescriptive
safety regulations; steps taken by industry and the Department to
improve facility management; the Department's progress in implementing
a stronger environmental assessment program, including developing
improved NEPA guidelines; and on any other steps taken by industry or
the Department to address safety and environmental concerns offshore.
The report should also detail the industry's safety and environmental
record during the previous 12 months. Finally, the report should
highlight any areas in which the Department believes industry is not
doing all that it can to promote safety and the environment and any
areas where additional legislation could be helpful to the Department's
efforts.
These committees should also require the Department of the
Interior's Office of Inspector General to submit an independent annual
public report to the applicable congressional committees. The report
should provide an independent description of the Offshore Safety
Authority's activities over the previous 12 months, including its
efforts to improve offshore safety and to investigate accidents and
other significant offshore incidents. The report should also include
the Inspector General's evaluation of the Authority's efforts and the
Inspector General's recommendations for improvement.
V. Conclusion
Creating and implementing a national energy policy will require
enormous political effort and leadership--but it would do much to
direct the Nation toward a sounder economy and a safer and more
sustainable environment in the decades to come. Given Americans'
consumption of oil, finding and producing additional domestic supplies
will be required in coming years, no matter what sensible and effective
efforts are made to reduce demand--in response to economic, trade, and
security considerations, and the rising challenge of climate change.
The extent to which offshore drilling contributes to augmenting
that domestic supply depends on rebuilding public faith in existing
offshore energy exploration and production. The Commission proposed a
series of recommendations that will enable the country and the oil and
gas industry to move forward on this one critical element of U.S.
energy policy: continuing, safe, responsible offshore oil drilling to
meet our Nation's energy demands over the next decade and beyond. Our
message is clear: both government and industry must make dramatic
changes to establish the high level of safety in drilling operations on
the outer continental shelf that the American public has the right to
expect and to demand. We will continue to encourage Congress, the
executive branch, and the oil and gas industry to take the necessary
steps.
______

The Chairman. Mr. Michael LeVine, the Pacific Senior
Counsel for Oceana. You are recognized to 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL LEVINE, PACIFIC SENIOR COUNSEL, OCEANA

Mr. LeVine. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Michael
LeVine. I am Pacific Senior Counsel for Oceana. Oceana is an
international nonprofit organization dedicated to using
science, law, and public engagement to protect and restore our
oceans. Our Pacific work is headquartered in Juneau, Alaska,
and, I along with nine colleagues, live and work there. I am
here today on of behalf of Oceana and Alaska Wilderness League.
My testimony will focus on the potential impacts of H.R. 2231
in Alaska, and in particular, in the Arctic Ocean. As the
Deepwater Horizon accident and Shell's ill-fated efforts to
drill exploration wells in the Arctic Ocean unfortunately
demonstrate, there is a clear need for change in how the
Government decides whether to allow industrial activities in
our oceans, and, if so, under what conditions.
Unfortunately, H.R. 2231 would take us in the wrong
direction. Rather than forcing the Department of the Interior
to hold lease sales and limiting environmental review, we
should focus on crafting a plan for our oceans and the Arctic
region that balances healthy ocean ecosystems and affordable
energy. Anticipated benefits must be balanced equitably against
increased risks to our economy, culture, and security,
important places must be protected, and we must begin to think
of these activities only as part of the needed transition to
clean, renewable sources of energy.
Oceans are vibrant, important places that provide economic
opportunity, food security, recreation, cultural connection and
a variety of other services. The Arctic Ocean, in particular,
is central to life in native communities, provides important
habitat for countless species of wildlife, and plays a vital
role in regulating the world's climate. The region is also
threatened by rapid warming, ocean acidification, and
industrialization, including the potential for offshore oil and
gas activities, shipping, and commercial fishing.
With these activities come substantial risks. A devastating
oil spill is the most obvious of those risks, but even routine
activities result in oil discharges, other substantial air and
water pollution, and noise. These risks are particularly severe
in the Arctic, where there is a dire lack of response and
rescue equipment, no proven method to clean up spilled oil, and
widely acknowledged lack of scientific information.
Unfortunately, Shell's unsuccessful efforts to drill
exploration wells in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas in 2012
provided a stark reminder of these risks. Shell's efforts
culminated in the grounding of the Kulluk drill rig and
sensitive habitat near Kodiak Island, a near disaster that put
lives and our oceans at risk, and likely resulted in part from
the company's desire to save $6 million in State taxes. The
Kulluk accident came after a series of mishaps and violations,
including losing control of the drilling vessel; the Noble
Discoverer in Dutch Harbor; violating the terms of its Clean
Air Act permits; arguing with the Coast Guard about the safety
standards to which its 40-year-barge must retrofit; and having
its containment dome crushed like a beer can, according to
Government observers during tests in calm waters.
As these problems make all too clear, even one of the
biggest and most well-financed companies in the world is not
prepared to drill in the Arctic Ocean, and our Government is
not prepared to provide appropriate oversight and planning.
Fundamental change clearly is needed. And the question we are
discussing today is what that change will look like. H.R. 2231
would prioritize oil and gas ahead of all other uses of our
oceans by requiring the Department of the Interior to offer
leases on vast tracks of the Outer Continental Shelf.
We can and must do better. First, there is no need for
additional leasing in the Arctic. The current 5-year leasing
program already includes lease sales in the Chukchi and
Beaufort Seas, and there is no reason for those sales, let
alone others. As Shell clearly demonstrated, companies are not
ready to explore on the leases they control already. Rather
than trying to force the Department of the Interior to
prioritize leasing, we should take three steps: First, better
science clearly is needed. We should commit to a long-term
research and monitoring program that would provide the baseline
scientific information needed to identify and protect important
ecological and subsistence areas, and better understand the
potential effects of industrial activities.
Second, companies must be required to demonstrate that the
response capabilities on which they plan to rely might actually
work. Vessels, cleanup technologies, and other aspects of
response plans should be proven in Arctic waters before
decisions are made to put the Arctic Ocean at risk. Third, we
must more fully and fairly evaluate the risks and benefits of
proposed activities. Ultimately, allowing industrial activities
like oil and gas leasing, exploration and development, amounts
to a tradeoff, accepting risks that are certain for benefits
that may or may not outweigh them. The risks, including threats
to fisheries, coastal communities, and food security, are borne
by all of us.
By contrast, large companies stand to benefit the most from
these activities. Offshore drilling, particularly in the Arctic
Ocean, will not substantially affect the price consumers pay
for gasoline, or make us substantially less dependent on
foreign sources of oil. The United States simply does not have
enough domestic oil to dramatically reduce its dependence on
imports, much less to fill its demand. Leasing exploration or
development offshore if they occur should be undertaken only as
part of a broader plan that advances the needed transition to
clean, renewable sources of energy.
Ultimately, we all need healthy oceans and affordable
energy. The best way to meet those goals is by obtaining the
basic scientific information needed to make good decisions,
requiring demonstrated response capacity, and more carefully,
looking at the risks and benefits to the American people of
offshore drilling in remote and difficult places.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. LeVine, for your
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. LeVine follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael LeVine, Pacific Senior Counsel, Oceana
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. Thank you
for the invitation to participate in today's hearing. My name is
Michael LeVine, and I am Pacific Senior Counsel for Oceana. Oceana is
an international, nonprofit, marine conservation organization dedicated
to using science, law, and public engagement policy to protect the
world's oceans. Our headquarters are in Washington, D.C., and we have
offices in five States as well as Belgium, Belize, Spain, Denmark, and
Chile. Oceana has more than 500,000 members and supporters from all 50
States and from 150 countries around the globe. Our Pacific work is
headquartered in Juneau, Alaska, and, together, our Pacific staff has
more than 200 years of experience working and living in Alaska. I am
presenting testimony today on behalf of Oceana and Alaska Wilderness
League.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Alaska Wilderness League is a non-profit 501(c)(3) corporation
founded in 1993 to further the protection of Alaska's amazing public
lands. The League is the only Washington, D.C.-based environmental
group devoted full-time to protecting Alaska's wild land and waters.
The League has four offices in Alaska, including an Arctic
Environmental Justice Center in Anchorage that provides a base of
outreach and support for members of Arctic communities who are on the
front lines of the destruction from industrial development. The
League's Arctic Ocean program aims to check the unbalanced and
potentially destructive development of Alaska's Arctic waters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As companies seek to explore for oil in more remote and difficult
places, the Government must think carefully about how it balances
anticipated benefits with increased risks and how it can ensure that
decisions are based on good science, preparedness, and planning.
Indeed, both the Deepwater Horizon accident and Shell's ill-fated
efforts to drill exploration wells in the Arctic Ocean unfortunately
demonstrated that decisions to prioritize expediency and profit often
create significant and unnecessary risk to important ocean resources on
which we depend for economic well-being, cultural connection, food
security, and many other important uses. They also evidence a
disturbing lack of Government oversight and substantial problems in the
manner in which Government agencies have made decisions to allow
offshore oil and gas activities. Change, clearly, is needed, and that
change should include requirements for better science, demonstrated
response capacity, and equitable balancing of risks and benefits to the
American people.
Unfortunately, H.R. 2231, the ``Offshore Energy and Jobs Act,''
would prioritize oil and gas leasing above all other uses of our
oceans. This ``leap before you look'' approach would preclude the
science-based planning needed to ensure the long term health of the
Arctic Ocean. Rather than forcing the Department of the Interior to
hold lease sales and limiting environmental review, we should focus on
crafting a plan for Arctic region that allows for healthy ocean
ecosystems and affordable, clean energy. Such a plan should provide
stewardship and oversight based on understanding the Arctic Ocean,
including identifying and protecting Important Ecological Areas,
requiring demonstrated response capabilities, and more fully and fairly
balancing costs and benefits.
My testimony today will focus on the potential impacts of H.R. 2231
in Alaskan waters. I will begin with an overview of the importance of
ocean resources, the changes occurring in the Arctic Ocean, the threats
from proposed industrial activities, and the difficulties in managing
those threats. I will then detail the problems Shell encountered in its
efforts to drill exploration wells in the Arctic Ocean in 2012 and
explain the broader ramifications of those failures. Finally, I will
recommend ways to make better decisions about whether to allow these
activities and, if so, under what conditions.
i. good decisions about ocean resources require science, preparedness,
and planning
Covering more than 70 percent of the world's surface, oceans and
seas are our largest public domain, and good stewardship of our ocean
resources is vital to our lives and livelihoods. As the U.S. Commission
on Ocean Policy stated, ``the importance of our oceans, coasts, and
Great Lakes cannot be overstated; they are critical to the very
existence and well-being of the Nation and its people.'' Similarly,
President Obama wrote that ``America's stewardship of the ocean, our
coasts, and the Great Lakes is intrinsically linked to environmental
sustainability, human health and well-being, national prosperity,
adaptation to climate and other environmental changes, social justice,
international diplomacy, and national and homeland security.''
Oceans provide economic opportunity, sustenance, recreation,
cultural connection, and a variety of other services. Together,
recreational and commercial fisheries provide over 2 million jobs in
the United States. Coastal tourism provides another 28.3 million jobs
and generates $54 billion in goods and services annually. In addition,
oceans provide essential protein to nearly half the world's population.
More than 1 billion people worldwide depend on fish as a key source of
protein, and wild-caught ocean fish currently provide about as much
animal protein to humans as eggs do. For these reasons and others, we
must not risk the long-term viability of our ocean resources by
prioritizing short-term economic gains or making poorly informed
decisions that could foreclose future opportunities for sustainable
management.
A. The Arctic Ocean
These management considerations are particularly important as
decisions are made for the Arctic Ocean. Despite harsh conditions, the
Arctic is home to vibrant communities and healthy ecosystems. The
Beaufort and Chukchi seas are central to life in coastal communities,
provide important habitat for countless species of wildlife, and play a
vital role in regulating the world's climate.
Thousands of people inhabit the Arctic region of the United States,
which is entirely in Alaska. The majority of these residents consider
themselves to be Alaska Natives and, for many, their culture is
inseparable from subsistence harvesting; sharing of food; teaching
youth how to fish, hunt, and gather resources; and celebrating
successful harvests. The Arctic seas are a foundation of the
subsistence way of life for coastal communities, and for the villages
that hunt bowhead whales, that hunt is a centerpiece of their culture.
In addition to the vibrant communities that have adapted to the top
of the world, Arctic waters also support some of the world's most
iconic wildlife species, such as beluga whales, polar bears, walrus,
and ice seals. The endangered bowhead, as well as beluga and gray
whales spend time in these waters. Millions of birds, including more
than 100 species, migrate from nearly every corner of the world to feed
and nest in the Arctic each summer. More than 100 fish species live in
the U.S. Arctic Ocean, including Arctic grayling, Arctic char, all five
species of Pacific salmon, capelin, herring, and various species of cod
and sculpin.
The Arctic region plays a critical role in the global climate
system and helps shape weather patterns in the northern hemisphere. The
colder Arctic is a sink for heat from the rest of the world, and the
movement of heat from the tropics to the poles affects weather
patterns. Storm tracks depend on the position, strength, and
orientation of the jet stream, and fluctuations in polar regions affect
the location and speed of the jet stream, which affects weather
patterns, especially at mid-latitudes.
B. Change: Warming, Ocean Acidification, and Industrialization
The Arctic region is changing. Climate change is resulting in
substantial warming, and marine absorption of carbon dioxide is causing
oceans to become more acidic. At the same time, increased industrial
activity has begun in the Arctic Ocean. As the Interagency Working
Group on Coordination of Domestic Energy Development and Permitting in
Alaska explained:
The U.S. Arctic is experiencing rapid, sustained change, and those
changes are expected to continue into the coming decades due to climate
change, resource extraction, and increasing human activities.
Terrestrial, freshwater, and marine ecosystems as well as broader
environmental, cultural, and economic trends in the Arctic will be
affected.
Together, these changes will have substantial effects on the people
and ecosystems in the region and the world.
i. Changing Climate and Ocean Acidification
The Arctic is warming roughly twice as fast as the rest of the
world. The scientific consensus is that this warming results from
human-caused emissions of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon
dioxide. The more rapid temperature increase in the Arctic, known as
Arctic amplification, results from particular sensitivities in the
region, including the presence of ice and snow.
The most prominent change in the Arctic has been the rapid loss of
sea ice extent and volume. In 2012, the seasonal minimum sea ice extent
in the Arctic reached a record low, and that low was only 50 percent of
the average extent from 1979-2000. The loss of sea ice volume has been
more dramatic. The record minimum in 2012 was only 20-30 percent of
previous minimums over the satellite record. If the current trend in
ice volume loss continues, the Arctic is likely to become seasonally
ice-free by 2017. Climate change in the Arctic is also accompanied by
stronger and more frequent storms, sea level rise, melting permafrost,
and coastal erosion. The changes make subsistence hunting more
difficult and dangerous, and they affect Arctic species by changing the
food web and reducing the habitat of ice-dependent species such as
polar bears.
The changes in the Arctic have implications for the rest of the
world. Loss of sea ice cover in the fall is already associated with
changing weather patterns across the northern Hemisphere with
consequences for agriculture and losses of life and property from
extreme weather events.
In addition to warming, carbon dioxide emissions are also causing
ocean acidification. Approximately one-third of the carbon dioxide that
is added to the atmosphere is absorbed by the oceans, and this
absorption changes the chemistry of the seawater, making it more
acidic. The Arctic is at particular risk from the effects of
acidification due to its cold, low-salinity waters, which lead to
increased solubility of carbon dioxide. A recent study even concluded
that ``Arctic marine waters are experiencing widespread and rapid ocean
acidification.'' These changes will fundamentally alter the Arctic
Ocean ecosystems and may have substantial effects on the people and
animals dependent on them.
ii. Increasing Industrial Threats
As the Arctic environment changes due to climate change and ocean
acidification, melting sea ice is making the region increasingly
available for industrial activities. With these activities come
substantial risks for a part of the world that has remained relatively
free from large-scale industrialization. These risks arise from both
accidents and routine activities inherent in oil and gas exploration
and development, shipping, and fishing.
We are in the second boom cycle for oil and gas in the Arctic
Ocean. Companies invested billions of dollars in the 1980s and 90s
purchasing leases and drilling several exploration wells. Eventually,
the price of oil collapsed and, along with it, industry interest; by
2000, almost no leases were owned in the Arctic Ocean. Between 2003 and
2008, more than 3 million acres of leases were sold in the Beaufort and
Chukchi seas. Netherlands-based Royal Dutch Shell owns the majority of
those leases, and the company has pushed forward aggressively to drill
exploration wells on those leases. As explained below, those efforts
have resulted in controversy, litigation, and near-disaster. Shell and
other companies have also conducted seismic surveys across the Arctic
Ocean.
In addition, as sea ice continues to retreat and the demand for
goods increases around the world, the number of vessels transiting the
Arctic Ocean is predicted to increase. The Aleutian Islands, at the
southern edge of the U.S. Arctic, are already a major shipping
thoroughfare, and shipping is predicted to rapidly expand into the
Arctic Ocean. Similarly, large-scale commercial fishing has been an
important economic and ecological force in the southern Bering Sea and
Gulf of Alaska for several decades. There is currently no large-scale
commercial fishing in the U.S. Arctic Ocean. It has been thought,
however, that ``[c]limate warming is likely to bring extensive fishing
activity to the Arctic, particularly in the Barents Sea and Beaufort-
Chukchi region where commercial operations have been minimal in the
past.''
With these activities comes substantial risk. The most apparent of
these risks, of course, is a catastrophic oil spill, which would have
dramatic impacts on the people and wildlife in the Arctic region. While
acknowledging the ``limited information'' available upon which to make
an assessment, the Federal Government has estimated that, ``[f]or a
catastrophic oil spill, it is assumed that 2 entire years of Arctic
marine mammal subsistence harvests and 1\1/2\ years of Bowhead whale
harvests would be lost.'' It has also estimated that there is a
substantial likelihood of such a spill; in its 2008 Draft Environmental
Impact Statement for the Chukchi and Beaufort Planning Areas, Federal
regulators estimated that there is a 40 percent chance of a large spill
in the Chukchi Sea and a 26 percent chance of a large spill in the
Beaufort Sea.
In addition to creating the risk of dramatic impacts from a
catastrophic spill, oil exploration and production activities also
routinely release smaller amounts of oil, toxic muds, and other fluids
into the ocean. Drilling muds, in particular, can have toxic effects in
the water column. Moreover, discharges of oil are virtually guaranteed
to result from routine activities. As one Shell executive made clear,
``There's no sugar-coating this, I imagine there would be spills, and
no spill is OK.''
Industrial activities in the Arctic would also increase air
pollution and contribute to global warming. Combustion will produce air
pollutants that can cause human health problems and affect the
environment. In addition, the activities would produce greenhouse gases
and would emit substantial amounts of soot. The black carbon particles
in soot are a particular concern in the Arctic because they contribute
to a feedback loop that accelerates snow and ice-melt.
Seismic testing, exploration and production drilling, icebreaking,
and vessel traffic also dramatically increase noise levels in the
ocean, and this noise can have significant effects on marine mammals
and other wildlife. As the National Marine Fisheries Service stated,
``Marine mammals use hearing and sound transmission to perform vital
life functions. Sound (hearing and vocalization/echolocation) serves
four primary functions for marine mammals, including: (1) providing
information about their environment; (2) communication; (3) prey
detection; and (4) predator detection.'' Additional noise can disrupt
these functions by displacing animals from breeding and feeding
habitat, causing temporary or permanent hearing loss, causing stress
and other physiological responses, making it more difficult for animals
to hear other, relevant sounds, and, in extreme situations, causing
stranding or death.
Further, offshore oil and gas activities are massive industrial
undertakings. For example, Shell's 2012 activities in the Chukchi and
Beaufort Seas included a drill rig, a drilling vessel, ice breakers,
tugs, barges, other support vessels, aircraft, helicopters, and other
industrial machinery. In addition to the direct impacts to the
ecosystem discussed above, this large-scale industrialization more
subtly affects the communities along the coast by bringing an influx of
people and industry from outside the communities and outside Alaska.
These changes have economic, social, and cultural impacts to Arctic
communities.
iii. Management Challenges
Effective management and decision-making about industrial
activities in the U.S. Arctic Ocean is hindered by a lack baseline
scientific knowledge, remoteness, absence of infrastructure, and the
lack of adequate and proven oil spill prevention and response
technology. Together, these challenges make it difficult to understand
or predict the impacts of activities, to craft appropriate mitigation,
and to weigh risks.
Scientists recognize that the recent losses of sea ice during
summer are fundamentally changing Arctic Ocean ecosystems, but
relatively little still is known about the abundance and distribution
of common species, much less how the food webs work in this region. In
its analysis of the potential impacts from Lease Sale 193 in the
Chukchi Sea, the Department of the Interior explicitly recognized that
there is significant missing information about even the most basic
parameters for every one of the largest and most conspicuous animals in
the ecosystem--all fish, marine mammals and birds--which in other
regions are typically the most highly studied animals of an ecosystem.
The missing information for these species includes abundance,
distribution, and life history. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) has
detailed information gaps for nearly every species in the Arctic Ocean.
The final report of the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon
Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling echoed this sentiment, observing that
the ``[s]cientific understanding of environmental conditions . . . in
areas proposed for more drilling, such as the Arctic, is inadequate.
The same is true of the human and natural impacts of oil spills,'' as
well as the impacts of routine oil and gas operations.
The lack of adequate baseline information creates a significant
impediment to effective planning and preparedness. The U.S. Commission
on Ocean Policy stated as a principal tenet, ``Ocean managers and
policy makers need comprehensive scientific information about the ocean
and its environment to make wise decisions.'' As the USGS explained,
the gaps in information about the Arctic Ocean are a ``major constraint
to a defensible science framework for critical Arctic decision-
making.'' Similarly, an inter-agency government report addressing the
need for integrated management in the Arctic noted that ``scientific
information and data relevant to U.S. Arctic decisions can be difficult
to access and it is not clear that the scientific agenda for the U.S.
Arctic adequately serves the informational needs of decision-makers.''
Despite harsh and changing conditions, progress is being made.
Various private and public entities have recently started scientific
research programs in the Arctic Ocean to fill some of the data gaps.
For example, the Chukchi Sea Environmental Studies Program, funded by
ConocoPhilips, Shell and Statoil, is a multi-year, multi-discipline
marine science research program collecting information on physical
oceanography, atmospheric conditions, sediments, benthic communities,
plankton ecology, fish, seabirds, marine mammals, and underwater
acoustics. Other entities are working to synthesize existing
information. Nonetheless, there are still substantial gaps in the
available information, and a comprehensive, long-term research and
monitoring program is needed.
Moreover, there is no proven method to respond to spilled oil in
the Arctic. Indeed, the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon
and Offshore Drilling found that ``successful oil spill response
methods from the Gulf of Mexico, or anywhere else, cannot simply be
transferred to the Arctic.'' The National Academy of Sciences similarly
determined that ``no current cleanup methods remove more than a small
fraction of oil spill in marine waters, especially in the presence of
broken ice.'' Tests of skimmers, boom, and vessels in 2000, were
characterized as a ``failure,'' despite calm weather. In particular,
the tests showed that even though mechanical recovery is typically
assumed to work in up to 30 percent ice coverage, the system only
actually worked in up to 10 percent ice coverage. In August 2012, the
Coast Guard conducted oil spill response tests that included the
deployment of boom and the use of a skimmer designed to recover oil in
pockets of water trapped by ice. The report of those exercises notes
that the lack of docking facilities or ports was a challenge, that ice
and fog inhibited the exercise, and that it was difficult to find
berthing facilities for personnel.
Weather and other environmental conditions can be severe in the
Arctic. The Arctic Ocean is covered with sea ice from approximately
October through May, and the air temperature goes below freezing on
nearly every day of the year. Fog, wind, and storms are common, and
long hours of darkness limits visibility in the late fall and winter.
These environmental conditions make operations, as well as response and
rescue, difficult or impossible.
In addition, there is a significant lack of infrastructure in the
U.S. Arctic. Very little response equipment is stored on the North
Slope, and there are hardly any vessels there that could assist in a
response effort. Senator Begich, for example, has pointed out that
icebreakers are ``sorely lacking'' as well as Coast Guard ``cutters,
aircraft hangars, crew quarters, communication capabilities, deepwater
ports and other infrastructure.'' Characterizing the lack of
infrastructure, Coast Guard Commandant Robert Papp explained that,
``[t]here is nothing up there to operate from at present and we're
really starting from ground zero.'' Moreover, there are not hotels or
other housing capable of accommodating thousands of responders. Nor is
there an easy way to move equipment or personnel from one location to
another. The remoteness of the Arctic is also a substantial challenge;
the nearest Coast Guard station is in Kodiak, roughly 1,000 miles from
the likely locations of oil and gas exploration, and the nearest
deepwater port is Dutch Harbor. Even Dutch Harbor has limited ability
to service drilling vessels and house people.
ii. the 2012 drilling season shows that companies are not prepared to
drill in the arctic ocean.
Since 2004, Shell has invested heavily pursuing oil in the Arctic
Ocean. The company's unsuccessful efforts to complete exploration wells
have resulted in controversy, litigation, and, most recently, near
disaster. In 2012, Shell sought to use the Kulluk drill rig and Noble
Discoverer drilling vessel to drill exploration wells. Though Shell did
manage to complete two top holes (the beginning of exploration wells),
it was not allowed to drill into oil-bearing zones. Along the way, the
company's lack of preparedness and forethought resulted in a series of
substantial mishaps:

1. Spring and early summer 2012--before the drilling season even
began--Shell:

Backtracked on the commitment in its oil
spill response plan to clean up 95 percent of a major
Arctic oil spill, asserting instead that it intended
only to ``encounter'' spilled oil, not necessarily
clean it up;

Admitted it could not comply with the terms
of the Clean Air Act permit is had negotiated over
several years and received a ``compliance order'' from
the government allowing it to exceed the established
standards; and

Began a prolonged argument with the Coast
Guard about safety standards for its 37-year-old oil
spill response barge, the Arctic Challenger, which had
been dormant since the 1990s. The barge was not
certified until October.

2. July 14, 2012--On its way to the Arctic Ocean, Shell lost
control of its drillship, the Noble Discoverer, near Dutch Harbor, and
the vessel almost ran aground.
3. September 10, 2012--Shell was forced to abandon its drilling
operations in the Chukchi Sea less than 24 hours after starting when an
ice sheet about the size of New York City covered the drilling site.
4. September 16, 2012--Shell's oil spill containment dome failed
spectacularly during sea trials off the coast of Washington State in
calm seas. Government observers said that the dome was ``crushed like a
beer can'' and ``breached like a whale.''
5. November 2012--Shell delayed departure of the Kulluk from the
Beaufort Sea due to cold and windy, but routine, arctic weather. The
problems included helicopters without de-icing equipment and pilots
unfamiliar with flying on Alaska's North Slope.
6. November 16, 2012--The Noble Discoverer suffered a loud
explosion and fire while docked in Dutch Harbor on its way to Seattle.
7. November 2012--The Noble Discoverer was boarded by Coast Guard
personnel and cited for a series of discharge and safety violations--
including skimming oil from main engine piston cooling water with a
``ladle and bucket.'' The vessel also barely made it to Seward, where
it was announced that it had suffered substantial engine damage, would
not be able to sail under its own power, and would be dry towed to Asia
for repairs.
8. December 21, 2012--The drill rig Kulluk departed Dutch Harbor
under tow by a single vessel for Seattle for repairs. It was rumored at
the time--and has since been confirmed--that the departure was timed at
least in part to avoid a $6 million State tax payment.
9. December 27, 2012--The Kulluk separated from its tow vessel in
bad, but not unexpected, weather and drifted on and off for 4 days.
During this time, the Coast Guard heroically rescued all 18 crew aboard
the Kulluk. The Kulluk had more than 150,000 gallons of fuel on board
as ballast.
10. December 31, 2012--The Kulluk ran aground on Sitkalidak Island,
near Kodiak, Alaska.
11. January 7, 2013--The Kulluk was towed off the rocks and into
Kiliuda Bay, approximately 45 nautical miles away. It remained there
for assessment until it was towed back to Dutch Harbor (this time with
three separate tow vessels) then dry-towed to Asia for repairs.
12. January 10, 2013--EPA issued two Notices of Violation--one for
the Discoverer and the other for the Kulluk--making it clear that Shell
violated the terms of both its original Clean Air Act permits and the
negotiated ``compliance order.'' The notices, which identify 35
separate violations, have been referred to the Department of Justice
for enforcement.

Shell's mishaps and problems resulted in a series of investigations
and reports. The Department of the Interior completed a 60-day review
of the drilling season in March. Violations of the Clean Air Act and
discharge and safety requirements have been referred to the Department
of Justice for enforcement. The Coast Guard recently completed a 2-week
marine casualty hearing and will complete its investigation in coming
months. Although investigations are still pending, it is abundantly
clear that there are problems with both corporate actions as well
Government oversight
Shell's lack of preparedness put lives and the marine environment
at substantial risk. Moreover, the response to these problems diverted
Government resources and led to substantial expenditures of public
funds. Even Shell's routine operations resulted in violations of air
and water protections.
In light of its problems, Shell announced that it was foregoing
drilling operations in 2013. ConocoPhillips and Statoil have announced
they would not seek approvals for exploration drilling in 2014.
iii. moving forward, decisions must be based on science and
preparedness.
As the problems encountered during the 2012 efforts to drill
exploration wells make all too clear, even one of the biggest and most
well-financed companies in the world is not prepared to drill in the
Arctic Ocean, and Government agencies are not able to provide
appropriate oversight and regulation. Fundamental reassessment and
change is needed in order to allow for decisions based on sound
science, preparedness, and a fair balancing of risks and benefits.
Unfortunately, many of the provisions of H.R. 2231 would foreclose this
path.
Indeed, H.R. 2231 seeks to require the Department of the Interior
(DOI) to offer leases on vast tracts of the Outer Continental Shelf.
The bill would change the manner in which DOI balances risks and
benefits by prioritizing leasing irrespective of the risks it might
cause. It does so without ensuring that the lease sales it mandates
will result in public economic good or additional oil production that
might justify the risks it seeks to impart on coastal communities.
Nor does the bill take into consideration the lease sales in the
Beaufort and Chukchi seas that DOI has included in its current 2012-
2017 5-Year Leasing Program. For all the reasons explained below, there
is no need to hold those sales, let alone additional ones. In addition,
the leases currently owned in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas were
purchased more than 5 years ago. Companies have yet to complete any
exploration wells on those leases.
Rather than putting a thumb on the scale in favor of drilling, we
need to address the problems identified above by: (1) obtaining the
basic scientific information needed to make good decisions; (2)
requiring demonstrated response capacity; and (3) taking a more careful
look at the risks and benefits to the American people of offshore
drilling in remote and difficult places.
A long-term research and monitoring program would provide the
baseline scientific information needed to better understand the
potential effects of industrial activities and the measures needed to
ensure protection of the marine environment. With that information,
Important Ecological Areas could be better identified and protected,
and more informed decisions could be made about whether and under what
conditions to allow industrial activities.
Similarly, companies must be required to demonstrate that response
capabilities on which they plan to rely might work. Vessels, clean-up
technologies, and other aspects of response plans should be proven in
Arctic waters before decisions are made to put the Arctic Ocean at
risk.
Those two steps--better science and preparedness will also help
more fully and fairly evaluate the risks and benefits of proposed
activities. Allowing industrial activities like oil and gas leasing,
exploration, and development amounts to a tradeoff--accepting risks
that are certain for benefits that may or may not outweigh them. The
public at large bears the risks, including threats to fisheries,
coastal communities, food security, and all of the other things for
which we depend on oceans. By contrast, large, private companies--many
of them foreign--stand to benefit the most from these activities. More
than 80 percent of the leases sold in the Arctic Ocean are owned by
companies based in foreign countries. In addition, subsidies, royalty
relief, and other loopholes greatly reduce the payments companies make
directly to the Federal Government.
Moreover, offshore drilling--particularly in the Arctic Ocean--will
not substantially affect the price consumers pay for gasoline. Nor will
it make us substantially less dependent on foreign sources of oil. The
United States currently imports roughly 62 percent of our crude oil,
most of it from Canada and Mexico. The Department of Energy estimates
that even if we opened all offshore areas to drilling, the United
States would still import about 58 percent of its oil supply. The
United States simply does not have enough domestic oil to reduce its
dependence on imports, much less to fulfill its demand.
For similar reasons, increasing offshore leasing--as H.R. 2231
attempts to do--will not increase national security. In fact, it is
possible that national security needs will be more effectively
protected by leaving large reservoirs of oil in the ground until other,
cheaper sources are exhausted. Moreover, increasing offshore oil and
gas activities threatens the economic benefits and food security
provided by fisheries and other uses of our oceans.
It is important to put the situation in the proper context. More
than 90 percent of the world's oil and gas reserves have been
nationalized by the countries that control them. As a result, the
opportunities for large, multi-national corporations have become
substantially narrower. The push to develop in the U.S. Arctic results
in part from these incentives, which are not necessarily congruent with
our national interests.
Moreover, these oil and gas resources are finite. It is widely
recognized that we, as a society, must transition away from fossil
fuels and toward renewable sources of energy. Leasing, exploration, or
development offshore--if it occurs--should be undertaken only with
clear recognition that this transition to renewables is necessary and
only as part of a broader plan that advances that transition.
Ultimately, we need to make careful decisions about whether to
allow these types of activities and, if so, under what conditions. As
Dr. Jeffrey Short, one of the world's experts on the impacts of oil
spills, stated in his testimony before the Senate Energy Committee in
November 2009:
Oil development proposals in the marine environment are often
presented and discussed as engineering challenges, without sufficient
regard for the complexity of the environment in which they would occur,
or the often dubious assumptions implicit in assessments of
environmental risks and cleanup and mitigation technologies. Oil spill
contingency plans are treated as exercises in damage control, taking
for granted that not all damage can be controlled, and based on the
faulty assumption all potential outcomes are adequately understood,
predictable, and manageable.
In other words, we can and must make better informed decisions
about whether to allow these activities and, if so, under what
conditions.
iv. conclusion
As we consider any industrial activities in the ocean--oil and gas,
shipping, fishing, alternative energy development--our first step
should be to understand and protect the marine environment and those
dependent on it. Once we better understand the ecosystem and what steps
can be taken to protect it, we can better balance risks and benefits
and, therefore, make better decisions about whether and under what
conditions to allow industrial activities.
______

The Chairman. And now I will recognize Mr. Sean Dixon, who
is a Coastal Policy Attorney for Clean Ocean Action. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SEAN DIXON, COASTAL POLICY ATTORNEY, CLEAN OCEAN
ACTION

Mr. Dixon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My name is Sean Dixon.
I am the Coastal Policy Attorney at Clean Ocean Action. We are
a broad-based coalition, representing over 125 diverse
organizations in the greater New York, New Jersey region,
working to protect and improve the water quality of the
Atlantic Ocean and the New York, New Jersey bite. Over the past
30 years, Clean Ocean Action has worked to protect marine water
quality, beaches, and the people that depend on clean ocean
economies from the mistakes of the past while educating the
next generation of ocean stewards. The waters of the Mid-
Atlantic Ocean were once known as the ocean dumping capital of
the world. These waters were home to acid wastes, municipal
wastes, medical waste dumpsites, and hazardous material
dumpsites, and really a day at the beach for many years was
anything but relaxing. Citizen action and decades of bipartisan
efforts by members of this Committee and their predecessors has
turned the tide against that pollution. Today, the Atlantic
Ocean is home to billion dollar economies that support millions
of jobs despite the absence of offshore oil drilling. This
hard-won success story, a robust economy free of fossil fuel,
industrialization, brings Clean Ocean Action to the Offshore
Energy and Jobs Act. We have submitted written testimony to
H.R. 2231, and are grateful for the opportunity to briefly
focus on the communities of the coast that will be affected by
this proposed legislation, specifically, the multigenerational
communities and committees that the jobs and ecologies of the
Atlantic Ocean rely upon.
Unlike the general portrayal of offshore oil and gas risk,
the devil is not only in the drilling risk. Impacts from non-
point sourced pollution, air emissions, construction and
decommissioning, coastal crowding, pipeline installation, and
most significantly, and most immediately, seismic surveys, all
impact coastal economies and ecologies through affecting long-
term resiliency of the communities for the coastline.
The Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council, which is
federally tasked with ensuring that sustainable fisheries are
present throughout the entire Mid-Atlantic region, in a letter
to BOEM regarding the currently pending proposed program for
seismic surveys, stated that the activities would threaten the
166,000 jobs, $6 billion in associated income generated from
those Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council managed
fisheries. In sales alone, the New York and New Jersey
commercial fisheries generated over $11 billion in 2011. These
fishermen come from multi-generational families, own their own
boats, and cooperatively own their own dock shore-side
facilities. These fishermen remember when acid waste dumpsites
ruined decades of fishing, they remember when seismic surveys
in the 1970s and 1980s created fish kills and scattered the
fish populations. These fishermen remember when their neighbors
couldn't operate boardwalk bars, beach clubs, and restaurants
because the industrial pollution scared away all the tourists.
They remember also Hurricane Sandy and Irene, where record
waves and storm surge left the shore devastated and the
industries in the coastal zone battered. It is important to
note that hurricanes eat oil and gas facilities. There is no
safe place in the ocean when you have something like Superstorm
Sandy bearing down on a coast.
In New Jersey, almost two-thirds of the State's $38 billion
economy is driven by coastal tourism. In Virginia, tourism
employs 200,000 people. And in Florida, tourism wildlife
supports 2.2 million jobs. These people, employed and working
hard to bring us fish and to keep our beaches clean, have jobs
worth fighting for. Oil expansion into the Atlantic would put
these hardworking families and the ecosystem that supports them
in grave danger. This search for oil is a risk for the entire
coast.
Moreover, with recovery from Superstorm Sandy still
underway, with global financial crisis still slogging along,
and with climate change rising our seas and flooding our
estuaries, the last thing the people of the Atlantic Ocean need
is the lifecycle of pollution that would be generated from
offshore oil drilling.
Fishermen don't want seismically stunned seafood, boardwalk
businesses don't want to go back to beaches that were empty and
closures that left their tables without customers. Tourists
don't want to wash tar balls off of their towels and have to
slog through medical waste. Because this act opens up the
Atlantic to offshore oil drilling, eliminates vital
environmental and economic impact evaluations from drilling
decisionmaking, and drives U.S. energy policy down the wrong
road, on behalf of the 125 organizations and businesses of the
Clean Ocean Action collation and the citizens that depend on
clean ocean economies, I urge that this bill not be released
from Committee. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Dixon, for your
statement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dixon follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sean Dixon, Coastal Policy Attorney, Clean Ocean
Action
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me here today to testify on H.R.
2231, the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act. My name is Sean Dixon, and I am
the Coastal Policy Attorney at Clean Ocean Action.
Headquartered at Historic Fort Hancock, on Sandy Hook, New Jersey,
Clean Ocean Action is a broad-based coalition representing over 135
boating, business, community, conservation, diving, environmental,
fishing, religious, service, student, surfing, and women's
organizations in the New York/New Jersey region. Clean Ocean Action's
goal is to improve and protect the water quality of the coastal and
marine waters of the New Jersey/New York region using science, law,
research, education, and citizen action.
I. Introduction
Clean Ocean Action (COA) has spent almost 30 years working to
cleaning up the costly decisions of the past where our ocean was seen
as a dumping ground of immeasurable capacity and an open canvas for
industrialization. Fortunately, the ocean is now seen as the
ecological, economic, and social keystone that it is. On the beach, in
the waves, and along the boardwalk, coastal business-owners, tourists,
residents, fishermen, and ocean advocates of all stripes are cognizant
of the connection between a clean ocean and a robust coastal economy.
However, without safe water there are no swimmers or surfers, without
healthy estuaries, there are no fish, without clean beaches, there are
no beachgoers, and without all of those qualities, there is no coastal
economy.
The Government's current OCS Five-Year Plan, while allowing access
to more than 75 percent of the estimated undiscovered, technically
recoverable oil and gas resources on the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf,
does not allow OCS oil and gas activities in the Atlantic Ocean.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Department of the Interior. ``Secretary Salazar announces
2012-2017 offshore oil and gas development program.'' November 8, 2011
(available at http://www.doi.gov/news/pressreleases/Secretary-Salazar-
Announces-2012-2017-Offshore-Oil-and-Gas-Development-Program.cfm).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 2231 puts coastal jobs and economies at risk by:

--Immediately opening the Atlantic Ocean to offshore oil and gas
drilling;
--Driving U.S. energy policy toward a less resilient, less secure
future; and
--Eliminating the ``no action alternative'' from environmental
impact assessments, thereby barring from consideration the
environmental and economic benefits of an oil-drilling-free
ocean.

For these, and the following reasons, Clean Ocean Action opposes
the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act of 2013.
II. Seismic Surveys Pose an Immediate Threat to Coastal Economies
On March 30, 2012, the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM)
issued a Draft Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement (Draft PEIS)
for geological and geophysical exploration on the Atlantic Ocean Outer
Continental Shelf.\2\ According to BOEM, these surveys, to be conducted
``in Federal waters of the Mid- and South Atlantic Outer Continental
Shelf (OCS) and adjacent State waters,''\3\ are needed ``to make
informed business decisions regarding oil and gas reserves'' and for
other purported goals.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 77 Fed. Reg. 19,321 (March 30, 2012).
\3\ http://www.boem.gov/Oil-and-Gas-Energy-Program/GOMR/GandG.aspx.
\4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This past January, in a letter to President Barack Obama, the late
Senator Lautenberg was joined by seven of his coastal colleagues in
decrying these proposed surveys, warning that the proposed seismic
testing will ``hurt our coastal communities and the marine resources
that drive our coastal economy.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Letter to President Barack Obama by U.S. Senators Frank R.
Lautenberg (D-NJ), Sheldon Whitehouse (D-RI), Patrick Leahy (D-VT),
Robert Menendez (D-NJ), Benjamin Cardin (D-MD), Barbara Mikulski (D-
MD), Barbara Boxer (D-CA), and Maria Cantwell (D-WA)., January 30, 2013
(available at http://www.lautenberg.senate.gov/assets/seismic.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Senators, representing the citizens of California, Maryland,
New Jersey, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington, took issue with the
currently pending seismic proposals for three reasons.

First, the most obvious: seismic surveys are only necessary for oil
and gas drilling.

``Seismic airgun testing is used to explore for offshore oil
and gas resources. Allowing this activity in the Atlantic Ocean
is clearly a step towards permitting dangerous offshore
drilling. . . . Even those the proposed seismic testing would
only span from Delaware to the middle of Florida, a significant
oil spill in the Atlantic Ocean would harm . . . fisheries, and
sea life all along the Atlantic Coast. In particular, it would
decimate the region's robust tourism economy, which relies on
clean and safe beaches.''\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Id. (emphasis added).

Second, the Senators warned of the direct, known, and significant
impact these surveys will have on marine mammals--many of which are
critically endangered yet still support significant tourism economies
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
and are keystone species in their coastal habitats.

``These loud airgun blasts can be heard for hundreds of miles
in the ocean and, as a result, can drive whales to abandon
their habitats, go silent, and cease foraging over vast areas.
At shorter distances, it can cause permanent hearing loss,
injury, and even death for whales, dolphins, and fish.
According to the Department of the Interior's (DOI) own
estimates, seismic testing would injure up to 138,500 marine
mammals, and disrupt marine mammal feeding, calving, breeding,
and other vital activities.''\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, fisheries will be significantly impacted by these surveys.

``[A]irgun noise has been shown to decrease fisheries catch
rates by 40 to 80 percent, forcing fishermen to seek
compensation for their losses. Since commercial and
recreational fishing off the Mid- and Southeast Atlantic
generates $11.8 billion annually and supports 222,000 jobs, we
are concerned that DOI did not take these economics impacts
into account when assessing the proposed plan for seismic
testing.''\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Id. (emphasis added).

At a June, 2012, meeting of the Mid Atlantic Fishery Management
Council (MAFMC), held in New York City, BOEM made a presentation on
these proposed surveys that highlighted the potential for seismic
surveys to impact clean coastal economies. During the presentation,
BOEM scientist Dr. Jill Lewandowski noted that ``that there is cross-
over between the frequency of noise that is produced by seismic surveys
and what at least many of the fish species we think can hear.''\9\ This
can lead to a variety of effects, according to the presentation, from
``no effect to habituation to a change in behavior;'' the airguns might
``mask some of [a fish's] important cues,'' could ``go to hearing
loss'' or cause ``other physiological effects that maybe don't result
in mortality but could be sublethal.''\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Minutes, MAFMC Meeting, New York, NY, June 11, 2012 (Available
at http://static.squarespace.com/static/511cdc7fe4b00307a2628ac6/t/
51657e74e4b0f2e667ba2341/136560600
4639/Council%20Minutes_June%2012_14_2012.pdf).
\10\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The BOEM conclusion on the state of science as to how seismic
surveys impact fish and fisheries was concise: ``there's really not
much at all.''\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
After hearings on the issue, with input from BOEM, other
scientists, fishermen, and the public, the Mid-Atlantic Fishery
Management Council found that there is a 50-meter lethal zone around
each airgun blast; that while highly-mobile fish may escape this zone,
``the extensive (months long) survey timeframe makes it likely that
prolonged avoidance of the arrays will be necessary and could lead to
interruptions in fish spawning and access to forage;'' and that much of
the OCS is at a depth less than 50 meters, which would ``place the
entire water column within the `lethal range' of the array.''\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council Comments on Draft
PEIS, June 29, 2012 (available at http://www.boem.gov/uploadedFiles/
BOEM/Oil_and_Gas_Energy_Program/GOMR/Atl
GGCommentsFedStaLoc.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These concerns were shared by many other government and non-
government organizations, including the State of Delaware Department of
Natural Resources and Environmental Control, which expressed concern
that these proposed seismic surveys, and the oil operations that follow
thereafter ``would be catastrophic for our State economy'' and that
``[e]ven with the mitigation and monitoring measures outlined in the
PEIS, significant adverse environmental impacts will still likely
result from seismic airgun surveys.''\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental
Control Comments on Draft PEIS, May 30, 2013 (available at http://
www.boem.gov/uploadedFiles/BOEM/Oil_and_
Gas_Energy_Program/GOMR/AtlGGCommentsFedStaLoc.pdf).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Based on this input, the MAFMC concluded:

``It is clear that G&G activities have substantial impacts on
marine environments, yet the Draft PEIS provides insufficient
information about how the specific proposed G&G activities may
affect fish, marine mammals, benthic communities, and ecosystem
structure and function. We understand that these impacts are
difficult to predict or quantify, but given the existing value
of marine resources to the region and the Nation, it is clear
that the potential benefits do not outweigh the risks of
initiating the proposed G&G activities at this point.''\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council Comments on Draft
PEIS, June 29, 2012 (available at http://www.boem.gov/uploadedFiles/
BOEM/Oil_and_Gas_Energy_Program/GOMR/AtlGGCommentsFedStaLoc.pdf).

Because the MAFMC found that the seismic surveys could threaten the
``more than 166,000 jobs with an associated income exceeding $6
billion'' within the Mid Atlantic Ocean, the Council resolved that it
``cannot support the Draft PEIS.''\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Seismic surveys, which are just the first step in OCS oil and gas
development, have significant impacts on fish, fisheries, and wildlife,
and pose a direct threat to fishery jobs, coastal ecosystems, and
coastal economies.
III. The Atlantic is No Place for Offshore Oil and Gas Activities
Only a few weeks ago, on May 24, 2013, six representatives of
Atlantic Ocean States, representing coastal districts (and the existing
businesses, people, economies and ecologies therein), as well as inland
districts whose residents no doubt rely on a clean coast for state-wide
economic benefit and for tourism, recreation, and employment, sent a
letter to Secretary Jewell cautioning her on expansion of oil and gas
operations into the Atlantic:

``OCS drilling is, in fact, quite controversial in our States
because of its potential adverse impacts both on the
environment and on our coastal communities and the tourism
economy on which they depend.''\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Letter to Secretary of the Interior Sally Jewell by Virginia
Representatives Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Jim Moran and Gerald E.
Connolly; South Carolina Representative James E. Clyburn; and North
Carolina Representatives David Price and Melvin L. Watt, May 24, 2013
(available at http://www.newsobserver.com/2013/05/31/2928854/6-
congressmen-oppose-atlantic.html).

The Congressmen continued, noting that ``the risks of drilling in
this sensitive region outweigh the benefits.'' Indeed, the Congressmen
urge the Secretary to turn away from offshore drilling and ``towards a
clean energy economy.''\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This ideal is backed up by economic fact: three times as many jobs
are created by clean energy investments than with continued investments
in reliance on fossil fuels.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ http://www.peri.umass.edu/fileadmin/pdf/
other_publication_types/green_economics/economic_benefits/
economic_benefits.PDF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This sentiment has been echoed in of New Jersey and New York for
decades with bi-partisan support. Indeed, since Governor Kean's
administration, every New Jersey Governor has opposed offshore
drilling, especially where New Jersey would be at risk. Moreover, for
decades, nearly the entire New Jersey Congressional delegation has
opposed legislation to expand offshore drilling into the Atlantic.
``The Jersey Shore has been known for our boardwalks, rolling surf
and ocean breezes. But now some are talking about adding oil rigs to
that list. We say no way,'' said the late Senator Lautenberg, in
2006.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Press Release: ``New Jersey Lawmakers Vow to Stop Republican
Attempts to Open Up Oil Drilling off Jersey Shore.'' July 14, 2006
(available at http://www.lautenberg.senate.gov/newsroom/
record.cfm?id=258641&).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Senator Robert Menendez joined his colleague in declaring that the
Jersey Shore ``is far too precious and important to allow oil-crazed
speculators to set-up shop along our coast.''\20\ According to a New
Jersey Department of Tourism study, about 60 percent of New Jersey's
$35.5 billion tourism industry is generated at the shore.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Id.
\21\ http://www.visitnj.org/sites/visitnj.org/files/2010-tourism-
ecom-impact-prelim-3-23-2011-2.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Across the greater New York/New Jersey region, the economic value
of the clean ocean economy is unquestionable:

The Port of New York and New Jersey, largest in the
Atlantic, lies at the top of the Mid-Atlantic and saw over $208 billion
in cargo,\22\ over 5.5 million cargo containers, and over 86 million
tons of goods move into and out of the Port.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Trade Statistics of the Port of New York and New Jersey, 2011,
at 1. The Port Authority of NY & NJ (available at http://
www.panynj.gov/port/pdf/port-trade-statistics-bar-C2c-2011.pdf).
\23\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Port Authority, which manages the Port, estimates
that the Port's economic impact supports over 279,000 jobs in the
region.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Regional Economic Benefits of the Port Authority of NY & NJ
(available at http://www.panynj.gov/port/regional-economic-
benefits.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In New York State, the ``recreational fishing industry
generated $369 million in sales, contributed $212 million to gross
state product, and supported 3,000 jobs across the broader State
economy'' in 2011.\25\ Commercially, New York's 2011 fisheries
``generated $5 billion in sales, contributed $1.8 billion to gross
state product, and supported 42,000 jobs across the broader
economy.''\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Regional Impact Evaluation; An Initial Assessment of the
Economic Impacts of Sandy on New Jersey and New York Commercial and
Recreational Fishing Sectors, at 1-2 (hereinafter ``Sandy Report'').
NOAA Fisheries, Office of Science & Technology and Northeast Fisheries
Science Center, March 15, 2013 (available at http://
www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/Assets/economics/documents/sandy/
Final_Report_Sandy_Regional_Impact_Evaluation_MSA.pdf).
\26\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In New Jersey, in 2011, ``the commercial fishing industry
generated $6.6 billion in sales, contributed $2.4 billion to gross
state product and supported 44,000 jobs across the broader State
economy''\27\ while recreational fisheries ``generated $1.7 billion in
sales, contributed $871 million to gross state product and supported
10,000 jobs.''\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Id.
\28\ Id.

The NY/NJ Port and fisheries impacts, therefore, contributed
(during a recession) over $220 billion in sales and cargo while
supporting over 300,000 jobs.
States across the Atlantic coast have similar statistics and their
economists would tell similar stories. For example, this committee
heard testimony last week of a recent analysis showing Virginia's 2011
tourism industry supports more than 200,000 jobs, yielding an economic
impact of more than $20 billion,\29\ and data from Florida showing that
the tourism, wildlife, fisheries, ports, and defense-related industries
generate more than $175 billion in economic benefits and over 2.2
million jobs annually.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ PricewaterhouseCoopers, ``Virginia State Tourism Plan'' (2013)
(available at http://www
.vatc.org/uploadedFiles/Partnership_Alliance_Marketing/
VirginiaStateTourismPlanVTC329201
3.pdf).
\30\ Mitch Stacy, ``Florida tourism rebounds in 2011, overseas
visits up,'' USA Today, December 30, 2011, (available at http://
travel.usatoday.com/destinations/story/2011-12-31/Florida-tourism-
rebounds-in-2011-overseas-visits-up/52295150/1).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These industries are not simply elements of the coastal economy--
they are the drivers of the coastal economy. Yet, we are here today to
speak to the expansion of oil and gas operations--operations which, in
the Atlantic Ocean, would threaten these keystone elements of the
coastal economy while only yielding U.S. consumers a three-cent ($0.03)
reduction in the ``price at the pump'' 10-15 years from now.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ EIA, Impacts of Increased Access to Oil and Natural Gas
Resources in the Lower 48 Federal Outer Continental Shelf AEO 2007
(available at http://www.eia.gov/oiaf/aeo/otheranalysis/ongr.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
IV. A Note on Superstorm Sandy
In addition to the human, social, and economic toll that Hurricanes
Rita and Katrina took on the Nation in 2005, those disasters triggered
125 known Gulf of Mexico oil spills (totaling over 16,000 barrels of
oil),\32\ destroyed 115 gulf petroleum production platforms, and
damaged 457 sea-to-shore pipelines.\33\ Hurricanes pose similar threats
in the Atlantic Ocean, and oil and gas drilling along the eastern
seaboard would be just as vulnerable as along the gulf coast.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ U.S. Minerals Management Service. Estimated Petroleum Spillage
from Facilities Associated with Federal Outer Continental Shelf (OCS)
Oil and Gas Activities Resulting from Damages Caused by Hurricanes Rita
and Katrina in 2005. August 8, 2006 (available at http://
www.docstoc.com/docs/6798709/Estimated-Petroleum-Spillage-from-
Facilities-Associated-with).
\33\ U.S. Minerals Management Service. News Release. MMS Updates
Hurricanes Katrina and Rita Damage. May 1, 2006.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fact, sea level rise and global climate disruption are already
making our coastal communities more vulnerable; further reliance on
fossil fuels, installation of offshore energy facilities, and the
industrialization of the Atlantic Ocean can only exacerbate the
problems facing the coasts.
Seven years after Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy struck the
Atlantic coast, making landfall in New Jersey on October 29, 2012. A
Federal disaster area was declared by President Obama for most States
in the region immediately after landfall. Two weeks later, on November
16, a Federal fisheries disaster area was declared for New York and New
Jersey under the citing Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and
Management Act (MSA) and the Interjurisdictional Fisheries Act
(IFA).\34\ After months of recovery, and promises of up to $60 billion
in disaster relief aid, New York and New Jersey, as well as many other
communities in the region, are still struggling to recover from the
storm, return to their communities, and rebuild their lives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Regional Impact Evaluation; An Initial Assessment of the
Economic Impacts of Sandy on New Jersey and New York Commercial and
Recreational Fishing Sectors. NOAA Fisheries, Office of Science &
Technology and Northeast Fisheries Science Center, March 15, 2013
(available at http://www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/Assets/economics/documents/
sandy/Final_Report_Sandy_
Regional_Impact_Evaluation_KMSA.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In New York, damages to the recreational fishing sector totaled $58
million ($36 million at marinas; $17 million at for hire companies; $5
million at bait and tackle shops) while damages to the commercial
fishing sector totaled $19 million ($9 million for seafood dealers; $5
million for federally-permitted commercial fishermen; $5 million for
seafood processors).\35\ In New Jersey, recreational fishing losses
exceeded $62 million ($30 million to marinas; $16 million to bait and
tackle shops; and $16 million to for-hire operations) and commercial
fishing losses exceeded $11 million for seafood dealers; $3 million to
federally-permitted commercial fishermen, and $100,000 to seafood
processors.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Regional Impact Evaluation; An Initial Assessment of the
Economic Impacts of Sandy on New Jersey and New York Commercial and
Recreational Fishing Sectors. NOAA Fisheries, Office of Science &
Technology and Northeast Fisheries Science Center, March 15, 2013
(available at http://www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/Assets/economics/documents/
sandy/Final_Report_Sandy_
Regional_Impact_Evaluation_MSA.pdf).
\36\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the aftermath of Superstorm Sandy, to add OCS oil and gas
operations and their dangerous risks to the already-full plate of the
Atlantic Ocean would devastate our natural resources and drastically
increase the burden on coastal marinas, regulators, citizens,
businesses, parks and wildlife refuges, and fishermen still looking to
rebuild or recover. For towns where half of the businesses are open,
where a only third of the tourists have returned, or where only a
quarter of the homes have been rebuilt, the answer is not to risk the
future with the fuels of the past; the answer is to reinvest in the
clean economies that brought in billions and employed millions before
Superstorm Sandy.
V. Endangering Long-Term Clean Ocean Economies Is Not in the Public
Interest
The push to expand offshore oil drilling all too often puts the
short term ahead of the long. As with any offshore fossil fuel project,
most of the job benefits claimed by oil companies are short-term--
installing and constructing facilities and pipelines. One facility
proposed for offshore New York, the Liberty LNG ``Port Ambrose''
project, would only generate up to 10 staff positions for the operation
of the port--4 of which are contingent on LNG deliveries.\37\ The long-
term, clean ocean economy jobs of the Atlantic coast, detailed above,
can suffer immediately (through increased competition and cost for dock
space, increased burdens on Coast Guard operations, and ecosystem
impacts from seismic surveys), as well as in the future (through oil
spills and leaks, tourism and recreation reductions, and multiple-use
at-sea conflicts).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Port Ambrose Socioeconomic Study (available at http://
portambrose.com/project-application-materials/volume-2-topic-6-
socioeconomics/).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The problem before us today is whether to support purported short-
term benefits of oil and gas activities in light of the actual short-
term losses and potential long-term vulnerabilities created in fishery,
tourism, recreation, and trade because of oil and gas. This
juxtaposition is rarely brought to the public's attention--that the
jobs promised by the oil companies would not be created in a vacuum.
This timeframe dichotomy is playing out in the world of energy
policy as well. ``While the United States may be a net importer of
crude oil, we are a net exporter of petroleum products, coal, and soon,
liquefied natural gas. Given that nonrenewable energy resources like
oil, gas, and coal are, by definition, not infinite, the issue is not
just how we produce energy domestically, but what we do with that
energy once it comes to market.''\38\ As with jobs, the national
discourse over oil production rarely presents the long-term, other-
industry issues pertinent to informed decisionmaking. Oil companies
extract U.S. domestic public resources for shipment to the top buyer
(whether that is overseas or not), solicit contractors who are the
bottom bidders, and have a clear set of economic and energy policy
priorities driven to maximize dividends, not the long term diverse
economic vibrancy of coastal communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ Dixon, Sean T. and Jonathan Panico, Extraction for
Exportation: Is There Such a Thing As ``Net Energy Independence''?
Natural Resources & Environment Volume 27, Number 3, Winter 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As has been stated time and time again by elected officials,
coastal citizens, and, most recently the Mid Atlantic Fishery
Management Council, the long-term vitality of the existing uses and
users of the Atlantic Ocean depends on an oil-free ecosystem. In the
midst of an economic crisis, and in the wake of a devastating few years
of Atlantic Ocean hurricanes, employers on fishing boats, boardwalks,
and beaches are just beginning to restore the industries that took
generations to build.
VI. Offshore Energy and Jobs Act Conclusions
The Atlantic Coast has been home to centuries of fishing, tourism
and trade; the people that live along the Nation's densest coastline
continue those traditions. From the recreational fisheries of Florida
to the commercial fisheries of Maine, the crabbing in the Chesapeake to
the sailing in Long Island Sound, these clean ocean economies drive our
coastal communities, our Coastal States, and our Nation. Billions of
dollars and millions of jobs are built within a delicately balanced
ecosystem, each relying on the other, and each relying on a clean
ecosystem.
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act of 2013 will threaten this
balance, immediately and with long-lasting impact.
Over the long history of the New York/New Jersey region, we have
learned that the ocean does not mix with toxins, medical waste, or acid
waste--at least not if the goal for the region is one of robust
fisheries and packed beaches. In the wake of Hurricanes Rita and
Katrina, and the BP Deepwater Horizon oil disaster, we re-learned the
lesson that oil and water do not mix.
Instead of turning our back on history, we should turn towards
those ocean uses that can have clean, productive futures, help those
that are still struggling after Hurricane Sandy, and move forward with
a clean ocean future.
Oil and gas moves with water and wind and is not contained by
political boundaries. When the oil well blows, or oil spills from a
pipe or platform, or leaks from a tanker--oil spreads rapidly and
contaminates everything in its way whether it's marine life, coastal
wetlands, the seafloor, or beaches. We continue to learn about the long
term ecological impact from the BP oil disaster. The myriad other
impacts generated by expanded offshore OCS activities, from seismic
surveys to non-point source pollution and air emissions, are similarly
unconstrained by political boundaries.
H.R. 2231's activation of OCS operations anywhere in the Atlantic
Ocean threatens the ecology, and therefore economy of the entire
Atlantic coast.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
______

The Chairman. And now I recognize Ms. Ryan Alexander,
President of Taxpayers for Common Sense. You are recognized for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MS. RYAN ALEXANDER, PRESIDENT, TAXPAYERS FOR
COMMON SENSE

Ms. Alexander. Thank you, Chairman Hastings and members of
the Committee.
The mission of Taxpayers for Common Sense is to achieve a
government that spends taxpayer dollars responsibly and
operates within its means. Over the last 17 years, TCS has
worked actively to ensure that taxpayers receive a fair return
to resources extracted from Federal lands and waters. As the
rightful owners, taxpayers have the right to fair market
compensation for the resources extracted from our lands and
waters, just like any private land owner.
Today's hearing to examine legislation to increase energy
production in Federal waters is certainly an important
discussion. Without any oil and gas extraction, taxpayers would
lose important royalty revenue altogether. But simply providing
greater access for offshore activities and not addressing the
larger royalty collection problems will not provide a solid
basis for the long-term solution to our Nation's financial
troubles, and could also lead to greater taxpayer liabilities
down the road.
In addition, altering the State-Federal revenue shares for
offshore drilling, as the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act
proposes, would siphon valuable revenue from the Federal
coffers for decades to come.
Natural resources derived from Federal lands and waters can
and do provide great benefit for entire Nation. In addition,
their end use and overall domestic economic benefit, their
extraction provides valuable revenue to the Federal coffers
with a potential to provide much more. To this end, Federal
lands and waters must be mined, drilled, and otherwise
developed in a manner that protects taxpayers' interests.
Appropriate fees, rents, and royalties must be collected, and
long-term liabilities, such as potential cleanup or mitigation
costs, must be shouldered by the extractive industries, not the
taxpayers. TCS believes in fix-it first. While federally owned
natural resources currently provide around $10 billion to the
Federal Treasury, this amount falls dramatically short of what
is rightfully owed to Federal taxpayers. For example, the
taxpayers are currently losing billions of dollars on royalty-
free oil and gas leases in the Gulf of Mexico. We must fix
these problems so that we recoup what we are owed before moving
forward. Taxpayers for Common Sense is opposed to any
legislative measure that would allow States to receive a
greater percentage of oil and gas revenues than is allowed
under traditional Federal and State revenue-sharing provisions
for royalty payments.
We oppose any measure to direct any additional percentage
of royalties collected on new leases in Federal waters to the
States. Further, we would like to see the revenue-sharing
provisions of GOMESA, the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act,
repealed and the original Federal-State shares reinstated.
Revenues from traditionally defined Federal waters must be
directed to the Federal Treasury. To be clear, TCS is not
opposed to offshore drilling or to opening up more areas in
Federal waters for drilling. Additional Federal resources can
be derived from new drilling, and Federal taxpayers, the
rightful owner of these resources, should receive the revenue.
Determining whether it is in the national interest to drill
should include an evaluation of offshore resources and
potential income and also potential long-term liabilities and
risks of those liabilities.
Federal taxpayers are due the royalties derived from leases
operating in Federal waters because those waters are
administered, protected, and managed by Federal, not State,
agencies at a cost to Federal taxpayers. Federal taxpayers
funding agencies charged with royalty collection and lease
regulation. Additionally, the U.S. Coast Guard, not the States,
inspects and regulates the offshore drilling rigs. It also
performs vessel regulation, search and rescue, security, and
pollution response.
Unlike onshore energy operations, offshore energy
operations do not occur in any State. The impact of operations
beyond State waters has national implications. States do get
the money from waters dedicated to the States under Federal
law, and we believe this should continue in any new drilling in
State waters. In addition, they get economic development
benefits from energy operations in Federal waters near their
coasts. But all Americans should get the revenue from
royalties, rents, and bonus bids in Federal waters. These
waters are more than 6 miles from the coast and 9 miles in
parts of the Gulf of Mexico. State waters are within 3 miles of
their respective shorelines.
The changes made in the 2006 GOMESA legislation, which gave
the Gulf States a larger share of Federal revenues, demonstrate
how large the revenue losses can be to Federal taxpayers and
may result in up to $500 million in annual revenues from
Federal waters diverted to the States. The new revenue-sharing
provisions of H.R. 2231 would extend those revenue-sharing
provisions to new leases, resulting in an additional multi-
billion dollar loss to taxpayers.
Expanding revenue shares in Federal waters, as proposed in
H.R. 2231, also presents a logistical nightmare. The Federal
Government manages and secures operations off our coasts, and
the taxpayer bears the costs of these services. The impact of
drilling in Federal waters have national implications. Costs
and benefits should be carried out in the interests of all
Americans, not a handful of Coastal States.
The country is now facing a $17 trillion debt and across-
the-board budget cuts. Many things need to be done to resolve
the Nation's fiscal woes, not least of which is ensuring
Federal taxpayers get the revenue they deserve for the
resources they own. The bottom line is that Federal lands and
waters must be used responsibly, and taxpayers must receive
appropriate financial assurances from those companies
benefiting from resource extraction. Providing increased access
without addressing future taxpayers costs is fiscally
irresponsible and could cost taxpayers billions. Giving
additional money from Federal resources to the States will
simply compound our budget problems. H.R. 2231 raises important
fiscal issues but should be revised with the primacy of the
Federal taxpayer in mind. One second.
The Chairman. That was an excellent job. Thank you. Right
to the second.
You will get a special award; I don't know what it is, but
you will be recognized.
Thank you very much, all four of you, for your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Alexander follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ms. Ryan Alexander, President, Taxpayers for
Common Sense
Good morning Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and
distinguished members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify today on the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act, H.R. 2231. My
name is Ryan Alexander and I am President of Taxpayers for Common Sense
(TCS), a national, non-partisan budget watchdog organization.
The mission of Taxpayers for Common Sense is to achieve a
government that spends taxpayer dollars responsibly and operates within
its means. Over the last 17 years, TCS has worked actively to ensure
that taxpayers receive a fair return on resources extracted from
Federal lands and waters. Royalties and fees collected from resource
development represent a significant source of income for the Federal
Government and must be collected, managed and accounted for in a fair
and accurate manner. As the rightful owners, taxpayers have the right
to fair market compensation for the resources extracted from our lands
and waters, just like any private landowner.
Unfortunately, over the years taxpayers have lost billions on
royalty-free oil and gas leases and royalty-free hard rock mineral
operations on Federal lands. Taxpayers have also lost because of a
corrupt and inadequate royalty collection system and outdated laws. In
today's budget climate, we cannot afford to lose this valuable revenue.
These problems must be resolved as we move forward with additional
mining and energy production on Federal lands and waters.
Today's hearing to examine legislation to increase energy
production in Federal waters is certainly an important discussion.
Without any oil and gas extraction, taxpayers would lose important
royalty revenue altogether. But simply providing greater access for
offshore activities and not addressing the larger royalty collection
problems will not provide a solid basis for the long-term solution to
our Nation's financial troubles and could also lead to greater taxpayer
liabilities down the road. In addition, altering the State-Federal
revenue shares for offshore drilling, as the ``Offshore and Jobs Act''
proposes, would siphon valuable revenue from the Federal coffers for
decades to come. At a time when we should be discussing how to bring in
more revenue--not less--to the Federal Treasury, this policy would not
only be costly, but also short-sighted.
This morning, I would like to first discuss the need for fair
return for all resource extraction on Federal lands and waters. Then I
would like to address several concerns with the changes that H.R. 2231
would make to the existing Federal-State revenue sharing provisions for
offshore oil and gas extraction.
Energy Legislation Must Ensure Fair and Accurate Collection of Revenues
for Extraction of our Federal Resources
Natural resources derived from Federal lands and waters can and do
provide great benefit to the entire Nation. In addition to their end
use and overall domestic economic benefit, their extraction provides
valuable revenue to Federal coffers, with the potential to provide much
more.
To this end, Federal lands and waters must be mined, drilled or
otherwise developed in a manner that protects taxpayers' interests.
Appropriate fees, rents and royalties must be collected and long-term
liabilities such as potential clean-up or mitigation costs must be
shouldered by the extractive industries, not by taxpayers.
TCS believes in ``fix it first.'' While federally owned natural
resources currently provide around $10 billion to the Treasury, this
amount falls dramatically short of what is rightfully owed to the
Federal Treasury. For example, the taxpayers are currently losing
billions of dollars on royalty-free oil and gas leases in the Gulf of
Mexico, as well as royalty-free operations for hard rock mineral
extraction on Federal lands. We must fix these problems so that we can
recoup what we are owed before moving forward.
Royalty Revenue Falls Short
TCS believes there are many areas where reform is needed to ensure
fair and accurate royalty collection. First, the Federal Government
must have a clear, transparent collection system that has sufficient
oversight and accountability. The many scandals that plagued the
Minerals Management Service (MMS), the agency that for nearly three
decades ran the Government's royalty collection system, demonstrated
how corrupted the system can become.
For years the Government Accountability Office (GAO) has found that
the Department of the Interior has not done enough to monitor and
evaluate its royalty collections. GAO has included royalty collection
in its last two reports on high-risk Federal programs and activities. A
report in 2008 found that the DOI had not reviewed how it was
compensated for extracted oil and gas from public lands for more than
25 years and had no system in place to even determine whether or not
such a reassessment was needed. A 2010 study found that DOI had no way
to determine if it was accurately measuring the amount of resources
taken from public lands, making it unlikely the Federal Government is
being fairly compensated. On top of these collection issues, the United
States has some of the lowest underlying royalty rates in the world.
Other reforms to existing onshore oil and gas operations could also
provide more valuable revenue for taxpayers. In 2010, GAO found that
taxpayers would receive $23 million more in royalty revenue annually
from additional natural gas obtained from Federal lands, if companies
were required to capture vented or flared natural gas in cases where it
is economically feasible.
At the same time that Federal taxpayers are not assured of adequate
royalty collection, they are also being asked to provide revenue from
offshore leases in Federal waters to the States. The Gulf of Mexico
Energy Security Act (GOMESA) already directs a portion of revenue
derived from new leases in Federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico to the
States rather than to Federal taxpayers. Since 2006, this law has cost
taxpayers more than a billion dollars. and it will cost billions more
in the years ahead. I will address this issue further in a moment.
Problems With Restructuring at DOI
Although the MMS has been dismantled, the Department of the
Interior's new royalty management structure is still a work-in-
progress. Since royalty collection has remained on the GAO's high-risk
list, despite the new system at DOI under the Office of Natural
Resources Revenue, it seems like the agency still has work to do in
this area. Until this new system demonstrates it can effectively manage
our taxpayer resources and collect royalties from existing operations
on Federal lands, it would be premature to add to their portfolio a new
category of leases without assurances that taxpayers are being
protected.
While H.R. 2231 addresses the new system at the DOI by codifying it
into Federal law, it would change little in the current system. Under
existing law, the Secretary of the Interior has the authority make
these changes and has proceeded with the dismantling of the Minerals
Management Service and the restructure of the Office of Natural
Resources Revenue. Further, H.R. 2231 adds layers to the bureaucracy at
DOI, with the addition of a new undersecretary and two assistant
secretaries. These new layers of political appointees will not only
cost taxpayer money to fund, they will create more red tape in
processing and executing leases and royalty collection fairly and
efficiently.
Finally, while TCS applauds H.R. 2231's application of the user-
pays principle for requiring inspection fees to fall on the oil and gas
industry not Federal taxpayers, we are concerned that fixing the price
for the inspections prematurely could lead to taxpayers footing the
bill for any additional inspection costs.
State Revenue-Sharing Changes Proposed in H.R. 2231
Taxpayers for Common Sense is opposed to any legislative measure
that would allow States to receive a greater percentage of oil and gas
revenues than is allowed under existing Federal-State revenue-sharing
provisions for royalty payments. We oppose any measure to direct any
additional percentage of royalties collected on new leases in Federal
waters to the States. Further, we would like to see the revenue-sharing
provisions of GOMESA repealed and the original Federal/State shares
reinstated. Revenues from traditionally defined Federal waters must be
directed to the Federal Treasury.
To be clear, TCS is not opposed to offshore drilling or to opening
up more areas in Federal waters for drilling. Additional Federal
resources can be derived from new drilling, and Federal taxpayers, the
rightful owners of those resources, should receive that revenue. We
believe with proper taxpayer safeguards and the application of fair
market royalties, Federal resources can and must be used to meet our
Nation's energy, transportation, and mineral needs. Determining whether
it is in the national interest to drill should include an evaluation of
offshore resources and potential income, and also potential long-term
liabilities and the risk of those liabilities.
Revenue-sharing provisions, like those proposed in H.R. 2231,
siphon billions of dollars in valuable revenue from the general
Treasury. Not only is this bad policy, in today's fiscal climate it is
downright foolish. Providing an increased share to the States would do
nothing to encourage energy development, as it doesn't affect the
bottom line of the oil and gas, wind, or other offshore developers--
they would owe the same royalties, rents, and fees at the end of the
day either to the States or to the Federal Government. Thus, it reduces
Federal revenues without adding any incentive toward energy
development.
Federal taxpayers are due the royalties derived from leases
operating in Federal waters because those waters are administered,
protected, and managed by Federal--not State--agencies at a cost to
Federal taxpayers. Federal taxpayers fund the agencies charged with
royalty collection and lease regulations. Additionally, the U.S. Coast
Guard, not the States, inspects and regulates the offshore drilling
rigs; it also performs vessel regulation, search and rescue, security,
and pollution response. Unlike onshore energy operations, offshore
energy operations do not occur in any State. The impact of operations
beyond State waters reaches well beyond any one State and has national
implications.
States do get the money from waters dedicated to the States under
Federal law and we believe this should continue in any new drilling in
State waters. In addition, they get economic development benefits from
energy operations in Federal waters near their coasts. But all
Americans should get the revenue from royalties, rents and bonus bids
in Federal waters. These waters are more than 6 miles from the coast
and 9 miles in parts of the Gulf of Mexico. State waters are within 3
miles of their respective shoreline.
The changes made in the 2006 GOMESA legislation, which gave the
Gulf States a larger share of Federal revenues, demonstrate how large
the revenue losses can be to Federal taxpayers. Under GOMESA, Gulf
States receive 37.5 percent of the royalty income from certain newly
opened areas in Federal waters of the gulf. Beginning in 2016 they will
receive 37.5 percent of royalties from new leases throughout the gulf's
Federal waters, up to $500 million annually. The new revenue-sharing
provisions of H.R. 2231 would extend these revenue-sharing provisions
to new leases, resulting in an addition multi-billion dollar loss to
the taxpayers.
Expanding revenue shares into Federal waters, as proposed in H.R.
2231, also presents a logistical nightmare. Beyond the limited State
waters designated in Federal law (extending 3 to 6 miles from shore),
there are simply no State boundaries in Federal waters. Drawing
boundaries for States and determining the recipient for the increased
State revenues for waters so far offshore would be a legal and
technical nightmare. The division of revenue among the States in the
GOMESA legislation represented a political compromise that would be
indefinitely more complicated along other U.S. coasts.
For example, States with concave or convex coastlines may have
difficulty determining boundaries or agreeing on where their State's
interests lie. The proposal for leasing wind offshore Rhode Island and
Massachusetts was delayed nearly a year by negotiations between the
States, and other areas along the east coast could yield similar
conflicts.
Royalties collected from offshore drilling in Federal waters should
be returned to the rightful resource owner, the Federal taxpayer.
States receive revenue from royalties collected within State waters and
the transitional area between State and Federal waters (3-6 miles from
shore). The Federal Government manages and secures operations off our
coasts and the taxpayer bears the cost of these services. The impacts
of drilling in Federal waters have national implications. Costs and
benefits should be carried out in the interest of all Americans, not a
handful of Coastal States. Additionally, relying on this money to pay
for today's infrastructure needs is bad budget policy.
Conclusion
The country is now facing a $17 trillion debt and across the board
budget cuts. Many things need to be done to resolve the Nation's fiscal
woes, not the least of which is ensuring Federal taxpayers get the
revenue they deserve for the resources they own.
All resources extracted from Federal lands must provide Federal
taxpayers with fair market revenue. It is imperative that energy
legislation address these problems.
Making more natural resources available, without ensuring
recoupment of what taxpayers are already owed for current and past
operations, is likely to only ensure inadequate collection of royalties
on new leases and to perpetuate the existing flawed system for even
longer. Without legislation to address the existing problems, taxpayers
will continue to lose valuable revenue--revenue that can be used to
address our Nation's budget deficit.
The bottom line is that Federal lands and waters must be used
responsibly and taxpayers must receive appropriate financial assurances
from those companies benefiting from resource extraction. Without
proper assurances, any future financial liabilities will fall on the
shoulders of taxpayers. Providing increased access without addressing
future taxpayer costs is fiscally irresponsible and could cost
taxpayers billions. Giving additional money from Federal resources to
the States will simply compound our budget problems. H.R. 2231 raises
important fiscal issues, but should be revised with the primacy of the
Federal taxpayers in mind.
______

The Chairman. I will now recognize the gentleman from
California, Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I concur with you.
Ms. Alexander, right on the mark.
I have many issues with this legislation. Including the
opening up of new leases off to the coast of southern
California. As I have stated at length before the Committee
last week, but my first question today focuses for NEPA, the
National Environmental Policy Act, which is in this bill. There
is another attempt to limit the important law that provides an
opportunity for public oversight prior to the Federal
Government taking a major action, something I think we should
all be for.
And this question is for both Mr. Boesch and Mr. LeVine.
Mr. Boesch and Mr. LeVine, this legislation before us mandates
the Interior Department to prepare only one Environmental
Impact Study for all the Outer Continental Shelf lands. And
that would be open, that is Virginia, South Carolina, southern
California. My question is, do you think the OCS lands, the
geology, the subsurface environments, including the
exploration, development, and cleanup risks, are the same or
different off of Virginia as they are off of South Carolina,
and as they are off of southern California? First question is,
are they the same or different?
Dr. Boesch. Well, I think, obviously, they are different.
Even in our Commission investigation of the Deepwater Horizon
incident, we actually uncovered a lot of differences within the
Gulf of Mexico that were not taken into account in terms of the
planning, environmental assessments, and so on, that were done
prior to the spill. And so they do require some very specific
analysis related to the environments in question.
One thing just because I read it this morning in The
Washington Post, of note that is relevant I think to specific
provisions of this bill is that there was announcement of a
discovery of some very unusual, unique long-life cold-water
corals in Norfolk Canyon, right off the Virginia coast, right
in the center of the area which is proposed for leasing. Some
of these corals are the same kinds of corals which were killed
by this deepwater plume that happened in the Gulf of Mexico. So
it brings to the point where you really have to take into
effect the specific conditions that exist in those locations.
Mr. Lowenthal. So then the follow-up question is, and I
will ask Mr. LeVine, so obviously we are only doing one EIS. Is
one EIS sufficient?
Mr. LeVine. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Lowenthal, you began the
question with the right statement, which is the importance of
the National Environmental Policy Act. It is a statute designed
to foster good decisionmaking. Where it requires the Federal
Government to look at the potential impacts and alternatives of
proposed activities in order to figure out which course of
action to take. It is not an action-forcing statute, it is an
analysis statute designed to foster better decisionmaking. And
the broader the scope, the larger the area analyzed, the more
differences, the more difficult it is to get at the proper
level of information needed to guide a good decision. It is
important to note what the Government is doing at the lease-
sale stage. It is deciding where, when, and under what
conditions to offer public resources to companies for sale. And
not only is one EIS not sufficient, it may very well be that
one EIS for each of these planning areas, which can cover tens
of millions of acres is not sufficient and that we need to look
even more carefully at the distinct resources and threats in
the various areas.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
Dr. Boesch, you state in your testimony that the relatively
modest liability cap and financial responsibility requirements
provide little incentive for oil companies to improve safety
practices. Can you elaborate on that statement?
Dr. Boesch. Well, if the risk of a major accident is capped
at a fairly modest level, $75 million when the consequences can
go into the billions, it is in the interest of the company then
to let someone else bear that responsibility. In the Deepwater
Horizon spill in a way we were fortunate to have a company, BP,
which had deep pockets and could find the resources to deal
with responding to this spill and also felt it was responsible,
it didn't have to do that under the law, under the existing
liability required under the oil pollution.
Mr. Lowenthal. So then you think that Congress should be
raising the liability cap for offshore oil spills that will
make sure that taxpayers are not held responsible and oil
companies have an incentive to improve their safety?
Dr. Boesch. We have a specific recommendation in our report
to that very effect. We do not specify the level. We think it
probably shouldn't be unlimited, but there should be a process
with Congress to determine what that level should be.
Mr. Lowenthal. Mr. LeVine, do you agree?
Mr. LeVine. Absolutely.
Mr. Lowenthal. And also, Mr. Dixon.
Mr. Dixon. Anything that puts oil drilling off the coast
should not be encouraged. It is something that really destroys
too many jobs and too many ecologies, and the clean ocean
economies that depend thereon.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dixon, you made my ears prick. We have the great
benefit in Florida that we don't have offshore oil drilling,
and then you mentioned Florida. I didn't see Florida anywhere
in here. Where is it?
Mr. Dixon. In the bill itself, is that your question?
Mr. Garcia. Yes.
Mr. Dixon. In the ocean, the oil drilling knows no
political bounds. One of the biggest problems that we are
facing right now is the Active Seismic Surveys Proposal, which
is going to affect Florida. It is going to bring seismic airgun
blasts from the middle of Florida all the way up to Delaware.
So that is something that can immediately create impacts in
marine mammal populations. And actually the testimony in front
of the Mid-Atlantic Fishery Management Council said that would
also lead to a 50-meter kill zone around each airgun array.
So when you have a shelf, Continental Shelf that leads to
productive fisheries, lots of recreational fisheries, and lots
of coastal tourism, having something like seismic surveys,
which are part and parcel on any offshore oil exploration, can
definitely have immediate impacts to Florida. Also, when oil
drilling is allowed in places like the gulf, you see problems
with tourism. After the BP Deepwater Horizon, when there was
very little oil that actually made it in Florida waters, it
still affected tourism, it affected the perception of the
availability of that coast for tourists to come visit. So these
all have multifaceted impacts at the end of the day.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
Mr. Boesch, well, I guess I can ask all of you, I mean,
from my reading here what staff has prepared, there are
literally millions of miles offshore already leased. So tell me
why we are not exploring that? Why do we need to go toward
this? Maybe we will start on the left and go to the right.
Dr. Boesch. Well, I can't answer the question specifically
other than the fact that there are leases being held which have
not yet been developed. In the Gulf of Mexico, in particular,
is extending deeper and deeper waters where there are larger
and larger reserves being found. So I think if you look at
where the industry has elected to put its resources in terms of
its exploration, it is there rather than these other frontier
areas at the moment.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. LeVine.
Mr. LeVine. Mr. Garcia, I will take you far from Florida to
Alaska, where oil companies own roughly 3 million acres of
leases purchased all more than 5 years ago. They have yet to
complete a single exploration well on any of those leases,
largely due to the lack of attention to detail and forethought.
I described some the problems Shell has had.
Mr. Garcia. My colleagues across the aisle would say to you
these aren't stupid businessmen. They know what they are doing.
And why wouldn't they? If it was there, they would go for it.
They are not going for it because there must not be something
there for them to get.
Mr. LeVine. The companies are going for it. Shell, in
particular, has been trying to drill exploration wells for
several years. They have not managed to have appropriate
response and rescue equipment approved. In this past year, when
the company tried to bring its two drill rigs and assorted
vessels to the Arctic, it ran into a series of logistical
problems for which it wasn't prepared, resulting in the
grounding of the Kulluk. And both the drill rig and the drill
vessel being disabled. So it is less lack of companies trying
and more the Arctic Ocean telling them they can't do it right
now.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. Dixon.
Mr. Dixon. Thank you. One of the things that I would like
to address is a slightly different tack, and that is the one of
the energy exports. Right now, we are seeing that the United
States, for the first time in a very long time, is a net
petroleum product exporter. Keystone XL has several contracts
already slated for export. This is a global market, and energy
companies can send their product----
Mr. Garcia. You mean they are going to export that stuff?
Mr. Dixon. Through export, yes, through refineries. And so
what we are seeing right now in the natural gas situation is
that shale gas plays are being kept artificially low, the
production levels, which is why a lot of companies are now
applying to export gas as LNG overseas. We have already seen
under the current Natural Gas Act over 40 percent of our daily
domestic natural gases are already approved for construction if
the facilities are built. And so once those export
applications, then that petroleum product exports, once that
market really opens up, then a lot of these fields where oil
and gas have been kept in the ground until prices go up will be
opened.
Mr. Garcia. Ms. Alexander, I figure you just want them to
show you the money. So----
Ms. Alexander. Pretty much. Wherever they go, we want them
to show us the money. And I think the answer is this is
economics and logistics. People are going to develop wells and
drill where they can make money. And we want them, if it is in
Federal waters, to give the Federal taxpayer the money. So.
Mr. Garcia. When you proposition, is that State versus
Federal? Is that--what is----
Ms. Alexander. I think essentially the existing revenue
share model requires that the revenue goes to the States in the
State waters, and there is a sharing zone of 3 to 6 miles. And
then in Federal waters, 6 miles off the coast, 9 miles in some
parts of the coast. Gulf of Mexico, those are Federal waters.
Federal agencies pay for all of the infrastructure around them
in terms of safety regulation inspection. And we think the
Federal taxpayers should get the dollars.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Ms. Alexander. Mr. Chairman, thank
you very much for your generosity.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. The
Chair recognizes the gentleman from Nevada, Mr. Horsford.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I support economic growth and smart energy development, but
my experience from Nevada is that we must work with local
communities when changing Federal policy. This bill would
curtail the National Environment Policy Act. And review by
requiring the Secretary of the Interior to conduct lease sales
off the coast of Virginia, South Carolina and California
regardless of the project's potential impacts. So I would like
to ask the panel's assessment to this bill's impact on other
areas. And specifically, around what types of enforcement,
penalties, and regulatory oversight should be maintained in any
type of review by the DOI?
Dr. Boesch. Well, I think, starting with your first part, I
mean, the interest in collaboration with the States, Coastal
States, is important. I actually think that it merits some
level of revenue sharing to offset the impacts that take place,
not to support the general treasuries of those States. The
other point I would like to make is that, as was mentioned
before, oil development offshore or oil spills know no
boundaries. And so, for example, a proposal to develop the area
off of Virginia, that area is the same distance from Ocean
City, Maryland, where I live in Maryland, as it is to Virginia
Beach, Virginia. So it has to be multiple States who play a
role in this decisionmaking.
Mr. LeVine. Thank you. I would refer you in part to Dr.
Boesch and his colleagues' report from the National Commission
of Deepwater Horizon for recommendations on oversight and
changes in law and regulations that are needed to more
appropriately manage these activities. Also, I would say that
in addition to working with States, you need to work more
closely with communities. If we are going to craft a lasting
solution for oceans that allows for healthy ecosystems and
affordable energy, we need to work with the communities,
including the small coastal communities, like those in Alaska
and the tribes that have sovereign rights in order to figure
out how we can move forward to protect local interests while
best achieving benefits for the American public as a whole.
Mr. Dixon. Thank you for the great question. One of the two
points that I want to make here on communities is that these
decisions that we are making on oil drilling don't exist in a
vacuum. As I mentioned in my testimony, there are thousands and
thousands of jobs in every one of these communities that are
dependent on that community's access to a clean and healthy
ocean. When you are deciding whether or not to allow oil
drilling offshore, all of those decisions need to be made with
respect to the existing economies of the clean ocean area.
And second, I would like to point out that in our region,
in New York and New Jersey, and around the greater New York
region, Sandy really left a trail of devastation that has
affected the communities' ability to even manage its own
existing environmental programs. Our communities are still
vulnerable, our beaches aren't yet reconstructed. And during
the storm, a tanker ran aground. Lots of hazardous waste went
into the ocean and ecology. And these agencies at State and
local levels are already overwhelmed with recovery efforts. To
add in a whole process of permitting oil pollution as well as
perhaps preparing for the risk of oil spills is something that
should not burden those communities at the moment.
Mr. Horsford. Quickly, because I have a follow-up.
Ms. Alexander. Go ahead with your follow-up; this is a
regulatory question.
Mr. Horsford. So, yes or no, just quickly, do you feel
there should be increased liability caps under the legislation,
and do you feel that the DOI should be able to levy against
companies who violate the laws so that there is some financial
deterrent? Yes or no?
Mr. LeVine. Yes to both questions, emphatically.
Mr. Dixon. I would say unlimited liability. The polluter
should pay.
Ms. Alexander. Yes, I would say increase caps.
Mr. Horsford. And is there a need to codify any of the
safety reforms that the DOI already has in place? Yes or no?
Dr. Boesch. Yes, there is. And this bill, as I said, does
that and to an extent by making sure in the statute those
functions are separated. However, it does it not in an
appropriate level of separation.
Mr. LeVine. Yes. The safety changes that have been made are
a good start, but they are not sufficient. Not only do we need
to codify changes that have been made, we need to think more
broadly about additional changes that should be made. And not
just safety, but how we are making decisions about whether to
allow these activities and under what conditions.
Mr. Dixon. I would echo that. When you have got a
legislative system that sets up allowing oil and gas that
doesn't allow other uses to take precedence, then that is a
failed system.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired. I want
to thank the witnesses. Many times, questions arise after we
adjourn. So I would ask you that if any member wishes to ask a
question of the witnesses that you respond in writing,
obviously, to the Full Committee in a very timely manner.
I would also like to ask unanimous consent that any member
that wishes to have a statement in the record today have that
statement to the Committee by the close of business today. And
without objection, so ordered.
If there is no business coming before the Committee, the
Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:40 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

[Additional Material Submitted for the Record]

Letter Submitted for the Record by The Honorable Lois Capps
Congress of the United States,
House of Representatives,
Washington, DC, June 11, 2013.
Chairman Doc Hastings,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Natural Resources,
Washington, DC 20515.

Ranking Member Edward J. Markey,
U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Natural Resources,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman Hastings and Ranking Member Markey,

I write in strong opposition to the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act
currently being considered by your Committee.
This proposed legislation mandates immediate oil and gas lease
sales off the coasts of my district in Santa Barbara and Ventura
Counties, despite the communities' well-known, long standing bipartisan
opposition to new drilling in these areas. Santa Barbara's devastating
1969 oil spill galvanized central coast residents, and virtually the
whole State, against more offshore drilling. We were outraged by the
damage to the environment and wildlife. And we understood the havoc
that similar blowouts would wreak on our economy--especially tourism
and fishing, and related industries. That's why Californians led the
fight to pass groundbreaking environmental laws like the National
Environmental Policy Act and Coastal Zone Management Act to protect our
coastline and communities from the devastation that the 1969 oil spill
brought to Santa Barbara.
The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act puts the central coast at risk
again by requiring an offshore lease sale in the Santa Maria, Santa
Barbara and Ventura Basins by the end of next year. To make matters
worse, the bill would also prevent proper environmental review of these
lease sales by requiring a single multi-sale environmental impact
statement that covers lease sales off both the west and east coasts.
Such EIS documents are usually done only for lease sales in areas like
the Gulf of Mexico, where the conditions are well known and similar.
Furthermore, this legislation would do nothing to implement key safety
reforms recommended by the BP Spill Commission and others, including
increasing the spill liability cap and codifying the safety reforms
already put in place.
Mandating destructive drilling in communities that do not want it,
while cutting-out proper environmental review might be good policy for
oil companies, but it is bard policy for my constituents and it is bad
energy policy for our Nation. The Offshore Energy and Jobs Act is
misguided and unnecessary, and I strongly oppose it.
Sincerely,
Lois Capps,
Member of Congress.
______

Prepared Statement of The Honorable Kathy Castor, a Representative in
Congress From the State of Florida
My district, the 14th of Florida, borders the Gulf of Mexico.
Thirty percent of U.S. oil production occurs in the gulf. The citizens
and businesses I represent learned and lived a very tough lesson after
the BP Deepwater Horizon blowout in 2010. I have great concerns on H.R.
2231, the Offshore Energy and Jobs Act, which would open up much of the
east coast and parts of California and Alaska to offshore oil drilling.
I commend the Committee for not including the eastern Gulf of Mexico in
this piece of legislation. However, in light of the catastrophic
economic and environmental damages caused by the 2010 BP Deepwater
Horizon oil disaster, no offshore oil drilling legislation should move
forward until Congress adopts the recommendations made by the National
Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling,
which was co-chaired by former U.S. Senator Bob Graham of Florida.
These recommendations include requiring offshore operators to
demonstrate that well components, including blowout preventer stacks,
are equipped with sensors or other tools to obtain accurate diagnostic
information and to raise the liability cap and financial responsibility
requirements for offshore facilities, among others.
The 125 mile buffer off the west coast of the State of Florida that
was instituted in 2006 as a compromise agreement in the Gulf of Mexico
Energy and Security Act (GOMESA) should be made permanent--Florida and
the other Gulf States have already compromised to expand oil
production. The ``buffer'' or ``moratorium'' on drilling in the eastern
Gulf of Mexico, that was given in exchange for the expansion of oil
drilling in GOMESA, is vital to the protection of Florida's economy,
the Panhandle military bases and other national security missions.
While H.R. 2231 does not open up this area for drilling, I am concerned
about the potential harm to Florida from an east coast State oil spill.
Florida's tourism, fish and wildlife, ports, and defense related
industries generate over $175 billion in economic benefits and over 2.2
million jobs for Floridians per year. The 2010 BP Oil Disaster was a
stark reminder that Florida's long-term economic health is dependent
upon clean water and clean beaches. Therefore, in the same spirit as
the GOMESA compromise, if there will be an expansion of oil exploration
the bill should include the trade-off of adopting the recommendations
made by the National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
and Offshore Drilling (i.e., requiring, among other things, offshore
operators to demonstrate that well components, including blowout
preventer stacks, are equipped with sensors or other tools to obtain
accurate diagnostic information and to raise the liability cap and
financial responsibility requirements for offshore facilities.)
The BP Oil Disaster, the largest oil spill in U.S. history, killed
11 workers and uncontrollably spewed almost 5 million barrels of oil
into the Gulf of Mexico for 3 months, devastating the gulf coast
economy. The BP Deepwater Horizon explosion occurred 300 miles off the
coast of west central Florida, yet it is estimated to cost Florida $2.2
billion and almost 40,000 jobs. Small businesses in the tourism
industry were immediately affected by the disaster, even in cities and
counties hundreds of miles away from the furthest extent of the oiled
beaches. The perception was enough to scare off tourists who are vital
to Florida's economy. The food, beverage and lodging industries saw
significant decline in sales, along with retail stores and the fishing
industry. It will some time before we know the full extent of gulf-wide
economic and environmental damages as a result of the BP Oil Disaster.
The RESTORE Act of 2012 was certainly a step in the right direction
for the economic and environmental recovery of the gulf coast, but it
was only one part of the equation. While there is no guarantee another
devastating spill will never occur, we can take steps to reduce the
likelihood and severity of an oil spill. I urge the Committee to adopt
the National Commission's recommendations.
H.R. 2231 would threaten tourism, fishing, and coastal environments
by requiring new, unsafe drilling off the coasts of the majority of
Eastern States, and parts of California and Alaska, even while domestic
oil production is at a 20-year high, natural gas production is at an
all-time high, and domestic production is projected to keep rising.
H.R. 2231 would do virtually nothing to implement key safety reforms in
the wake of the BP Deepwater Horizon oil disaster and it would expand
the amount of Federal revenue diverted to the States during this
Federal budget crisis. This legislation rewards wealthy corporations
with new leases in sensitive areas off our coasts, despite the fact
that they are sitting on 30 million acres worth of approved leases. The
bill also leaves in place the massive tax breaks these companies have
enjoyed for a century.
______

Letter Submitted for the Record by Senator Hannah-Beth Jackson
California State Senate,
Nineteenth Senate District,
Sacramento, CA, June 6, 2013.
The Honorable Alan S. Lowenthal,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources,
Committee on Natural Resources,
Washington, D.C. 20515.

Dear Congressman Lowenthal:

The People of Santa Barbara County and the State of California have
a long history opposing off-shore oil drilling along our magnificent
coast. We vehemently oppose any further efforts to despoil our
beautiful and pristine waters in the name of oil or any other fossil
fuels. Now is the time to wean ourselves off dirty and polluting oil
and find clean and sustainable ways to provide the energy we need.
At a time when we are seeing severe weather events throughout the
Nation and world, we should be reducing our use of fossil fuels, not
drilling even further in our pristine waters for more of them. It would
be irresponsible to allow our coast to be despoiled by such folly. Not
now, not ever again.
Thank you for your support on this issue.
Sincerely,
Hanna-Beth Jackson
Senator, 19th District
______

Prepared Statement of The Honorable David E. Price, a Representative in
Congress From the State of North Carolina
I am writing in opposition to Rep. Hastings' H.R. 2231, the
``Offshore Energy and Jobs Act,'' which would dramatically and hastily
expand oil and gas drilling in our Nation's most sensitive coastal
areas, including many areas where local communities have resoundingly
rejected it.
First, this legislation claims to be a jobs bill, but I want to
remind the Committee that oil and gas production is already a growth
industry. Despite the rhetoric we hear from the oil and gas industry,
the Congressional Research Service found that there has been more oil
produced on the Outer Continental Shelf in every year of the Obama
Administration than there was during the last year of the Bush
Administration. Furthermore, although about two-thirds of Federal
offshore lands leased by the oil industry are currently not producing,
the Obama Administration has offered--and continues to offer--millions
of acres of public lands offshore for additional oil and gas
exploration and production.
This legislation takes no heed of this fact--nor of the fact that
the current offshore leasing plan will be updated in 2017--and instead
unnecessarily accelerates oil and gas production in new areas of the
Atlantic, Pacific, the gulf coast, and Alaska. Drilling is already
prominent in the Gulf of Mexico, where about 95 percent of our offshore
oil and gas is produced, but many of the newly proposed lease areas are
not appropriate for offshore drilling. In many of these areas, local
economies rely on clean and healthy oceans and communities have
resoundingly opposed offshore drilling.
In my home State of North Carolina, offshore drilling is highly
controversial because of its potential adverse impacts on the
environment and coastal communities, as well as the tourist economies
on which they depend. As you know, the Interior Department's current
OCS Gas Leasing Program recognized the risks of drilling off the
Atlantic coast and deferred a decision on oil and gas leasing in the
region. In its justification, the agency cited a ``lack of
infrastructure to support oil and gas exploration and development as
well as spill preparedness and response.'' There are also national
security concerns to be weighed as our armed forces and NASA maintain
extensive and exclusive use of ocean space along the east coast for
training and testing activities. For these reasons, I recently joined
several of my colleagues from North Carolina, Virginia, and South
Carolina in sending a letter to Interior Secretary Jewell expressing
continued opposition to offshore drilling on our coasts.
I am also concerned about oil and gas production in the Arctic. The
Arctic Ocean is characterized by hurricane-force storms, 20-foot
swells, sea ice up to 25 feet thick, sub-zero temperatures, and months-
long darkness. The U.S. Geological Survey concluded that major gaps in
scientific understanding of the Arctic make it ``difficult, if not
impossible'' to make informed decisions about oil and gas development
in the region. Furthermore, the President's National Oil Spill
Commission's report card on the progress that had been made in
implementing its 2011 recommendations concluded that ``additional work
must be done to understand the ecosystems of the Arctic and to
establish the infrastructure necessary to protect this vulnerable and
valuable region.''
In the years since the 2010 BP oil spill, Congress has not passed
any legislation to update our drilling procedures. While I am pleased
that this legislation would codify reforms the Administration has made
to the former Minerals Management Service, I urge you to bring these
reforms to the House in a stand-alone bill, not in a controversial bill
that opens the floodgates to new drilling.
My colleagues claim that they support an ``all of the above''
energy strategy, but this bill demonstrates that their true policy is
``oil above all''. We can't drill our way to cheap gas prices and
energy independence. If we truly want to optimize the use of our
resources--including the ocean--create jobs, and promote energy
independence, we should reject this measure and focus instead on
developing alternative energy sources that do not pose the same risks
as drilling.
______

The document listed below has been retained in the Committee's official
files.

--Oil Spill Commission Acton, Assessing Progress Three Years Later,
April 17, 2013 (http://oscaction.org/osca-assessment-report-
2013/)

[all]

