- LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 4293, TO AUTHORIZE THE APPROVAL OF NATURAL GAS PIPELINES AND ESTABLISH DEADLINES AND EXPEDITE PERMITS FOR CERTAIN NATURAL GAS GATHERING LINES ON FEDERAL LAND AND INDIAN LAND, ``NATURAL GAS GATHERING ENHANCEMENT ACT''; AND H.R. 1587, TO AUTHORIZE THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR AND THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TO ISSUE PERMITS FOR RIGHTS-OF-WAY, TEMPORARY EASEMENTS, OR OTHER NECESSARY AUTHORIZATIONS TO FACILITATE NATURAL GAS, OIL, AND PETROLEUM PRODUCT PIPELINES AND RELATED FACILITIES ON ELIGIBLE FEDERAL LANDS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES, ``ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT ACT''

[House Hearing, 113 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

H.R. 4293, ``NATURAL GAS GATHERING ENHANCEMENT ACT''; AND H.R. 1587,
``ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT ACT''

=======================================================================

LEGISLATIVE HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND
MINERAL RESOURCES

of the

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED THIRTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

Friday, June 20, 2014

__________

Serial No. 113-75

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Natural Resources

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
or
Committee address: http://naturalresources.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

88-391 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

DOC HASTINGS, WA, Chairman
PETER A. DeFAZIO, OR, Ranking Democratic Member

Don Young, AK                        Eni F. H. Faleomavaega, AS
Louie Gohmert, TX                    Frank Pallone, Jr., NJ
Rob Bishop, UT                       Grace F. Napolitano, CA
Doug Lamborn, CO                     Rush Holt, NJ
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Rauul M. Grijalva, AZ
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Madeleine Z. Bordallo, GU
John Fleming, LA                     Jim Costa, CA
Tom McClintock, CA                   Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,
Glenn Thompson, PA                       CNMI
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Niki Tsongas, MA
Dan Benishek, MI                     Pedro R. Pierluisi, PR
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Scott R. Tipton, CO                  Tony Caardenas, CA
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Jared Huffman, CA
Rauul R. Labrador, ID                Raul Ruiz, CA
Steve Southerland, II, FL            Carol Shea-Porter, NH
Bill Flores, TX                      Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Jon Runyan, NJ                       Joe Garcia, FL
Markwayne Mullin, OK                 Matt Cartwright, PA
Steve Daines, MT                     Katherine M. Clark, MA
Kevin Cramer, ND                     Vacancy
Doug LaMalfa, CA
Jason T. Smith, MO
Vance M. McAllister, LA
Bradley Byrne, AL

Todd Young, Chief of Staff
Lisa Pittman, Chief Legislative Counsel
Penny Dodge, Democratic Staff Director
David Watkins, Democratic Chief Counsel
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY AND MINERAL RESOURCES

DOUG LAMBORN, CO, Chairman
RUSH HOLT, NJ, Ranking Democratic Member

Louie Gohmert, TX                    Matt Cartwright, PA
Rob Bishop, UT                       Jim Costa, CA
Robert J. Wittman, VA                Niki Tsongas, MA
Paul C. Broun, GA                    Jared Huffman, CA
John Fleming, LA                     Alan S. Lowenthal, CA
Glenn Thompson, PA                   Tony Caardenas, CA
Cynthia M. Lummis, WY                Rauul M. Grijalva, AZ
Dan Benishek, MI                     Colleen W. Hanabusa, HI
Jeff Duncan, SC                      Joe Garcia, FL
Paul A. Gosar, AZ                    Katherine M. Clark, MA
Bill Flores, TX                      Vacancy
Markwayne Mullin, OK                 Vacancy
Steve Daines, MT                     Vacancy
Kevin Cramer, ND                     Peter A. DeFazio, OR, ex officio
Vacancy
Doc Hastings, WA, ex officio
------

CONTENTS

----------
Page

Hearing held on Friday, June 20, 2014............................     1

Statement of Members:
Cramer, Hon. Kevin, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Dakota......................................    11
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Holt, Hon. Rush, a Representative in Congress from the State
of New Jersey..............................................     4
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Colorado..........................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     3

Statement of Witnesses:
Lund, Nicholas, Program Manager of Landscape Conservation,
National Parks Conservation Association....................    26
Prepared statement of....................................    28
Mall, Amy, Senior Policy Analyst, Natural Resources Defense
Council....................................................    22
Prepared statement of....................................    23
Nedd, Michael, Assistant Director, Minerals and Realty
Management, Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of
the Interior, Accompanied by Herbert C. Frost, Regional
Director, Alaska Region, National Park Service, U.S.
Department of the Interior.................................    30
Prepared statement of....................................    31
Santa, Donald F., President and CEO, Interstate Natural Gas
Association of America.....................................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    19
Soth, Jeffrey, Legislative and Political Director,
International Union of Operating Engineers.................    13
Prepared statement of....................................    14
Questions submitted for the record by Chairman Lamborn...    17

Additional Material Submitted for the Record:
Clean Air Task Force, CATF Fact Sheet: Bakken Flaring in
Focus: A Close Look at Natural Gas Flaring in North Dakota.     8
Hulsey, Blu, Vice President of Government and Regulatory
Affairs, Continental Resources, Prepared statement of......    48
List of documents submitted for the record retained in the
Committee's official files.................................    51
Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Letter submitted for the record on
H.R. 4293..................................................    49
The Wilderness Society, Letter submitted for the record on
H.R. 1587..................................................     6

LEGISLATIVE HEARING ON H.R. 4293, TO AUTHORIZE THE APPROVAL OF NATURAL
GAS PIPELINES AND ESTABLISH DEADLINES AND EXPEDITE PERMITS FOR CERTAIN
NATURAL GAS GATHERING LINES ON FEDERAL LAND AND INDIAN LAND, ``NATURAL
GAS GATHERING ENHANCEMENT ACT''; AND H.R. 1587, TO AUTHORIZE THE
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR AND THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE TO ISSUE
PERMITS FOR RIGHTS-OF-WAY, TEMPORARY EASEMENTS, OR OTHER NECESSARY
AUTHORIZATIONS TO FACILITATE NATURAL GAS, OIL, AND PETROLEUM PRODUCT
PIPELINES AND RELATED FACILITIES ON ELIGIBLE FEDERAL LANDS, AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES, ``ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT ACT''

----------

Friday, June 20, 2014

U.S. House of Representatives

Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources

Committee on Natural Resources

Washington, DC

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:34 p.m., in
room 1334, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Lamborn, Lummis, Mullin, Cramer;
Holt, Costa, Lowenthal, and Garcia.
Mr. Lamborn. The committee will come to order. The Chairman
notes the presence of a quorum, which, under Committee Rule
3(e), is two Members.
The Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources is meeting
today to hear testimony on a legislative hearing on two bills:
H.R. 4293, introduced by my colleague, Representative Kevin
Cramer of North Dakota, to authorize the approval of natural
gas pipelines and establish deadlines and expedite permits for
certain natural gas gathering lines on Federal land and Indian
land, the ``Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act''; and H.R.
1587, introduced by my colleague, Representative Marino, to
authorize the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of
Agriculture to issue permits for rights-of-way, temporary
easements, or other necessary authorizations to facilitate
natural gas, oil, and petroleum product pipelines and related
facilities on eligible Federal lands and for other purposes,
the ``Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act.''
Under Committee Rule 4(f), opening statements are limited
to the Chairman and Ranking Member of the subcommittee.
However, I ask unanimous consent to include any other Members'
opening statements in the hearing record, if submitted to the
clerk by close of business today.
[No response.]
Mr. Lamborn. Hearing no objections?
Dr. Holt. No objection.
Mr. Lamborn. So ordered. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF COLORADO

Mr. Lamborn. I would like to thank our witnesses for being
with us today. Today the Natural Resources Committee,
Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources, is meeting for a
legislative hearing on two bills: H.R. 4293, the ``Natural Gas
Gathering Enhancement Act''; and H.R. 1587, the ``Energy
Infrastructure Improvement Act.'' These bills aim to expedite
the permitting process for pipelines, gathering lines, and
field compression units. Clarifying this process will allow for
increased amounts of natural gas to be produced in areas where
huge quantities of this resource are flared, due to lack of
infrastructure to transport the natural gas.
It is no secret the energy boom has brought tremendous
economic benefits to the United States. Unfortunately, massive
quantities of natural gas are flared every year, due to a
serious lack of infrastructure to transport it.
For example, in North Dakota, companies are forced to flare
approximately one-third of the natural gas produced each day.
This equates to approximately $1.4 million in natural resources
being wasted every day. Flaring this resource takes it off the
market, therefore depriving Federal, State, and local
governments of revenue, inhibiting job creation, and reducing
energy security.
H.R. 4293, the ``Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act,''
was introduced by Congressman Cramer and seeks to streamline
the permitting process for natural gas gathering lines and the
associated field compression unit. It allows the Secretary of
the Interior to utilize categorical exclusions to issue various
notices of rights-of-way to ensure that this infrastructure can
be permitted in a timely fashion, and that the project can move
forward. New infrastructure will supply the transportation
capacity that is needed to reduce the need for flaring, and
allows for increased production of natural gas.
H.R. 1587, the ``Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act,''
sponsored by Congressman Marino, will update the U.S. Code to
reflect modern energy developments. Statutes enacted 100 years
ago authorize the Secretary of the Interior to approve rights-
of-way on lands managed by the National Park Service for
electrical and telephone lines, water pipes and pipelines, and
canals and ditches.
However, it is interpreted to exclude natural gas
pipelines. As a result, each time a company seeks to expand,
modify, or construct a natural gas pipeline across lands
managed by the National Park system, Congress has to pass a
separate piece of legislation for that particular project. In
some cases this had added years to the project.
This legislation would give the Department of the Interior
explicit authority to permit natural gas pipelines over Federal
lands. The bills we are discussing today will clarify and
streamline the natural gas infrastructure permitting process.
They will reduce the need for flaring and allow more natural
gas to be brought to market. As a result of increased energy
production, more jobs will be created, revenue will increase,
and the United States can further distinguish itself as a
global leader in energy production.
Again, I would like to thank the witnesses for coming
before our committee today, and I look forward to hearing your
testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lamborn follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Doug Lamborn, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Energy and Mineral Resources
I'd like to thank our witnesses for being with us today. Today the
Natural Resources Committee, Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral
Resources is meeting for a legislative hearing on two bills--H.R. 4293,
the ``Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act'' and H.R. 1587, the
``Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act.'' These bills aim to expedite
the permitting process for pipelines, gathering lines, and field
compression units. Clarifying this process will allow for increased
amounts of natural gas to be produced in areas where huge quantities of
this resource are flared due to lack of infrastructure to transport the
natural gas.
It is no secret the energy boom has brought tremendous economic
benefits to the United States. Unfortunately, massive quantities of
natural gas are flared every year due to a serious lack of
infrastructure to transport it. For example, in North Dakota, companies
are forced to flare approximately one-third of the natural gas produced
each day--this equates to approximately $1.4 million dollars in natural
resources being wasted daily. Flaring this resource takes if off the
market, therefore depriving Federal, State and local governments of
revenue, inhibiting job creation, and reducing energy security. H.R.
4293, the ``Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act'' was introduced by
Congressman Cramer and seeks to streamline the permitting process for
natural gas gathering lines and the associated field compression unit.
It allows the Secretary of the Interior to utilize categorical
exclusions to issue sundry notices or right-of-ways to ensure this
infrastructure can be permitted in a timely fashion and the project can
move forward. New infrastructure will supply the transportation
capacity that is needed to reduce the need for flaring and allow for
increased production of natural gas.
H.R. 1587, the ``Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act,'' sponsored
by Congressman Marino, will update the U.S. Code to reflect modern
energy developments. Statues enacted in the early 20th century
authorize the Secretary of the Interior to approve rights-of-ways on
lands managed by the National Park Service for electrical and telephone
lines, water pipes and pipelines, and canals and ditches--however it
excludes natural gas pipelines. As a result, each time a company seeks
to expand, modify or construct a natural gas pipeline across national
park land, Congress has to pass a separate piece of legislation for the
particular project. In some cases this has added years onto the
project. This legislation would give the Department of the Interior
explicit authority to permit natural gas pipelines over all Federal
lands.
The bills we are discussing today will clarify and streamline the
natural gas infrastructure permitting process. They will reduce the
need for flaring and allow more natural gas to be brought to market. As
a result of increased energy production, more jobs will be created,
revenue will increase, and the United States can further distinguish
itself as a global leader in energy production.
Again I'd like to thank the witnesses for coming before our
committee today and I look forward to hearing your testimony.

______

Mr. Lamborn. I would now like to recognize the Ranking
Member, Representative Holt of New Jersey.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RUSH HOLT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY

Dr. Holt. I thank the Chair, and I thank the witnesses for
being here today to discuss these two pieces of legislation.
While I share the Administration's concerns with these two
bills, I would like to commend the sponsors for acknowledging
the fact that we are in the middle of an unprecedented oil and
gas boom in this country, and that with the boom come
challenges that need to be addressed.
As the BP Statistical Review of World Energy put it earlier
this week, ``The U.S. increase in 2013 was one of the biggest
oil production increases the world has ever seen.'' That kind
of production increase is going to create problems, and there
will be conflicts with land owners, increased truck traffic in
rural areas, concerns about air and water quality, induced
earthquakes from wastewater injections, questions about health
and safety. This sort of production boom doesn't happen in a
vacuum; it happens in people's towns, off their shores,
sometimes right in the backyards.
So, whether it is the fact that the natural gas is being
flared at unacceptable rates in North Dakota, or companies are
trying to expand pipelines to carry all their new supplies,
there are problems that Congress should be debating and
addressing.
Now, of course, some of the legislation that we have had
here in Congress ignores, really ignores the fact that we are
producing at a near-record clip. Next week the House is
scheduled to debate yet another bill that would force land
sales off the coasts and do other such things, and is even more
obsolete and unnecessary this year than it was last year, when
House Republicans forced it through to no effect, or the year
before, when they did the same thing.
This kind of legislation exists in a fantasy land where
President Obama is somehow shutting down U.S. energy
production, not in the real world, where we are the Number-one
producer of natural gas, and soon to be the Number-one producer
of oil. But on the bills we are here to talk about today, as I
said, I want to give credit to the sponsors for finding, or at
least seeking, solutions to real problems. I do not believe
that these bills would be the right solutions.
H.R. 1587 would take the responsibility for approving oil
and gas pipelines through the national parks away from Congress
and hand it to the National Park Service. It is a
responsibility they don't want, and they have said so, and that
they are not best suited to carry out.
When Congress amended the Mineral Leasing Act of 1973 to
allow land managers to site oil and gas pipelines on their
lands, it specifically carved out the Outer Continental Shelf
and Indian lands, which were both covered by their own laws.
Congress retained the authority to site pipelines in the
national parks. It wasn't an oversight or a mistake; it was
deliberate and, I believe, with good reason.
Congress has repeatedly, and in a timely manner, passed
laws to authorize oil and gas pipelines through national parks,
and I believe our parks are too precious a resource for us
simply to abandon our responsibility in that matter.
The other bill we are discussing today, H.R. 4293, would
create a new statutory categorical exclusion to accelerate the
siting of natural gas gathering lines in an attempt to cut down
on flaring. Now, I appreciate the goal of the legislation, but
I believe it is the wrong way to go about it.
Congress enacted five categorical exclusions in the
Republican-led Energy Policy Act of 2005, and those have
created enormous problems, according to the Government
Accountability Office. In particular, these exclusions don't
even allow land managers to look for special circumstances that
may make them inappropriate in a given situation. Legislative
categorical exclusions are really clumsy tools that create more
harm than good, and I believe we should be repealing the ones
from 2005, not creating new ones.
Now, more fundamentally, I simply haven't seen any evidence
that the environmental review process for natural gas gathering
lines is in any way responsible for the incredible amounts of
flaring in North Dakota. Without that evidence, this bill
appears to be a classic example of a solution in search of a
problem or, perhaps, an attempt to accomplish something
ideological and unrelated to the problem at hand.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Holt follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Rush Holt, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Energy and Mineral Resources
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and I'd like to thank the witnesses for
being here today to discuss these two pieces of legislation.
While I share the Administration's concerns with these two bills, I
would like to commend the sponsors for acknowledging the fact that we
are, in fact, in the middle of an unprecedented oil and gas boom in
this country, and that with this boom comes challenges that need to be
addressed.
After all, as the BP Statistical Review of World Energy put it
earlier this week, ``the U.S. increase in 2013 was one of the biggest
oil production increases the world has ever seen.''
That kind of production increase is going to create problems.
Conflicts with landowners. Increased truck traffic in rural areas.
Concerns about air and water quality. Induced earthquakes from
wastewater injection. Questions about health and safety. This sort of
production boom doesn't happen in a vacuum. It happens in people's
towns, off their shores, even right in their backyards.
So whether it is the fact that natural gas is being flared at
unacceptable rates in North Dakota, or companies are trying to expand
pipelines to carry all their new supplies, there are problems that
Congress should be debating and addressing.
Of course, some legislation seems oblivious to the fact that we're
producing at a near-record clip. Next week the House is scheduled to
debate a bill that is even more obsolete and unnecessary this year than
it was last year, when the House Republicans forced it through to zero
effect. Or the year before, when they did the exact same thing.
That legislation exists in a fantasy land where President Obama is
somehow shutting down U.S. energy production, not in the real world
where we're the #1 producer of natural gas, and soon to be the #1
producer of oil.
But on the bills we are here to talk about today: as I said, I give
their sponsors credit for trying to find solutions to real problems. I
do not believe, however, that these bills would be the right solutions.
H.R. 1587 would take the responsibility for approving oil and gas
pipelines through National Parks away from Congress, and hand it to the
National Park Service, a responsibility they have told us they do not
want.
When Congress amended the Mineral Leasing Act in 1973 to allow land
managers to site oil and gas pipelines on their lands, it specifically
carved out the Outer Continental Shelf and Indian lands, which were
both covered by their own laws. And Congress retained the authority to
site pipelines in National Parks. This was not an oversight or a
mistake. It was deliberate, and I believe with good reason.
Congress has repeatedly, and in a timely manner, passed laws to
authorize oil and gas pipelines through National Parks, and I believe
our parks are too precious a resource for us to simply abrogate our
responsibility in this matter.
The other bill we are discussing today, H.R. 4293, would create a
new statutory categorical exclusion to accelerate the siting of natural
gas gathering lines in an attempt to cut down on flaring. I appreciate
the goal of the legislation, but I believe this is the wrong way to go
about it.
Congress enacted five categorical exclusions in the Republican-led
Energy Policy Act of 2005, and those have created enormous problems
according to the Government Accountability Office. In particular, those
exclusions don't even allow land managers to look for special
circumstances that may make them inappropriate in a given situation.
Legislative categorical exclusions are a ham-fisted tool that create
more harm than good, and I believe we should be repealing the ones from
2005, not creating new ones.
But more fundamentally, I have simply not seen any evidence that
the environmental review process for natural gas gathering lines is at
all responsible for the incredible amounts of flaring in North Dakota.
Without that evidence, this bill appears to be a classic example of a
solution in search of a problem.
With that, I would like to thank the witnesses again, and I yield
back my time.

______

Dr. Holt. So, with that, I would like to thank the
witnesses. And I would also like to ask unanimous consent, Mr.
Chairman, to include two items in the record: a letter from the
Wilderness Society stating their concerns about H.R. 1587, and
a document from the Clean Air Task Force, entitled, ``A Close
Look at Natural Gas Flaring in North Dakota.''
[No response.]
Mr. Lamborn. With no objection, so ordered.
[The information submitted by Dr. Holt for the record
follows:]
Letter Submitted for the Record on H.R. 1587

The Wilderness Society,
Washington, DC,
June 20, 2014.

Hon. Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
House Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources,
1334 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Hon. Rush Holt, Ranking Member,
House Subcommittee on Energy and Mineral Resources,
1334 Longworth House Office Building,
Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman Lamborn and Ranking Member Holt:

The Wilderness Society appreciates the opportunity to submit this
statement in regard to H.R. 1587, the Energy Infrastructure Improvement
Act. We write to oppose the legislation based on serious concerns about
several of its provisions and an overriding belief that this
legislation is not needed. This bill could be harmful for some of our
most important Federal lands, as well as needlessly overriding many
important aspects of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and
the benefits of meaningful public and local participation in developing
new infrastructure.

Section 2(d)(2) says the ``Secretary shall renew any right-of-
way issued under this section, in accordance with the
provisions of this section, if the pipeline and its related
facility is in commercial operation and operated and maintained
in accordance with this section . . .'' (emphasis added). This
means that if changes are needed (e.g., better corrosion
prevention to prevent leaks on an older pipeline or to require
more advanced leak detection), it might be tougher for the
Bureau of Land Management (BLM) or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (FWS) to get them implemented. If BLM or FWS were
delayed in rectifying potential safety or environmental
concerns, that could greatly endanger Federal lands and waters
and the habitat and recreation opportunities they support.

Section 2(e)(4) provides for judicial review for a pipeline
operator (called ``permittee'' in the bill) who does not like
the Secretary's decision on a pipeline right-of-way. What is
not clear, however, is whether the public can bring suit
against the pipeline operator if the operator is in non-
compliance with its right-of-way authorization. There is also
no provision allowing the public to get involved on the
administrative level to challenge a Secretary's decision. This
goes counter to NEPA and the idea that public participation is
crucial in administrative decisionmaking on project-level
decisions.

Section 2(f) further undermines NEPA by allowing Secretarial
modification--regardless of the extent of changes in pipeline
design or operation--without doing an Environmental Impact
Study, which could result in major changes to a pipeline
without public review. This is especially problematic since
NEPA analyses are crucial for projects that cross State and
international boundaries as well as public lands and waters.
Environmental Impact Statements are essential for assessing
routing, safety and land/water considerations.

The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is responsible
for approving rights-of-way for interstate natural gas
pipelines and States approve rights-of-way for interstate
hazardous liquid (generally, oil) pipelines. This legislation
would trump FERC's process and State decisionmaking processes
on pipeline projects. The legislation is unnecessary, would be
harmful for public participation, and could endanger federal
lands, waters, and habitats given the lack of appropriate
public and local input and expertise.

We look forward to working with the Chairman and the committee on
any alternative measures needed to address concerns this legislation
attempts to respond to.

Sincerely,

Chase Huntley,
Senior Director of Government Relations, Energy.

______

Report by Clean Air Task Force

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Dr. Holt. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. I would now recognize the author of H.R. 4293,
Representative Kevin Cramer of North Dakota, for a brief
statement about his bill.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the
Ranking Member as well for agreeing to allow this brief opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. KEVIN CRAMER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA

Mr. Cramer. It is no secret that in North Dakota crude oil
production has significantly increased. In fact, just announced
this week that we have gone over a million barrels per day,
with, of course, the good fortune of geology that is beneath
private and State land, largely, and very little under Federal
land. Obviously, the advent of horizontal drilling and
hydraulic fracturing and common-sense energy development policy
in North Dakota has resulted in this spike in production.
While natural gas in the Bakken is considered a secondary
or a byproduct of North Dakota's crude oil development,
significant infrastructure investment and technological
innovation is being done to ensure it is captured. Since 2006,
approximately 9,600 miles of gas gathering line and 1.3 billion
cubic feet per day of gas processing capacity has been
installed with an investment of over $6 billion.
Several laws and agencies may come into play when
permitting a natural gas pipeline. But when Federal resources
are developed, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
applies to assess environmental impacts, if any. Environmental
impact statements are required for proposed projects determined
to have a significant impact on the environment. Environmental
assessments are prepared when it is unclear whether a proposed
project will have a significant impact, and a categorical
exclusion is utilized if determined to have no significant
environmental impact.
Now, categorical exclusions alone save time and precious
resources. But when applied to areas where a NEPA document has
already been developed--this is an important distinction, a
NEPA document has already been developed and scrutinized, it
prevents duplicative efforts. And that is what this legislation
does.
Within a field or unit where an approved land use plan or
an environmental document prepared pursuant to NEPA has already
been done, and transportation of natural gas from one or more
oil wells was seen as a reasonably foreseeable activity, and
the gathering line will be located adjacent to an existing
disturbed area for the construction of a road or well pad, a
natural gas gathering line shall be considered an action that
is categorically excluded for purposes of NEPA.
We can reduce the workload on already strained Federal
workers and agencies, and I have to tell you they are strained,
as I am sure we will hear in a little bit. And we can protect
the environment, we can reduce the amount of flaring, we can
increase royalty revenues to the government, and we can get
more natural gas to market. To me, this is just common sense.
With regard to evidence, as Mr. Holt referred to, the fact
of the matter is that statewide in North Dakota, or Bakken-
wide, if you want, we are flaring on non-Federal lands, we are
flaring about 28 percent, while we are trying to get the
infrastructure caught up. On Federal and Indian lands it is 40
percent that is being flared. These are just facts. The Bureau
of Indian Affairs is responsible, of course, for approving
rights-of-way across lands held in trust for an Indian tribe.
And BLM is for other Federal lands.
So, with that, I look forward to the hearing and thank the
witnesses again. Thank you for your indulgence.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cramer follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Hon. Kevin Cramer, a Representative in
Congress from the State of North Dakota
In North Dakota, crude oil production has significantly increased
with the luck of geology beneath private and State land, the advent of
horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing, and common sense energy
development policy. While natural gas is considered a byproduct to
North Dakota's crude oil development, significant infrastructure
investment and technological innovation is being done to ensure it's
captured. Since 2006 approximately 9,600 miles of gas gathering pipe
and 1.3 billion cubic feet per day of gas processing capacity has been
installed at over $6 billion.
Several laws and agencies may come into play when permitting a
natural gas pipeline. When Federal resources are developed the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) applies to assess environmental
impacts, if any. Environmental impact statements (EIS) are required for
proposed projects determined to have a significant impact on the
environment, environmental assessments (EA) are prepared when it's
unclear whether a proposed project will have a significant impact, and
a categorical exclusion is utilized if determined to have no
significant environmental impact.
A categorical exclusion alone saves time and precious resources,
but when applied to areas where a NEPA document has already been
developed and scrutinized it prevents duplicative efforts, and that's
what this legislation does. Within a field or unit where an approved
land use plan or an environmental document prepared pursuant to NEPA
has already been done, and transportation of natural gas from one or
more oil wells was seen as a reasonably foreseeable activity, AND the
gathering line will be located adjacent to an existing disturbed area
for the construction of a road or well pad, a natural gas gathering
line shall be considered an action that is categorically excluded for
purposes of NEPA.
We can reduce the work load on strained Federal workers, we can
protect the environment, we can reduce the amount of flaring, we can
increase royalty revenues, and we can get more natural gas to market.
This is pure common sense.
The fact is that statewide we are flaring about 28 percent on non-
Federal land and on Federal and Indian lands it is 40 percent.

______

Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We will now hear from our
witnesses. I would like to welcome Mr. Jeffrey Soth,
Legislative and Political Director for the International Union
of Operating Engineers; Mr. Donald Santa, President and CEO of
the Interstate Natural Gas Association of America; Ms. Amy
Mall, Senior Policy Analyst for the Natural Resources Defense
Council; Mr. Nicholas Lund, Program Manager of Landscape
Conservation for the National Parks Conservation Association;
and Mr. Michael Nedd, Assistant Director for Minerals and
Realty Management for the Bureau of Land Management.
Like all of our witnesses, your written testimony will
appear in full in the hearing record, so I ask that you keep
your oral statements to 5 minutes. Our microphones are not
automatic, so you need to turn them on when you are ready to
begin.
I also want to explain how our timing lights work. When you
begin to speak, our clerk will start the timer, and a green
light will appear. After 4 minutes, a yellow light will appear.
And at that time you should begin to conclude your statement.
At 5 minutes the red light will come on. You may finish your
sentence, but at that time I ask that you stop your statement.
Shortly I will be turning over the gavel to Representative
Cramer of North Dakota.
Mr. Soth, you may begin.

STATEMENT OF JEFFREY SOTH, LEGISLATIVE AND POLITICAL DIRECTOR,
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF OPERATING ENGINEERS

Mr. Soth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is an honor to join
you and members of the subcommittee for what operating
engineers believe is a critical conversation about the future
of the natural gas industry, with a particular focus on the
pipeline segment of it. My name is Jeffrey Soth. I am the
Legislative and Political Director of the International Union
of Operating Engineers. The union represents almost 400,000 men
and women in the United States and Canada.
I would like to touch on three things quickly this morning
in my testimony. First, I will cover the role that operating
engineers play in the pipeline industry. Second, I will share
some economic analysis and data with you. And last, I will
speak more directly to the legislation, the two bills before
the subcommittee this morning.
First, operating engineers are one of the key occupations
directly employed in the construction of this Nation's energy
infrastructure. Every day across the United States, thousands
of our members are building the Nation's pipelines, power
plants, and natural gas wellpads. The IUOE is one of four
unions signatory to the National Pipeline Agreement. In 2013,
operating engineers performed nearly 14 million hours of work
on all types of pipelines, from gathering lines to transmission
lines. The pipeline industry is indeed at the heart of work
opportunities for members of the IUOE.
Now I would like to turn quickly to some broader industry
dynamics and economics. The development of the natural gas
resources in this country has really presented an amazing
opportunity. It also has created a number of policy and
regulatory challenges for decisionmakers. But in order to
capitalize on this opportunity presented by the abundant
American natural resource, operating engineers strongly believe
that the permitting and regulatory framework for pipelines must
be updated, ensuring that domestic oil and gas industry
flourishes in a safe and productive way.
I would like to share with you a quick look at employment
in the pipeline industry. I have shared with you a couple of
graphs that give you a visual look at some of the employment
picture in the oil and gas pipeline industry group of the
construction sector. As you can see, since the start of the
Great Recession in December 2007, the industry has grown over
26 percent, reaching an all-time high in April.
And if I may, Chairman, let me repeat that. The United
States today has seen an all-time high in oil and gas pipeline
construction employment, and that is really critical. And what
is particularly noteworthy is that, during the same time, and
you will see in the next graph that during the same time
construction employment has plummeted. We have lost about 20
percent of all construction workers; about 1 in 5 construction
workers in the country over that same period have left the
industry. That makes what is happening in natural gas
particularly noteworthy, and has allowed that sector to counter
some of the worst employment losses we have seen in
construction since the Great Depression.
As you know, dramatic growth is expected in the natural gas
industry. Our friends at INGAA have made dramatic estimates
about potentially 61,000 miles of additional midstream natural
gas pipeline necessary through 2030, with as much as $10
billion necessary annually. IHS Global finds that about $8
billion a year could be invested in oil and gas industry for
just gathering pipelines, not including distribution and
transmission. That is a lot of potential, obviously, and we
would like to be able to capture that.
And finally, I would like to turn more directly to the
legislation before the subcommittee. Operating engineers
believe that we must forge bipartisan agreements for the oil
and gas permitting in this country. The bottom line is that
anachronistic, out-of-date regulations prevent job growth, and
it is essential that American energy policy keep pace with the
innovations that are occurring in the industry.
The Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act reflects the
simple modernization of environmental permitting of gathering
lines when there is clearly no significant environmental
impact. Consistently issuing a finding of ``no significant
environmental impact'' adds no environmental value to the
permitting process. Clearly, time, energy, and money of
regulatory authorities could be better spent elsewhere. H.R.
4293 is a common-sense step to modernize this Nation's
permitting process for natural gas pipelines.
Similarly, the Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act simply
clarifies the authority to issue easements and permits to build
on Federal lands. It is a common-sense step that operating
engineers are pleased to see this kind of technical correction
made to the law.
The United States should continue modernizing its
regulatory approach to meet the needs of the growing domestic
energy industry, and to encourage job growth. We believe the
legislation before you will do just that, and we appreciate the
committee's leadership and your leadership, Representative
Cramer, on these two bills. And we thank you for the
opportunity to testify this morning. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Soth follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeffrey Soth, Legislative and Political Director,
International Union of Operating Engineers on H.R. 4293 and H.R. 1587
Thank you for the invitation to join you this morning, Chairman
Lamborn. It is an honor to join you and members of the subcommittee for
what the Operating Engineers believe is a critical conversation
regarding the development of the natural gas industry in the United
States, with particular focus on the regulatory framework for
pipelines.
My name is Jeffrey Soth. I am the Legislative and Political
Director of the International Union of Operating Engineers (IUOE). The
International Union of Operating Engineers represents almost 400,000
men and women in the United States and Canada. Operating Engineers are
one of the key occupations directly employed in the construction and
maintenance of this Nation's energy infrastructure, including natural
gas infrastructure.
Every day across the United States thousands of IUOE members are
building the Nation's natural gas pipelines, power plants, and natural
gas well pads. Operating Engineers are also seeking other employment
opportunities in the natural gas supply chain. For example, thousands
of IUOE members in the Upper Mississippi Basin excavate the silica sand
that is essential to the hydraulic fracturing process. In the coming
years, members of the IUOE also expect to build liquefied natural gas
export facilities along the United States and Canadian coasts.
Most of the Operating Engineers engaged in the construction
industry run bulldozers, backhoes, cranes, and excavators--the
traditional heavy equipment operated by members of the union. To
perform this work at the highest levels, members of the Operating
Engineers union receive extensive craft training through on-the-job
apprenticeship. Local unions of the IUOE, in partnership with their
contractor-employers, invest over $107 million annually in construction
training. But the work opportunities around the natural gas industry
also require specialization within the Operating Engineer craft.
What I would like to focus on this morning is the role that members
of the IUOE play in the pipeline industry. The IUOE is one of four
unions signatory to the National Pipeline Agreement. In 2013, Operating
Engineers performed nearly 14 million hours of work on all manner of
pipeline projects, from gathering lines to mainline transmission
projects. The pipeline industry is a key sector to members of the
Operating Engineers. It is at the heart of IUOE members' opportunities
for work.
The pipeline industry has a unique set of skill requirements and
Operating Engineers are perfectly suited to what the industry demands--
the safest, most productive workforce available. That is why IUOE
members develop their skills through a robust national training program
in partnership with the Pipe Line Contractors Association to meet that
specific part of the industry's needs.
After that summary of who we are and how we fit into the sector,
let me turn to the broader industry dynamics. The development of
American natural gas resources has presented the country an amazing
opportunity; it has also created a number of policy and regulatory
challenges for decisionmakers.
In order to keep pace, in order to capitalize on the opportunity
presented by this abundant American natural resource, the Operating
Engineers strongly believe that Congress must ensure that there is an
updated, streamlined permitting and regulatory framework, ensuring that
the domestic oil and gas industry flourishes in a safe, predictable
way.
First, I wanted to share with you some numbers that help describe
what has occurred in the pipeline industry as a result of the increase
in domestic oil and gas production. In the first chart attached to my
testimony, you can see employment in the oil and gas industry group
within the construction industry. It shows dramatic growth since the
start of the Great Recession in December 2007. Since that time, the
industry has grown over 26 percent. According to the most recent data
available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, employment in the oil
and gas industry hit an all-time high. That is especially noteworthy
and important because of what has occurred in the broader construction
sector during the same period. You can see that construction has lost
over 1.5 million jobs over the same timeframe. Although a small part of
the overall industry, the burgeoning natural gas industry has helped
the broader construction sector counter some of the worst employment
losses seen since the Great Depression.
Family sustaining jobs in the oil and gas pipeline construction
industry group are created at higher than average wages. Wage estimates
for production and nonsupervisory workers in the oil and gas pipeline
industry are over $26 an hour, according to the most recent data from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics. That compares to $19.75 an hour for
production workers in all of the private sector.
Please allow me to turn more directly to the legislation before the
subcommittee. The Operating Engineers believe that Congress must work
to forge bipartisan agreements around common-sense changes to oil and
gas permitting processes. The bottom line is that an anachronistic
regulatory structure inhibits the development of the industry and the
jobs that go along with it.
The Interstate Natural Gas Association of America (INGAA) estimated
in 2009 that North America may need more than 61,000 miles of
additional natural gas pipelines through 2030. INGAA estimates that
investments in midstream natural gas pipelines could reach around $10
billion annually for the next 20 years. An IHS Global study finds that
$8 billion a year could be invested in just gathering pipelines, not
including distribution and transmission, for both the oil and gas
industry.
I also wanted to mention to the subcommittee that the IUOE is part
of a newly formed industry group, the Energy Equipment and
Infrastructure Alliance (EEIA), the voice of the shale energy supply
chain. The EEIA pulls together a number of key industry players beyond
oil and natural gas companies themselves. It includes contractors,
materials and equipment suppliers, and essential unions in the
industry. EEIA has commissioned a new economic study that should
provide keen new insights into the future of the industry, including a
new, updated analysis of jobs, labor income, and dollar outputs by the
sector. We look forward to sharing the study with the committee when it
is formally released in July.
It is essential that the American energy policy support the
development of this domestic resource by keeping pace with the dramatic
innovations that are occurring in the sector. In a number of cases, the
growth in the industry has simply outpaced the Nation's regulatory
framework. That is how the Operating Engineers view the two pieces of
legislation under consideration by the subcommittee.
Representative Cramer's legislation, H.R. 4293, the Natural Gas
Gathering Enhancement Act, reflects a straightforward modernization of
the environmental permitting of gathering lines when there is clearly
no significant environmental impact. The process of developing an
Environmental Assessment and consistently issuing a Finding of No
Significant Impact (FONSI) adds no environmental or economic value to
the permitting process. It merely adds procedural impediments and
associated cost for both developers and regulators without associated
improvements in environmental quality. The time, energy, and money of
regulatory authorities should be spent elsewhere in the permitting
process. It is also my understanding that an agency could still conduct
an Environmental Assessment and take a gathering line on Federal or
tribal land through the process of determining whether, in fact, there
is a significant environmental impact. Representative Cramer's
legislation is a common-sense step to modernize the Nation's permit
processes for natural gas pipelines.
Similarly, Congressman Marino's bill, the Energy Infrastructure
Improvement Act, merely clarifies the authority of the Secretary of
Interior and Secretary of Agriculture to issue easements and permits to
construct pipelines on eligible Federal lands. The Operating Engineers
are pleased to see this technical correction made to the law so that we
may continue to responsibly develop this important American energy
resource, and with it the jobs of Operating Engineers and other workers
who depend on it for their livelihoods.
The United States should continue updating and modernizing its
regulatory approach to meet the needs of the growing domestic energy
industry. We believe the legislation before you will do just that and
we appreciate the committee's leadership to advance these two bills.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning, Chairman
Lamborn.

______

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Questions Submitted for the Record by Chairman Lamborn to Jeffrey Soth,
Legislative and Political Director, International Union of Operating
Engineers
Question 1. In your testimony you say these bills modernize the
approach to pipeline regulation and meet the needs of the growing
energy industry. What current impacts to production and job creation
are we seeing from the hurdles imposed by the current process and what
will we see if permitting process is modernized and improved?

Answer. Literally, waiting for an Act of Congress to approve
rights-of-way and easements through National Parks, for example, places
unnecessary obstacles to the permitting of essential energy
infrastructure. In some cases, there are existing utility corridors
through parks that should be considered desirable, already-disturbed
surfaces well suited for oil and gas pipelines. Updating and clarifying
the authority of Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior to approve
easements would eliminate the need for statutory approval and place the
authority where it should have been all along--with natural-resource
agencies.
Similarly, the Bureau of Land Management testified that they did
not know of a situation where there was anything other than a Finding
of No Significant Impact (FONSI) issued for gathering lines under the
conditions imposed by H.R. 4293. In that case it is hard to imagine
what value the process of making a determination delivers in terms of
environmental integrity; the process of issuing a determination (and,
ultimately, a FONSI) merely presents an obstacle--averaging 3 months,
according to BLM testimony--to securing the necessary permits to
construct gathering lines. Clearly, the process stands in the way of
building pipeline infrastructure and the jobs that go along with it.
The Keystone XL is a high-profile example of the hurdles imposed by
the anachronistic regulatory framework for trans-boundary oil and gas
pipeline projects. The Presidential Permit process, which lives only by
Executive Order and administrative fiat, is cumbersome, uncertain, and
delivers important responsibilities for the environmental review of
projects to a non-resource agency, the State Department. Although not
necessarily in the jurisdiction of the Committee on Natural Resources,
the IUOE supports H.R. 1900 that restructures the process for
permitting this type of trans-boundary infrastructure. The failure to
permit Keystone XL has left thousands of Operating Engineers' jobs on
the drawing board, denying members of the union with concrete
opportunities to go to work.
Much more pipeline infrastructure is necessary in order to realize
America's domestic energy future. While the oil and gas pipeline
industry group of the construction sector is at an all-time high
currently, reaching over 140,000 jobs for the first time in American
history, more jobs opportunities await Operating Engineers and other
construction craftworkers. The International Union of Operating
Engineers appreciates the leadership of your committee and the sponsors
of H.R. 15787 and H.R. 4293 on these vital issues.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before the Committee
on Natural Resources. The International Union of Operating Engineers
looks forward to working with you to enact this legislation into law.

______

Mr. Cramer [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Soth.
Mr. Santa, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DONALD F. SANTA, PRESIDENT AND CEO, INTERSTATE
NATURAL GAS ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA

Mr. Santa. Good morning, Mr. Cramer, Ranking Member Holt,
and members of the subcommittee. My name is Donald Santa, and I
am President and CEO of the Interstate Natural Gas Association
of America, or INGAA. INGAA represents interstate natural gas
transmission pipeline operators in the United States and
Canada. Our 26 members account for virtually all of the major
interstate natural gas transmission pipelines in North America,
and operate about 200,000 miles of transmission pipe in the
United States.
Thank you for the opportunity to share INGAA's views on
H.R. 1587, the Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act,
introduced by Representative Tom Marino. This bill addresses a
process problem rooted in statute that affects permitting for
natural gas pipelines. Largely through a historical oversight,
the current law governing lands administered by the National
Park Service authorizes the administrative review and approval
of rights-of-way for certain enumerated types of
infrastructure, but not rights-of-way for natural gas
pipelines.
Natural gas pipelines were not common when these statutes
were enacted in the early 20th century. Consequently, when
Congress enumerated the types of rights-of-way that could be
approved by the National Park Service or the Secretary of the
Interior, natural gas pipelines were not listed. Electric
facilities, communications facilities, mining facilities, and
even telegraph lines and water flumes are listed in the
existing statute, but not natural gas pipelines. The statute
mentions pipelines only in the context of water transportation.
The result is this: while the National Park Service has
authority to approve certain types of rights-of-way, it cannot
approve rights-of-way for natural gas pipelines absent
enactment of project-specific legislation by the Congress. In
other words, the current law puts Congress in the role of being
a permitting agency for pipelines seeking authority to traverse
NPS lands. This cumbersome process creates unnecessary delays
and, in some cases, illogical outcomes. This framework
needlessly consumes the time and resources of the Congress, and
compels the National Park Service or the Secretary, the
operators of natural gas pipelines, and all affected
stakeholders to engage in a duplicative process in which both
congressional action and administrative approval are required
to grant the same right-of-way.
The National Park Service or the Secretary should have the
authority to review and approve pipeline rights-of-way, in the
same manner as other types of rights-of-way, as long as such
approval is not inconsistent or detrimental to the primary
purposes of these lands. H.R. 1587 grants such authority, and
represents a long-overdue amendment to the law. INGAA agrees
with the intent behind Representative Marino's efforts, and
therefore endorses H.R. 1587.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for allowing INGAA to share
its views on this matter. Given the need to expand our natural
gas infrastructure to keep pace with demand growth, we need to
ensure that permitting questions are handled in an efficient
and effective manner. The severe winter that we just
experienced amply demonstrates the need and the importance of
making these decisions to benefit American consumers. Natural
gas pipeline companies do not look lightly on the question of
placing energy infrastructure on lands administered by the
National Park Service. Where there is a public need to locate
pipelines across these areas, though, or to expand existing
pipelines in these areas, we need a better and more efficient
process.
We thank Representative Marino for introducing his bill and
starting Congress on the path toward creating a better process.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Santa follows:]
Prepared Statement of Donald F. Santa, President and CEO, the
Interstate Natural Gas Association of America on H.R. 1587
Good morning Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt and members of
the subcommittee. My name is Donald F. Santa, and I am President and
CEO of the Interstate Natural Gas Association of America, or INGAA.
INGAA represents interstate natural gas transmission pipeline operators
in the United States and Canada. Our 26 members account for virtually
all of the major interstate natural gas transmission pipelines in North
America and operate about 200,000 miles of transmission pipe in the
United States.
Thank you for the opportunity to share INGAA's views on H.R. 1587,
the ``Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act'' introduced by Rep. Tom
Marino. This bill addresses a process problem rooted in statute that
affects permitting for natural gas pipelines. Largely through a
historical oversight, the current law governing lands administered by
the National Park Service (NPS) authorizes the administrative review
and approval of rights-of-way for certain enumerated types of
infrastructure, but not rights-of-way for natural gas pipelines.
Natural gas pipelines were not common when these statutes were enacted
in the early 20th century. Consequently, when Congress enumerated the
types of rights-of-way that could be approved by the NPS and/or the
Secretary of the Interior (the Secretary), natural gas pipelines were
not listed.\1\ Electric facilities, communications facilities, mining
facilities, and even telegraph lines and water flumes are listed in the
existing statute, but not natural gas pipelines. The statute mentions
``pipelines'' only in the context of water transportation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 16 U.S.C. Sec. 5 (1911) and 16 U.S.C. Sec. 79 (1901).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The result is this: While the NPS has the authority to approve
certain types of rights-of-way, it cannot approve rights-of-way for
natural gas pipelines absent the enactment of project-specific
legislation by the Congress. In other words, current law puts Congress
in the role of being a ``permitting agency'' for pipelines seeking
authority to traverse NPS lands. This cumbersome process causes
unnecessary delays, and in some cases, illogical outcomes. This
framework needlessly consumes the time and resource of the Congress and
compels the NPS and/or the Secretary, the operators of natural gas
pipelines and all affected stakeholders to engage in duplicative
processes in which both Congressional action and administrative
approval are required to grant the same right-of-way. The NPS, and/or
the Secretary, should have the authority to review and approve pipeline
rights-of-way in the same manner as other types of rights-of-way, as
long as such approval is not inconsistent or detrimental to the primary
purposes of these lands. H.R. 1587 grants such authority, and
represents a long-overdue amendment to the law. INGAA agrees with the
intent behind Rep. Marino's efforts, and therefore endorses H.R. 1587.
Current Law
As mentioned, the statutes governing Federal lands include sections
authorizing the review and approval of rights-of-way across Federal
lands. These provisions, originally enacted in 1901 and 1911, authorize
the Department of the Interior (DOI) to approve rights-of-way
associated with specific types of infrastructure. For example, Title
16, Section 5, authorizes the head of the department with jurisdiction
over the lands to approve rights-of-way for:

electrical poles and lines for the transmission and
distribution of electrical power, and for poles and lines for
communication purposes, and for radio, television, and other
forms of communication transmitting, relay, and receiving
structures and facilities, to the extent of 200 feet on each
side of the center line of such lines and poles and not to
exceed 400 feet by 400 feet for radio, television, and other
forms of communication transmitting, relay, and receiving
structures and facilities . . ..

Also in Title 16, Section 79, the Secretary is authorized to
approve rights-of-way across public lands for:

electrical plants, poles, and lines for the generation and
distribution of electrical power, and for telephone and
telegraph purposes, and for canals, ditches, pipes and pipe
lines, flumes, tunnels, or other water conduits, and for water
plants, dams, and reservoirs used to promote irrigation or
mining or quarrying, or the manufacturing or cutting of timber
or lumber, or the supplying of water for domestic, public, or
any other beneficial uses to the extent of the ground occupied
by such canals, ditches, flumes, tunnels, reservoirs, or other
water conduits or water plants, or electrical or other works
permitted hereunder, and not to exceed 50 feet on each side of
the marginal limits thereof, or not to exceed 50 feet on each
side of the center line of such pipes and pipe lines,
electrical, telegraph, and telephone lines and poles, by any
citizen, association, or corporation of the United States.

Section 5 was amended in 1952 to add the references to radio,
television and other communications facilities. Other than that, the
law governing this area has remained largely unchanged for more than
100 years.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The communications-related amendment is the only major
amendment since original enactment. There have been some re-
codification changes over the years, but nothing altering the substance
of the statute in any major way.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 \3\ (MLA) includes a provision
granting either the Secretary or the appropriate agency head the
authority to approve rights-of-way ``through any Federal lands'' for
``the transportation of oil, natural gas, synthetic liquid or gaseous
fuels, or any refined product produced therefrom . . ..'' The MLA,
however, defines ``Federal lands'' to mean ``all lands owned by the
United States except lands in the National Park System . . ..'' For
lands within the National Park System, the statute defers to the
provisions in Title 16, which do not include natural gas pipelines
among the enumerated forms of infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 30 U.S.C. Sec. 181 et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Practice for Many Years
Even with this apparent oversight, DOI assumed for decades that it
possessed the authority to approve natural gas pipeline rights-of-way
across NPS lands. It made this assumption based on the general spirit
of the law. And based on this assumption, DOI granted natural gas
pipeline rights-of-across these lands during the major build-out of the
Nation's natural gas transmission system in the 1950s and 1960s.
Pipelines were not sited on NPS lands haphazardly or carelessly.
Instead, operators chose to seek such approvals from the NPS only when
viable alternatives were unavailable, when the impact of the right-of-
way was viewed as negligible, and/or when facilities within NPS lands
(such as concessionaires) needed natural gas service.
This process changed in the late 1980s after a DOI legal analysis
in connection with an application for a pipeline right-of-way across
NPS lands concluded that the statute did not authorize such action. In
denying the application, DOI stated that it lacked the authority under
Title 16 to approve pipeline rights-of-way, other than those pipelines
associated with water transportation.\4\ Since then, DOI has taken the
position that any natural gas pipeline needing a right-of-way across
NPS lands must first secure the enactment of specific authorizing
legislation from Congress. Such legislation, however, does not grant
the right-of-way sought by the pipeline operator. It only grants DOI
the authority to approve the specific right-of-way if it so chooses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Since this decision, a number of bills have been enacted which
allow the Secretary to authorize rights-of-way for existing natural gas
pipelines on certain NPS lands. Examples include P.L. 107-223, P.L.
101-573, and P.L. 105-329.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In practice, pipeline operators seeking a NPS right-of-way now
first seek to negotiate the terms and conditions for constructing the
proposed pipeline (or altering an existing pipeline) with the NPS. If
agreement is reached, the pipeline operator seeks congressional
authorization with the support of the NPS. Given the vagaries of the
legislative process, this step can take several years.
Recent Examples
Mr. Chairman, this committee has dealt with several specific
pipeline right-of-way bills in recent years. The most recent is the
``Denali National Park Improvement Act'' (P.L. 113-33). The President
signed this legislation last September, after 4 years of consideration
in Congress. In brief, the legislation allows, among other things, the
NPS to approve a right-of-way through the Denali National Park for a
future natural gas transmission line to serve consumers in south-
central Alaska. The pipeline, if approved, would largely share an
existing right-of-way with a highway through the park. This project is
supported by the NPS.
Another example is the ``New York City Natural Gas Supply
Enhancement Act'' (P.L. 112-197), which was reported by this committee,
enacted by Congress and signed by the President in November 2012. This
law addresses a proposed lateral pipeline from the existing Transco
pipeline in New York Bay to serve increased natural gas demand in
Queens and Brooklyn. The lateral pipeline will be only about 3 miles
long, but must cross under the Gateway National Recreation Area in
order to come ashore in Brooklyn. The Gateway National Recreation Area
includes Jacob Riis Park and Floyd Bennett Field, New York City's first
airport. Congress approved the legislation after about 18 months of
consideration. Again, the legislation did not approve the right-of-way
permit; instead, it allowed DOI to consider the construction permit for
possible approval. After an additional 19 months of review by DOI, the
permit was approved just 2 weeks ago, and pipeline construction is now
underway.
A final example is the ``Delaware Water Gap National Recreation
Area Natural Gas Pipeline Enlargement Act'' (P.L. 109-156), enacted in
2005. This bill dealt with the expansion of the existing Columbia Gas
Transmission pipeline. The pipeline had been built in 1948, and
subsequently, in 1965, Congress created the Delaware Water Gap National
Recreation Area which was situated on top of about 3.5 miles of the
pipeline right-of-way. Under pre-existing agreements, the NPS was
empowered to approve future expansions of the pipeline, to meet
customer needs, for all but two parcels of land that the pipeline
traversed. These two parcels included about 850 feet of the 3.5 miles
of pipeline right-of-way in the park. When Columbia needed to repair
and expand the pipeline in the early 2000s, it had to petition the
Congress to enact a statute authorizing amendment of the right-of-way
in those two parcels. Two years were needed to obtain the statutory
authority needed to modify the terms of the right-of-way so that
Columbia could replace 850 feet of 14-inch-diameter pipeline with a
safe and more reliable 20-inch-diameter pipeline.
Reason for Legislation
This process begs the question: Why should Congress involve itself
in a specific right-of-way permit application in the first place? This
question is appropriate, because the current law does not reflect a
decision by the Congress to establish this process for natural gas
pipelines as matter of policy, but rather results from the fact that
natural gas pipelines were not among common forms of infrastructure
during the first decade of the last century. It would be more efficient
to relieve the Congress of the obligation to review all applications
for natural gas pipeline rights-of-way across NPS lands and to
authorize the Secretary to fulfill this role without the need for case-
specific statutory authority to grant a right-of-way if an application
has merit. This is, in fact, how the myriad of other permits required
for a new pipeline are processed now--by the agencies charged by
Congress to be subject-matter experts and decisionmakers.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ For example, the Bureau of Land Management, the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One more point is worth mention. As ``national park'' status is
extended to lands that were not previously so designated, especially in
the eastern part of the country, we believe this problem will continue
to arise, for both existing and proposed natural gas pipelines, until
clear administrative authority is created.
Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for allowing INGAA to share its views
on this matter. Given the need to expand our natural gas infrastructure
to keep pace with demand growth, we need to ensure that permitting
questions are handled in an efficient and effective manner. The severe
winter that we just experienced amply demonstrates the need, and the
importance, of making these decisions to benefit American consumers. We
do not look lightly on the question of placing energy infrastructure on
lands administered by the NPS. Where there is a public need to locate
pipelines across these areas, though, or to expand existing pipelines
in these areas, we need a better and more efficient process. We thank
Rep. Marino for introducing his bill and starting Congress on the path
toward creating a better process.

______

Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Santa, for your testimony.
Ms. Mall, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AMY MALL, SENIOR POLICY ANALYST, NATURAL RESOURCES
DEFENSE COUNCIL

Ms. Mall. Thank you, Mr. Cramer, Mr. Holt, and members of
the subcommittee, for inviting me to present NRDC's views on
H.R. 4293, the Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act.
Flaring is a serious environmental problem that needs to be
addressed, and we are pleased that the committee is discussing
it. Flares have produced a significant amount of CO2 that
contributes to global warming, NOx, an ozone precursor,
volatile organic compounds, methane, and particulate matter.
Flaring of gas associated with oil wells in 2012 released more
CO2 than 1.5 million passenger vehicles. So flaring must be
eliminated, except for safety cases, to reduce environmental
impacts and also waste.
Federal policy currently allows gas to be flared royalty
free, robbing U.S. taxpayers of revenue.
The genuine need to eliminate flaring, however, is not a
reason to waive environmental review of new gathering lines and
compressor stations. Gathering lines and compressor stations
themselves pose serious safety and environmental risks,
including risks of explosion, leaks, water contamination,
dangerous air pollution, habitat destruction, and severe noise.
Yet gathering lines and compressor stations currently have
too little environmental oversight, not too much. Gathering
lines in rural areas are not regulated by the Pipeline and
Hazardous Material Safety Administration, and regulations in
non-rural areas are much too weak. While historically gathering
lines were small and thought to be low-risk, gathering lines
today can be as big as or bigger than transmission pipelines,
and may operate at the same extremely high pressures.
The Government Accountability Office (GAO), in a recent
report, found that there is not even basic information on where
gathering lines are, or whether any safety procedures are being
observed. GAO concluded that pipeline safety officials are
unable to assess and manage safety risks from unregulated
gathering lines. No regulation means that there are no
requirements for pipe thickness, strength, welding, burial
depth, inspections, corrosion resistance, installation
practices, periodic maintenance, or to record the location.
The National Environmental Policy Act, or NEPA, process is,
therefore, crucial to maximize the benefits of a project and
minimize its health and environmental costs. Excluding projects
from NEPA review or imposing arbitrary deadlines for issuing
permits would shortcut the essential work needed to reduce
risk, improve safety, and ensure all health and environmental
threats are considered.
While a project located adjacent to an existing disturbed
area such as a road or a wellpad may seem like an innocuous
location for a gathering line or compressor station, there may
be new or cumulative impacts of additional large-scale
industrial development. If those impacts have already truly
been considered and vetted in a prior NEPA analysis, then under
current law new analysis is not needed, which makes legislation
unnecessary.
And the Interior Department already has discretion under
NEPA to establish administrative categorical exclusions, or
CEs, where environmental review is genuinely unnecessary, and
to take other action. For example, the Bureau of Land
Management (BLM) is currently considering new rules to reduce
waste, including flaring, under its current authorities. BLM
has a duty under the law to minimize the waste of Federal oil
and gas resources, and can and should use the full scope of its
current authority to do so.
Efforts to legislate CEs from NEPA are unnecessary, and
have historically proven to be problematic. For example, after
Section 390 of the 2005 Energy Policy Act created CEs for oil
and gas projects, GAO analyzed them and found that BLM had
issued more than 6,000 oil and gas drilling exemptions between
Fiscal Year 2006 and 2008, but that the use of these exemptions
often did not comply with either the law or BLM's guidance.
The Federal Government can and should take other actions to
reduce flaring. For example, expand the green completion
requirement of the Clean Air Act to cover oil-producing wells,
limit production and new well drilling to areas with sufficient
pipeline resources, mandate maximum on-site and nearby use of
captured gas and natural gas liquids, charge royalties on all
flared gas, and limit the cumulative duration of flaring.
While dramatically reducing flaring is a very important
goal that we should all work to achieve, ignoring other
environmental impacts to achieve this goal is not appropriate.
NRDC, therefore, opposes H.R. 4293. We would be happy to work
with the subcommittee to develop the right solutions to
directly reduce flaring, as well as to reduce our dependence on
fossil fuels and promote energy efficiency and clean energy.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Mall follows:]
Prepared Statement of Amy Mall, Senior Policy Analyst, Natural
Resources Defense Council on H.R. 4293
Thank you Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt, and members of the
subcommittee, for inviting me to present NRDC's views on H.R. 4293, the
Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act.
Flaring is a serious environmental problem that needs to be
addressed. Flares produce significant amounts of CO2, contributing to
global warming, as well as NOx, an ozone precursor, and volatile
organic compounds, methane, and particulate matter. The genuine need to
eliminate flaring, however, is not a reason to waive environmental
review of new gathering lines and compressor stations. Gathering lines
and compressor stations come with their own serious environmental
hazards and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) ensures that
these risks are understood, that the public has an opportunity for
review and input, and that better alternatives are considered. Efforts
to legislate categorical exclusions from NEPA have historically created
confusion and resulted in administrative abuses and the Department of
the Interior already has discretion under NEPA to establish
administrative CEs where appropriate and to take other action. While
dramatically reducing flaring is an important goal we should all work
to achieve, ignoring other environmental impacts to achieve this goal
is not appropriate and NRDC therefore opposes H.R. 4293.
flaring is a serious environmental problem that needs to be addressed
Flares produce significant amounts of CO2, contributing to global
warming. Flares also release NOx (an ozone precursor) as well as
volatile organic compounds, methane, and particulate matter due to
incomplete combustion. According to the Greenhouse Gas Reporting
Program mandated by Congress, associated gas flaring released around 7
million metric tons of CO2 in 2012, which is equal to the annual
greenhouse gas emissions from more than 1.5 million passenger
vehicles.\1\ Flaring must absolutely be eliminated, except for cases of
safety, to reduce the environmental impacts of oil and gas production.
It is also a waste of resources. Federal policy currently allows gas to
be flared royalty-free, robbing U.S. taxpayers. Therefore, to protect
the health of Americans and the planet and to protect our valuable
mineral resources, the Federal Government should impose restrictions on
flaring. It can do this by expanding the green completion requirement
of the Clean Air Act to cover oil producing wells. Green completion is
a process whereby operators capture gas from the completion phase that
would otherwise be vented or flared. There should also be requirements
that: (a) limit production and new well drilling to areas with
sufficient pipeline resources; (b) mandate maximum onsite and nearby
use of captured gas and natural gas liquids; (c) charge royalties on
all flared gas; and (d) limit the cumulative duration of flaring. For
example, the State of North Dakota is currently considering rules to
reduce flare volume, the number of wells flaring, and the duration of
flaring by, among other things, restricting production at wells that
continue to flare beyond initial allowances.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Greenhouse Gas Reporting
Program. (2013). Retrieved June 17, 2014, from http://www.epa.gov/
enviro/facts/ghg/customized.html.
\2\ North Dakota Industrial Commission power point, March 3, 2014,
https://www.dmr.nd.gov/oilgas/presentations/NDIC030314_100.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The genuine need to eliminate flaring, however, is not a reason to
waive environmental review of new gathering lines and compressor
stations. This would be the equivalent of ``robbing Peter to pay
Paul.'' Gathering lines and compressor stations themselves pose serious
safety and environmental risks, including risks of explosion, leaks,
water contamination, dangerous air pollution, and severe noise.
Congress must not interfere with consideration and mitigation of those
impacts when pursuing a solution to the problems of flaring. The
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requires that, where gathering
lines and compressors could significantly affect the human environment,
these impacts are understood and alternatives for reducing them are
explained to the affected public and considered by officials; indeed,
the very premise of NEPA is that a comprehensive review of significant
environment-related impacts informs major Federal decisions. NEPA
ensures that Federal officials understand the consequences of their
choices and the public and local governments are given a voice in the
development of projects on Federal lands that affect their well-being
and interests. Stifling that process will not result in smart solutions
to the problem of flaring. Neither our public lands nor nearby
communities should be faced with the risks that would come with more
gathering lines and compressors constructed without well-informed
environmental review.
gathering lines and compressor stations currently have too little
environmental oversight, not too much
This is not the time to weaken environmental review of natural gas
gathering lines or compressors. Gathering lines in areas defined as
rural--with 10 or fewer homes within a quarter-mile of the pipeline in
any mile-long stretch of pipe--are not regulated by the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), and regulations for
gathering lines in non-rural areas are much too weak. While
historically gathering lines were smaller and thought to be less risky,
many gathering lines today are as big as, or bigger than, many
transmission lines and may operate at the same extremely high
pressures. New gathering lines can be more than 24 inches in diameter
and operate at pressures upwards of 1400 pounds per square inch,
comparable to some transmission lines. And the regulatory definition of
``gathering line'' \3\ is so broad that it can include large compressor
stations used to pressurize the gas for long-distance transport.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 49 CFR Sec. 192.8. See also: American Petroleum Institute,
``Guidelines for the Definition of Onshore Gas Gathering Lines,'' API
Recommended Practice 80, Published April 2000, Reaffirmed March 2007
(incorporated by reference).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2012, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) reported that
there is not even basic information on where gathering lines are or
whether any safety procedures are being observed. GAO concluded that
``pipeline safety officials are unable to assess and manage safety
risks'' from unregulated gathering lines.\4\ No regulation means that
there are no requirements for pipe thickness, strength, welding, burial
depth, inspections, corrosion resistance, installation practices,
periodic maintenance to prevent and identify leaks and ruptures, or a
record of the location. Without NEPA those issues will remained buried.
While we lack any information concerning incidents on unregulated
gathering lines or compressor stations in rural areas, GAO found that,
in 2010, the average incident on a regulated gas gathering pipeline
caused $1.8 million in property damage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Pipeline Safety:
Collecting Data and Sharing Information on federally Unregulated
Gathering Pipelines Could Help Enhance Safety,'' GAO-12-388: Published:
Mar 22, 2012.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PHMSA has estimated that there are more than 200,000 miles of
natural gas gathering lines in the country and an additional 30,000-
40,000 miles of hazardous liquid gathering lines that carry mostly
petroleum products. PHMSA estimates that only about 10 percent of these
lines are regulated. These lines are generally not included in programs
that require the marking of utility lines to prevent them from being
damaged by excavation or demolition work because there are no
requirements to mark or keep records of the locations of gathering
lines.
Unfortunately, few States have chosen to add their own rules in the
absence of Federal rules, so they do not regulate these facilities to
ensure safety. For example, after a 2012 compressor station explosion
in Pennsylvania, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection asked the operator not to restart the compressor without
permission, but within 2 days the company had restarted the compressor
against the agency's wishes.
the national environmental policy act is crucial to ensure the best
outcome
The National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) passed the House of
Representatives by a vote of 372 to 15 and passed the Senate by voice
vote with no recorded dissent during the Nixon administration.
President Obama's Proclamation on NEPA's 40th anniversary noted NEPA's
role in promoting ``. . . open, accountable, and responsible
decisionmaking that involves the American public.''
NEPA establishes a process to identify and consider the
environmental impacts of a government proposal. NEPA requires the
government to thoroughly consider the pros and cons for the human
environment of proposed significant actions and to develop alternatives
that reduce harms and increase benefits. NEPA does not dictate adoption
of the least environmentally harmful alternative, but rather requires
disclosure and consideration of alternatives that would reduce the
harm. NEPA gives the public an opportunity to review and comment on any
decisions. It is a tool that improves consensus, accountability and
transparency surrounding government decisionmaking, and promotes buy-in
by the public because it assures them an informed voice before final
decisions are made.
NEPA's process, helping to maximize the benefits of a project and
minimize its health and environmental costs, is exactly what is needed
for any important decisions regarding gathering lines or compressor
units. Excluding projects from NEPA review or imposing arbitrary
deadlines for issuing permits would shortcut the essential work needed
to reduce risk, improve safety, and ensure all health and environmental
threats are considered.
H.R. 4293 would categorically exclude from NEPA sundry notices or
rights-of-way for natural gas gathering lines or compression units that
are located within an area for which NEPA review has already occurred
and adjacent to an existing disturbed area. While a project located
adjacent to an existing disturbed area, such as a road or wellpad, may
seem like an innocuous location for a gathering line or compressor
station, this approach does not take into consideration new or
cumulative impacts of additional large-scale industrial development in
an area. Potential impacts include threats to surface waters such as
streams, ponds, and rivers, destruction of wildlife habitat, increased
air pollution, severe noise, and potential impacts on historical and
other important resources. Where those impacts have already been
considered and vetted in a prior NEPA analysis, then under current law,
new analysis is not needed and legislation is unnecessary. In addition,
NEPA has built-in mechanisms by which projects with lesser impacts are
subject to a less extensive review.
Efforts to legislate categorical exclusions (CEs) from NEPA have
historically proven to be an invitation to confusion and administrative
abuses. For example, section 390 of The 2005 Energy Policy Act created
CEs for oil and gas projects. A 2011 GAO report found that the Bureau
of Land Management (BLM) had issued more than 6,000 oil and gas
drilling exemptions from Fiscal Year 2006 through Fiscal Year 2008 and
that the use of these exemptions ``often did not comply with either the
law or BLM's guidance.'' GAO found ``several types of violations of the
law.'' \5\ According to a more recent investigation by the Casper Star-
Tribune, the BLM's Casper office issued exemptions 111 times in 2013,
and only conducted environmental review seven times. In the first 4
months of 2014, the Casper office issued 53 exemptions and only
conducted two environmental assessments.\6\ Without any environmental
review, the public is left in the dark, decisionmakers cannot
understand the consequences of their actions, and industry gets a free
pass on making others bear the environmental costs of their operations.
We are therefore opposed to legislative CEs which undermine the NEPA
process, in particular CEs that favor one industry, such as energy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``Energy Policy Act of
2005: BLM's Use of Section 390 Categorical Exclusions for Oil and Gas
Development,'' GAO-11-941T: Published: Sep 9, 2011.
\6\ Storrow, Benjamin, ``BLM revives controversial fast-tracking of
oil and gas permits,'' Casper Star-Tribune, April 12, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Interior Department already has discretion under NEPA to
establish administrative CEs where environmental review is genuinely
unnecessary, and to take other action. For example, BLM is currently
considering new rules to reduce waste, including flaring, under its
current authorities. BLM has a duty under the law to minimize the waste
of Federal oil and gas resources and can and should use the full scope
of its current authority to do so.
conclusion
Reducing flaring is a laudable goal. However, ignoring other
environmental impacts to achieve this goal is short-sighted. NRDC
therefore opposes H.R. 4293 and would be happy to work with the members
of the subcommittee to develop the right solutions, including
approaches to directly reduce flaring as well as reducing our
dependence on fossil fuels and promoting energy efficiency and clean
energy resources.

______

Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Ms. Mall.
Mr. Lund, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NICHOLAS LUND, PROGRAM MANAGER OF  LANDSCAPE
CONSERVATION, NATIONAL PARKS CONSERVATION ASSOCIATION

Mr. Lund. Thank you. Good morning, Mr. Cramer, Ranking
Member Holt, and members of the subcommittee. I am Nick Lund,
Manager of the Landscape Conservation Campaign at the National
Parks Conservation Association, or NPCA. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to express NPCA's views
on H.R. 1587 on behalf of NPCA's 800,000 members and supporters
nationwide.
National parks serve and protect America's most treasured
landscapes, our history, and our culture, and are a vital
resource to millions of Americans. The idea of parks owned by
and maintained for all citizens was born in the United States,
and the existence of these national parks, representing the
crown jewels of the American landscape and the shared
experiences of our past embodies our democratic ideals, and has
been called the best idea we ever had.
However, the success of the national park idea depends upon
careful stewardship of their resources. These lands are set
aside with a mandate that they remain unimpaired for future
generations, and impairment, however incremental, should be
permitted only as a last resort. In certain situations where
potential impacts by commercial activities are minor, the
National Park Service rightly has the authority to manage for
and allow impacts that are acceptable. However, that
discretionary authority does not apply, nor should it, in a
case where use could cause impairment or an unacceptable
impact.
Where impairment to a national park is attended by a
continued threat of contamination or pollution, such as the
establishment of new oil and gas pipelines across park lands,
the decision to allow such a use should be made by the park's
owners, the public, through their representatives in Congress.
The authors of the Mineral Leasing Act's 1973 pipeline
provision understood this when they specifically excluded lands
in the National Park System from those through which the
Secretary of the Interior can grant rights-of-way for oil and
gas pipelines.
In fact, the 1973 provision passed the Senate with national
parks, national wildlife refuges, and wilderness areas all
being excluded from the Federal lands definition. After
conference with the House of Representatives, only national
park lands remained excluded, highlighting the fact that
Congress specifically recognized the uniqueness and importance
of national parks.
Unlike other possible rights-of-way across national park
lands, such as water pipelines or transmission lines, oil and
gas pipelines carry the risk of leakage or contamination. The
Wall Street Journal recently counted more than 1,400 pipeline
accidents reported in the United States since 2010. More than
80 percent of the pipeline leaks and ruptures are discovered
not by industrial leak detection monitors, but by human beings,
either pipeline employees or local residents.
The risk of not detecting a leak is greater across national
park lands that may be less frequently visited. And the impact
of a large oil spill inside a park could be catastrophic. In
these situations, the decision to permit such an incompatible
use of a national park should be left to the public, their
representatives, not the Administration in power.
However, there are situations where running a pipeline
across park lands is preferable to some other option. In those
cases, dictated by specific facts, NPCA has supported such
proposals. The Congressional Research Service has found at
least nine recent examples of Federal legislation authorizing
oil and gas pipelines to be constructed across park lands
around the country. I would like to highlight some of those
examples.
In July of last year, NPCA supported provisions in the
Denali National Park Improvement Act that would allow for a new
oil and gas pipeline to be constructed along a highway corridor
in Denali National Park. The routing of the pipeline through
that area of the park is likely more environmentally friendly
than any other alternative, and that bill is now law.
In 2001, NPCA did not object to a pipeline proposal through
Great Smoky Mountains National Park at the Gatlinburg Spur. The
area, while technically part of the park, is not an area where
the park's central resources or visitor experience would be
diminished by incursion. The bill became law, and the pipeline
was built.
In 2012, NPCA supported the New York City Natural Gas
Supply Enhancement Act, which included provisions allowing for
the construction of a natural gas pipeline through Gateway
National Recreation Area. Studies of the proposal have found
that the impacts on the recreation area were minor and
temporary, and the bill is now law.
The point of these examples is to highlight that the
process works, as currently established. The drafters of the
Mineral Leasing Act understood that the Federal Government
should only encourage private companies to seek easements
across national park lands for oil and gas pipelines when all
other options are exhausted. In the few cases where this last
resort is reached, Congress has been willing and able to pass
legislation allowing the exception.
H.R. 1587 seeks to fix a system that isn't broken. The bill
would, in its current state, increase the likelihood of injury
and impairment to our national parks.
Parks continue to occupy an important place in our Nation's
hearts, with 95 percent of Americans viewing national parks as
something that the Federal Government should be protecting and
supporting. There are a number of reasons that the increase in
domestic production of oil and natural gas can be viewed as
beneficial to our Nation, but the Federal Government should not
encourage the use of sensitive national park lands for oil and
gas pipelines.
The Mineral Leasing Act provides a logical and effective
path for oil and gas pipeline easements as it is currently
written.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lund follows:]
Prepared Statement of Nick Lund, Landscape Conservation Campaign
Manager, National Parks Conservation Association on H.R. 1587
Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt and members of the
subcommittee, I am Nick Lund, Manager of the Landscape Conservation
Campaign at the National Parks Conservation Association, or NPCA. NPCA
is a nonpartisan, nonprofit advocacy organization that has been the
leading independent voice in support of protecting and enhancing the
National Park System since it was founded in 1919. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to express our views on H.R.
1587 on behalf of NPCA's 800,000 members and supporters nationwide.
National parks conserve and protect America's most treasured
landscapes, our history, and our culture and are a vital resource to
millions of Americans. The idea of parks owned by and maintained for
all citizens was born in the United States, and the existence of these
national parks--representing the crown jewels of the American landscape
and the shared experiences of our past--embody our democratic ideals
and has been called ``the best idea we ever had.''
The success of our national park system is undeniable. Our national
parks protect our most incredible landscapes and most sacred places,
from Denali to the Liberty Bell. The huge domestic and international
interest in our national park system has created robust and stable
economies in communities near national parks. More than 279 million
people made recreational visits to national parks in 2011, spending
more than $12.95 billion in local gateway regions.
However, the success of the national park idea depends upon careful
stewardship of their resources. These lands are set aside with a
mandate that they remain unimpaired for future generations, and
impairment, however incremental, should be permitted only as a last
resort. In certain situations, where potential impacts by commercial
activities are minor, the National Park Service rightly has the
authority to manage for and allow impacts that are acceptable. However,
that discretionary authority does not apply, nor should it, in case
where a use could cause impairment or an unacceptable impact.
Where impairment to a national park is attended by a continued
threat of contamination or pollution, such as the establishment of new
oil and gas pipelines across park lands, the decision to allow such a
use should be made by the parks' owners, the public, through their
elected representatives in Congress. The authors of the Minerals
Leasing Act's 1973 pipeline provision understood this when they
specifically excluded lands in the National Park System from those
through which the Secretary of the Interior can grant rights-of-way for
oil and gas pipelines. In fact, the 1973 provision passed the Senate
with national parks, national wildlife refuges, and wilderness areas
all being excluded from the ``Federal lands'' definition. After
conference with the House of Representatives, only national park lands
remained excluded, highlighting the fact that Congress specifically
recognized the uniqueness and importance of national parks.
Unlike other possible rights-of-way across national parks lands,
such as water pipelines or transmission lines, oil and gas pipelines
carry the risk of leakage or contamination. The Wall Street Journal
recently counted more than 1,400 pipeline accidents reported in the
United States since 2010. More than 80 percent of pipeline leaks and
ruptures are discovered not by industrial leak-detection monitors but
by human beings--either pipeline employees or local residents.\1\ The
risk of not detecting a leak is greater across national park lands that
might be less frequently visited, and the impact of a large oil spill
inside a park could be catastrophic. In these situations, the decision
to permit such an incompatible use of national park lands should be
left to the public, through their representatives, not the
administration in power.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Sider, A. (2014, January 20) High-Tech Monitors Often Miss Oil
Pipeline Leaks. The Wall Street Journal. Online at: http://
online.wsj.com/news/articles/
SB10001424052702303754404579310920956322040.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, there are situations where running a pipeline across park
lands is preferable to some other option, and in those cases, dictated
by specific facts, NPCA has supported such proposals. The Congressional
Research Service has found at least nine recent examples of Federal
legislation authorizing oil and gas pipelines to be constructed across
national park lands across the country.
I'd like to highlight some of those examples. In July of last year,
NPCA supported provisions in the Denali National Park Improvement Act
that would allow for a new oil and gas pipeline to be constructed on a
highway corridor in Denali National Park. The routing of the pipeline
through that area of the park is likely more environmentally friendly
than any other alternative. That bill is now law, and the pipeline will
be constructed pending completion of the NEPA process.
In 2001, NPCA did not object to a pipeline proposal through Great
Smoky Mountains National Park, at the Gatlinburg Spur. The area, while
technically part of the park, is not an area where the park's central
resources or visitor experience would be diminished by incursion. The
bill became law, and the pipeline was built.
In 2012, NPCA supported the New York City Natural Gas Supply
Enhancement Act, which included provisions allowing for the
construction of a natural gas pipeline through Gateway National
Recreation Area. Studies of the proposal have found that impacts on the
recreation area would be minor and temporary, and the bill is now law.
The point of these examples is to highlight that the process works
as currently established. The drafters of the Mineral Leasing Act
understood that the Federal Government should only encourage private
companies to seek easements across national park lands for oil and gas
pipelines when all other options are exhausted. In the few cases where
this ``last resort'' is reached, Congress has been willing and able to
pass legislation allowing the exception. H.R. 1587 seeks to fix a
system that isn't broken. The bill would, in its current state,
increase the likelihood of injury and impairment to our national parks.
Parks continue to occupy an important place in the Nation's hearts,
with 95 percent of Americans viewing national parks as something that
the Federal Government should be protecting and supporting. There are a
number of reasons that the increase in domestic production of oil and
natural gas can be viewed as beneficial to our Nation, but the Federal
Government should not encourage the use of sensitive national parks
lands for oil and gas pipelines. The Mineral Leasing Act provides a
logical and effective path for oil and gas pipeline easements as it is
currently written.
I would be happy to answer any questions members of the
subcommittee might have.

______

Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Lund, for your testimony.
Now, Mr. Nedd, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL NEDD, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, MINERALS AND
REALTY MANAGEMENT, BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF THE INTERIOR, ACCOMPANIED BY HERBERT FROST, REGIONAL
DIRECTOR, ALASKA REGION, NATIONAL PARK SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF THE INTERIOR

Mr. Nedd. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to present the views
of the Department of the Interior on two bills pertaining to
the development of oil and gas pipeline infrastructure on
Federal lands. With me today to answer any questions
specifically related to National Park Service is Dr. Herbert
Frost, Regional Director for the Alaska Region of the National
Park Service.
The Department of the Interior administers a wide range of
lands and resources that includes wilderness areas, land held
in trust for Native Americans, our national park system, our
national wildlife refuge system, and the national system of
public land. The Bureau of Land Management administers over 245
million surface acres on approximately 700 million acres of
onshore subsurface mineral estate.
Together with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the BLM also
conducts energy permitting on approximately 56 million acres of
land held in trust by the Federal Government on behalf of
tribes and individual Indian owners. The Department of the
Interior has made it a priority to ensure a clean energy future
to environmentally responsible development of renewable and
conventional energy on Federal and Indian lands.
Oil and gas transmission is a critical component of these
energy efforts, and the BLM plays a key role by issuing rights-
of-way grants for oil and natural gas gathering, distribution,
transmission, pipelines, and related facility. Notably, the BLM
oil and gas pilot offices authority, that has been expanded to
include our Dickinson office in North Dakota, are particularly
effective for permitting these pipelines.
Since 2009, the BLM has participated in the approval of
seven major oil and gas projects, totaling nearly 1,750 miles,
with nearly 750 of those miles crossing Federal lands. In the
next 18 months, the BLM is expected to complete review and
disposition of three more major pipeline projects, totaling
nearly 500 additional miles, with nearly 250 of those miles
crossing Federal land. This work is in addition to the
thousands of miles of smaller pipeline projects that are
approved every year to transport oil and gas from the
production site to the larger gathering pipelines and the major
transport pipeline facilities.
The activities called for in H.R. 4293, the Natural Gas
Gathering Enhancement Act, are already within the scope of
existing Department authorities, and consistent with our
priorities and activities already underway. The Department
strongly opposes the categorical exclusion from NEPA of
pipelines activity, as proposed in H.R. 4293. The engagement of
the public through the environmental review process under NEPA
is a crucial component of the BLM's multiple use management of
the public lands. H.R. 4293 would prohibit the BLM from
engaging in this important public participation and
environmental analysis process, and prohibit the BLM from
engaging in site-specific NEPA analysis, if needed, for
particular natural gas pipelines.
The Department strongly opposes the provision of H.R. 1587,
the Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act, which would
authorize the Secretary to issue a permit for oil and gas
pipelines on National Park Service lands, reversing the long-
standing prohibition on allowing such pipeline in our Nation's
national parks, unless explicitly authorized by Congress. The
disturbance associated with the laying of pipelines, as well as
the transportation of oil and gas products via pipeline is
inconsistent with the conservation mandate in the National Park
Service Organic Act, and would overturn long-standing and
necessary protection of park system resources and value.
The Department also opposes H.R. 1587 because it contains
provisions which are redundant or conflict with existing BLM
authority under the Mineral Leasing Act to grant right-of-ways
for pipelines through Federal land. These new provisions would
raise confusion for land management agencies, applicants, and
public regarding what authority should be followed, what
requirement must be met, and what new regulation would be
required. The Department continues to work hard to increase the
capacity to transport energy resources, where appropriate,
across Federal lands, and has been successfully coordinating
with our State and tribal partners.
Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony on H.R.
4293 and H.R. 1587.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nedd follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael D. Nedd, Assistant Director, Minerals and
Realty Management, Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the
Interior on H.R. 4293 and H.R. 1587
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the
Department of the Interior (Department) on H.R. 4293 and H.R. 1587.
H.R. 4293 would categorically exclude from environmental review under
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) the permitting of natural
gas gathering lines, and would establish deadlines for such
authorizations on Federal and Indian lands. The Department strongly
opposes H.R. 4293, which would prohibit the BLM from engaging in
valuable public participation and analysis under NEPA. The NEPA process
is invaluable to sound public land management, providing a formal
opportunity for public engagement, consideration of environmental
impacts, and identification of unknown or unforeseen issues. Both the
Department of Interior and the Department of Agriculture have
capabilities to effectively and efficiently evaluate and process
pipeline applications including the use of categorical exclusions where
relevant criteria apply. Both Departments also appreciate the need to
capture natural gas and are actively seeking means to be responsive
while protecting public lands.
The Department also opposes H.R. 1587 which contains provisions
which are redundant or conflict with existing Mineral Leasing Act (MLA)
authority regarding granting pipeline rights-of-way (ROW) through
Federal lands, and strongly opposes the bill's provisions that would
authorize the Secretary to issue a permit for oil and gas pipelines on
Department-administered lands, which would now include National Park
Service (NPS) lands.
Background
The Department of the Interior administers a wide range of lands
and resources that includes wilderness areas, lands held in trust for
Native Americans, our National Park System, our National Wildlife
Refuge System, and our National System of Public Lands. The Bureau of
Land Management (BLM) is responsible for protecting the resources and
managing the uses of our Nation's public lands, which are located
primarily in 12 western States, including Alaska. The BLM administers
over 245 million surface acres and approximately 700 million acres of
onshore subsurface mineral estate throughout the Nation. The BLM,
together with the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), also provides
permitting and oversight services under the Indian Mineral Leasing Act
of 1938 on approximately 56 million acres of land held in trust by the
Federal Government on behalf of tribes and individual Indian owners.
The BLM plays an important role in ensuring safe and effective
management of mineral resources on Federal and Indian lands. The BLM
works closely with surface management agencies, including the BIA and
tribal governments, in the management of the subsurface mineral estate.
While the BLM cooperates with its Federal partners to provide
consistent and responsible oil and gas management, the BLM alone is
delegated the responsibility of managing public and Indian Trust
minerals.
The Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 establishes the statutory framework
to promote the exploration and development of oil and natural gas from
the Federal onshore mineral estate. Secretary of the Interior Sally
Jewell has emphasized that, as the Nation moves toward the new energy
frontier, the development of conventional energy resources from BLM-
managed public lands will continue to play a critical role in meeting
the Nation's energy needs. Facilitating the safe, responsible, and
efficient development of these domestic oil and gas resources is one of
the BLM's many responsibilities and part of the administration's broad
energy strategy, outlined in the President's Blueprint for a Secure
Energy Future. Environmentally responsible development of these
resources will help protect consumers and reduce our Nation's reliance
on oil imports, while protecting our Federal lands and the environment.
As part of this effort, the Department is working with various agencies
in support of Executive Order 13604 to improve the performance of
Federal permitting and review of infrastructure projects by increasing
transparency, predictability, accountability, and continuous
improvement of routine infrastructure permitting and reviews.
Oil production from Federal onshore lands is at its highest level
in over a decade, with onshore production about 35 percent above 2008
levels according to the most current available data. The amount of
producing Federal acreage continues to increase, and grew by over
300,000 acres from 2011 to 2013. The total number of well bores on
Federal lands has increased by over 3,400 wells during this same period
to nearly 94,000 total wells.
Well-paying jobs are often associated with oil and gas exploration
and development, and provide crucial revenues and economic activity in
many communities. Royalties from onshore public land oil and gas
development were nearly $3 billion in Fiscal Year 2013. Approximately
half of that total ($1.4 billion) was paid directly to the States in
which the development occurred and is used to fund important State
priorities. Over $930 million in mineral revenues was disbursed to
American Indian tribes from production on Indian lands--an increase of
more than $200 million over Fiscal Year 2012 disbursements.
Fundamental to all of the BLM's management actions--including
authorization of oil and gas exploration and development--is the
agency's land use planning and NEPA processes. These open, public
processes are the vehicle by which proposals for managing particular
resources are made known to the public in advance of taking action. The
BLM is committed to providing the environmental review and public
involvement opportunities required by NEPA for proposals to use BLM-
managed lands. In addition, as required under the Federal Land Policy
and Management Act (FLPMA), the BLM strives to achieve a balance
between oil and gas production and development of other natural
resources and protection of the environment and cultural resources. The
land-use planning and NEPA processes are vital tools used to achieve
this statutory mandate.
Oil & Gas Pipelines
As authorized by the Mineral Leasing Act (MLA, Section 28), the BLM
issues ROW grants for oil and natural gas gathering, distribution, and
transmission pipelines and related facilities. The BLM may grant MLA
ROWs on any public land, or on land administered by two or more Federal
agencies, except land in the National Park System or land held in trust
for Indian tribes. Oil and gas production is now outpacing pipeline
capacity and creating bottlenecks in some locations, putting a strain
on America's pipeline infrastructure.
Since 2009, the BLM has participated in the approval of seven major
pipeline expansion projects totaling nearly 1,750 miles of new oil and
gas pipeline with nearly 750 of those miles crossing Federal lands. In
the next 18 months, the BLM is expected to complete review and
disposition of three more major pipeline projects totaling nearly 500
hundred additional miles with nearly 250 of those miles across Federal
lands. Work on these major oil and gas pipeline projects is in addition
to the thousands of miles of smaller pipeline projects that are
approved every year to transport oil and gas from the production site
to the larger gathering pipelines and the major transport pipeline
facilities.
H.R. 4293, ``Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act''
H.R. 4293 amends several laws to provide additional authority for
the Secretary of the Interior to approve natural gas pipelines and
gathering lines on Federal and Indian land. Section 4 of the bill
amends the Energy Policy Act of 2005 and adds a new provision (section
319) to categorically exclude from NEPA review certain gas gathering
lines and associated field compression units. Under the bill, such
lines would be categorically excluded from NEPA review if they are
within an area that has a land use plan or environmental document that
analyzed transportation of natural gas produced from oil wells as a
reasonably foreseeable activity and also are located adjacent to an
existing disturbed area for the construction of a road or oil and gas
pad. The bill's categorical exclusion (CX) is applicable to BLM-managed
lands and other Federal lands with two exceptions: (1) if the Governor
in which the lands are located requests that the CX not be applied; and
(2) if an Indian tribe requests the CX be applied on tribal lands.
Section 4 of the bill further amends the Energy Policy Act of 2005
and adds a new provision to require the Secretary to conduct a study to
identify any actions that may be taken under Federal law or regulation,
or changes to Federal law or regulation, to expedite permitting for gas
gathering lines and associated field compression units that are located
on Federal land or Indian land. This section requires the Secretary to
prepare a report to Congress every 180 days on the progress made in
expediting permits for gas gathering lines and associated field
compression units that are located on Federal or Indian land and on any
issues impeding that progress.
Finally, Section 5 of H.R. 4293 amends the MLA to require the
Secretary to issue a sundry notice or ROW for a gas gathering line and
associated field compression unit not later than 30 days after
receiving the request from the pipeline proponent if the request meets
the criteria in section 4 of the bill, and not later than 60 days after
receiving the request if it does not meet the section 4 criteria. The
bill (section 6) also amends FLPMA to require the same approval
timeframes.
Analysis
The Department strongly opposes the categorical exclusion from NEPA
review of pipeline activities as proposed in H.R. 4293. The engagement
of the public through the environmental review process under NEPA is a
crucial component of the BLM's multiple-use management of the public
lands and for the consideration and mitigation of impacts to adjacent
resources and lands. These open, public processes facilitate the
consideration of impacts to the affected environment and identify
unknown or unforeseen issues, which is invaluable to sound public land
management. The BLM is committed to providing the environmental review
and public involvement opportunities required by NEPA for proposals for
the use of BLM-managed lands. H.R. 4293 would prohibit the BLM from
engaging in this important public participation and environmental
analysis process, in addition to prohibiting the BLM from engaging in
site-specific NEPA analysis if needed for particular natural gas
pipelines.
The activities called for in H.R. 4293 are already within the scope
of existing Department authorities and consistent with our priorities
and activities already underway. For example, for an area that has a
land use plan or environmental document for transportation of natural
gas as a reasonably foreseeable activity, the BLM could use its
existing authorities to authorize the activity following a
determination that the existing NEPA is adequate, provided the
necessary site-specific analysis and the environmental document found
the action would not cause a significant impact to other resources.
The Department also strongly opposes the bill's provisions in
section (4) that would allow each State Governor to decide the
appropriate level of NEPA analysis to be done by the BLM for pipeline
projects on Federal lands within that State. In addition to the
practical problems that this raises with pipelines that may cross State
jurisdictional lines, giving State Governors the authority to determine
planning activities on Federal lands would limit the BLM's ability to
comply with its obligations under Federal law. The bill contains a
related provision which applies to tribal land and the Department has
concerns that the provision may conflict with the agency's legal
responsibility for consultation, stewardship and oversight service
under the Indian Mineral Leasing Act of 1938.
The Department also has concerns about the requirement to conduct a
study to identify proposed changes to Federal law or regulations and to
report every 180 days on progress to expedite permitting for gas
gathering lines and associated field compression units that are located
on Federal land or Indian land and impediments to that progress. If
enacted, these requirements would divert limited BLM resources from oil
and gas permitting, inspection and enforcement activities and result in
the further delay of environmentally responsible development of
pipeline infrastructure.
Sections 5 and 6 of H.R. 4293, which require the Secretary to issue
a sundry notice or ROW not later than 30 or 60 days after receiving the
request from the project proponent, are also very concerning. The
provision does not contain any requirement for the proponent's request
to be fully complete prior to submission. This provision removes
discretion from the Secretary to authorize the sundry notice or ROW.
Furthermore, categorical exclusions still require consideration of
extraordinary circumstances before they can be applied, even if NEPA
analysis is not required, and this consideration may be challenging to
complete within the 30- or 60-day timeframes.
Finally, the Department opposes the provision in section 6 amending
section 504 of FLPMA. This provision would allow the Secretary to
authorize gas gathering lines via the authority of Title V of FLPMA,
which sets out the requirements for many other types of ROWs. However,
section 501(a)(2) of FLPMA prohibits the Secretary from using the Title
V authority to authorize oil and gas pipelines, instead deferring to
the MLA. The proposed amendment to section 504 of FLPMA would give
contradictory direction to the BLM. In addition, it should be noted
that under the MLA, 50 percent of the receipts from annual rents for
oil and gas pipelines ROWs are provided to State governments in which
the pipeline is located, in contrast to the treatment of receipts from
FLPMA ROWs, none of which are provided to State governments.
H.R. 1587, ``Energy Infrastructure Improvement Act''
H.R. 1587 provides new direction for the Department in granting
ROWs through Federal lands for petroleum pipeline purposes--separate
and apart from the existing authorization provided in the Mineral
Leasing Act. The bill authorizes the Secretary of the Interior and the
Secretary of Agriculture to issue permits for ROWs, temporary
easements, or other necessary authorizations to facilitate natural gas,
oil and petroleum product pipelines and related facilities on eligible
Federal lands--including lands managed by the NPS.
The bill requires the Secretary to include terms and conditions for
the ROW and states modifications to these terms and conditions must be
agreed to by the permittee. Under the bill, the Secretary could recover
costs of processing, issuing, and monitoring the permit and an annual
rental fee of the fair market value of the use. The bill also
authorizes the Secretary to determine the initial term for a ROW permit
based on costs incurred, useful life of the pipeline and the public and
economic purposes served and requires the Secretary to renew the ROW
provided the project is in commercial operation and is operated and
maintained in accordance with the terms and conditions. Finally, the
bill provides authority for the Secretary to impose citations, fines,
or revoke a permit for failure to comply with any terms and conditions
of the permit and also provides that a permittee may file suit to
challenge a final decision in the United States Court of Appeals.
Analysis
The Department strongly opposes H.R. 1587's provisions that would
authorize the Secretary to issue a permit for oil and gas pipelines on
NPS lands--reversing the longstanding prohibition on allowing such
pipelines in our Nation's national parks unless explicitly authorized
by Congress. In its 1973 amendments to the MLA, Congress determined
that such lands would not be part of the general ROW provisions. This
specific exemption in the MLA protects the integrity, resources, and
values of the National Park System. The significant infrastructure
associated with the clearing, grading, trenching, stringing, welding,
coating and laying of pipeline as well as the transportation of oil and
gas products via pipeline, which carries the risk of oil spillage and
gas explosions, is inconsistent with the conservation mandate set forth
in the NPS Organic Act. H.R. 1587 would overturn longstanding and
necessary protection of park system resources and values, visitor
experience, and human health and safety and would undermine the very
purpose for which National Park System units were created.
The Department is also concerned that H.R. 1587's provisions could
be interpreted to authorize the Secretary to issue a permit for oil and
gas pipelines on lands that are a component of the National Wilderness
Preservation System, a concept the Department strongly opposes.
The Department also opposes H.R. 1587 because it contains
provisions granting ROWs through Federal lands for pipeline purposes
which are redundant or conflict with existing BLM authority under the
MLA. These new provisions would raise confusion for land management
agencies, applicants, and the public regarding which authority should
be followed, which ``sideboards'' apply, what requirements must be met
and what new regulations would be required. For example, the bill
authorizes the Department to issue permits for pipeline ROWs, but
remains silent on the width of any ROW that a permit might affect and
does not provide a fixed term for the ROW as provided for under the
MLA. In contrast, the MLA identifies a 50 foot maximum ROW and an
initial term of no more than 30 years. The bill also fails to identify
where an annual rental fee would be deposited. Also of concern are the
bill's provisions that require mandatory renewal of the ROW and that
allow modifications to the permit only if they are agreed upon by the
permittee. The Department believes that the bill's new authority to
issue citations or impose fines would be better suited for inclusion in
the MLA.
Finally, H.R. 1587 omits a number of important procedural and
substantive safeguards Congress previously required with the issuance
of ROWs, including: a right of public notice and comment; bonding
requirements; pipeline safety and environmental protection provisions;
technical and financial capability requirements; disclosure regarding
entity ownership; and width limitations.
Conclusion
The Department has been successful and continues working hard to
increase the capacity to transport energy resources where appropriate
across Federal lands and in coordination with our State and tribal
partners. The BLM plays an active role in providing suitable lands to
modernize the Nation's pipeline infrastructure in an environmentally
responsible way to efficiently distribute the Nation's energy
resources. Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony on H.R.
4293 and H.R. 1587.

______

Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Nedd, and thank all of you for
your statements. We will now begin questioning. Members, as you
were reminded, are limited to 5 minutes for their questions,
but we may have additional rounds if there are more questions
after the first round. And I now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
And I want to pursue, Mr. Nedd, with you the line of your
testimony because you state that my bill eliminates the NEPA
requirements, and thus, the NEPA process. But isn't the use of
categorical exclusions, as you have testified to, already part
of the NEPA process? And, if so, can you tell me areas where
the Administration does, in fact, use categorical exclusions to
get around the NEPA process?
Mr. Nedd. Congressman, again, the Department recognizes the
importance of public involvement. And categorical exclusion,
the administrative categorical exclusion may be used within a
right-of-way where site-specific NEPA has already been
performed.
Mr. Cramer. But when developing a land use, don't you
assume or prepare or go through the NEPA, where you have
already had public engagement of the plan, don't you assume the
possibility of things like a gathering line might be an
important part of other oil and gas activity on that same land?
And so doesn't the public have its opportunity?
Mr. Nedd. Congressman, in a land use plan it is done for a
higher level for allocation, resource allocation. That land use
plan may contemplate transportation of oil or gas, but does not
engage in a site-specific NEPA to understand the impacts on the
ground on that site to any conservation values.
Mr. Cramer. So doesn't it make sense, though, that we
would, in that process, then, at least consolidate the NEPA
process? In other words, I am looking for a solution that
doesn't shortcut public participation and involvement, but
rather, consolidates it. So we can do it more efficiently,
without jeopardizing the environment. Can't we do that in that
process?
Mr. Nedd. I believe, Congressman, the Department already
has a process that would allow site-specific NEPA at a time an
APD or any type of right-of-way is contemplated. And so, during
that process, it would allow a site-specific and then a right-
of-way within that right-of-way, that has already been
analyzed, would be appropriate with the appropriate DNA, or
something to that effect.
So, again, looking for the site-specific while in the land
use plan is more the resource allocation level.
Mr. Cramer. Let me ask you this. Didn't the Department use
categorical exclusion to expand the permitting for wind
projects to kill birds from 5 years to 30 years without public
comment, and without the NEPA public participation process? And
now the Department believes a single decision to approve, say,
2 miles of gathering line in North Dakota for gas in a right-
of-way that already exists requires years more environmental
oversight than allowing a 30-year exclusion for killing birds
with wind farms? I mean doesn't that seem inconsistent?
Mr. Nedd. Congressman, I am not familiar with the reference
to wind and the killing of birds, so I cannot comment on that.
Mr. Cramer. All right. Let me say to you, as well, as not
only a Member from North Dakota, but having served 10 years as
an environmental regulator in the oil and gas and coal and the
energy industry as a public service commissioner in North
Dakota, your employees, along with the U.S. Department of
Agriculture employees out in the Forest Service really are some
of the hardest working people I know. They do an incredible job
with the resources they have. I get the sense sometimes,
though, that they don't have the full support back here that
they ought to have.
We have, as you know, tried to provide and have
successfully provided you all some latitude in compensating
them properly, given the fact that the rent in the Bakken is
higher than Manhattan, and the standard of living is equal to
many different places. We are trying to help them and help you
keep people. But what I am trying to do with this bill, and I
think what both bills try to do, is not shortcut anything, and
try to reduce that workload in a way that is responsible for
the environment.
Now, you have testified, I think, in your testimony that
the government has a problem, or the Administration has a
problem with the 3 months, every 3 months of responding or
reporting. Is there some way that you can see in this that we
can work together to ease that a little bit, and maybe report
every 6 months, 1 year, every other year? Is there some
compromise we can find here that we can get the support of the
Administration to consolidating this process, so that we can
stop flaring this gas?
Because, as Ms. Mall testified, this gas is not only a
waste product, it is also a pollutant, it is an emission of CO2
gases without any value added to it. Do you see any room for
compromise here?
Mr. Nedd. Congressman, I agree with you, BLM employees are
certainly some of the hardest working employees I have known.
And spending time in Montana myself a few years ago, I can
attest to that.
And, you know, Congressman, we are always open for looking
for ways to allow our employees to get the resources. But the
Administration clearly wants to make certain the NEPA process
allows public participation and be able to look at those site-
specific impacts. So, Congressman, again, I believe finding
ways to increase resources is a good thing, and finding ways to
make certain we continue to have public involvement is a great
way, and the Administration, I presume, would want to talk on
that level.
Mr. Cramer. All right. Thank you very much. My time has
expired. I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Holt.
Dr. Holt. Thank you. Mr. Nedd, if I may continue with you,
is there any evidence that the NEPA review for gas gathering
pipelines has been a significant contributor to excessive
flaring, a contributor to that flaring?
Mr. Nedd. No, Congressman, there has been no evidence I am
aware of.
Dr. Holt. And do you have any evidence what is causing the
flaring?
Mr. Nedd. You know, Congressman, around the Nation
certainly, but if I may go to North Dakota, where it seems to
be one of the hot spots, it is a relatively new play, the
Bakken. The infrastructure is not fully developed. And, frankly
speaking, as operators look at how best to make their decision,
they sometimes find that it is easier to flare than it is to go
through the process of getting the gathering line.
Dr. Holt. How long does it typically take for the BLM to do
a required environmental review for a gas gathering pipeline?
Do you have a typical time or a median time?
Mr. Nedd. Yes, Congressman. Less than 3 months. We have
looked across a range and it is less than 3 months.
Dr. Holt. Less than 3 months. OK.
Now, let me try to get this in perspective, too. Oil and
gas production on Federal lands in North Dakota has gone up
significantly in the last 4 or 5 years. According to the Office
of Natural Resources Revenue, since 2009 Federal land gas
production is up 33 percent. And Federal land oil production
has gone up 85 percent.
But I would like to get this in perspective. The Federal
production is still a very small fraction of the total in North
Dakota, less than 5 percent of the oil. So why is that fraction
so small on Federal lands in North Dakota?
Mr. Nedd. You know, Congressman, the majority of the
development in that Bakken area is in either private or State
and some tribal----
Dr. Holt. But the Federal lands are a small fraction of----
Mr. Nedd. Very small fraction.
Dr. Holt. Is the flaring in North Dakota just a problem on
Federal lands, or is it also occurring on private lands?
Mr. Nedd. It is occurring on private lands, absolutely.
Dr. Holt. In fact, it appears, according to the data that I
have here, that the rate of flaring is higher on private lands
than it is on Federal lands, and the Federal lands are a very
small fraction of the total land.
Ms. Mall, most people think about flaring in the Bakken in
North Dakota. Are there other areas where flaring is a serious
problem, other areas of the country?
Ms. Mall. Yes, definitely. In particular, there have been a
lot of reports lately of flaring in Texas, in what is called
the Eagleford Shale Area.
Dr. Holt. And is that Federal land?
Ms. Mall. There is not Federal land there, that is private
land.
Dr. Holt. I see. Let me also ask you, Ms. Mall, in your
testimony you said that flaring is an environmental problem,
but there are other environmental problems to balance that must
also be considered. What is the appropriate forum for balancing
those various kinds of environmental risk?
Ms. Mall. NEPA, the National Environmental Policy Act, sets
out a process that is tried and true over many years for
developing the best projects possible, including a large
priority for public input, as Mr. Nedd referenced, and
independent experts, such as scientists. Generally, with the
public input, the agency can then consider what are the
different alternatives to accomplish a goal, what alternative
will offer the greatest benefits and the least harms.
Now, the agency doesn't have to select that alternative.
But they have to consider----
Dr. Holt. But the procedure shouldn't be bypassed is what
you are saying.
Ms. Mall. It should not be, no. This is an essential way to
develop this project----
Dr. Holt. I have only a moment left, or less than a minute.
Let me turn to Mr. Lund--excuse me for interrupting you.
But, Mr. Lund, in Mr. Santa's testimony he said that the
process in the national parks is really an oversight, that the
way it used to be is the way it should be. But is it not true
that in 1973 Congress deliberately amended Section 28 of the
Mineral Leasing Act, specifically excluding national parks?
Mr. Lund. Yes, it is true.
Dr. Holt. So this is not an oversight that needs to be
corrected, do you think?
Mr. Lund. No. This was considered in both the Senate and
the House, and conferenced out, and national park lands were
left as the one needing legislation.
Dr. Holt. Well, thank you. I wish we had more time. I
appreciate your comments.
Mr. Santa. May I respond, Mr. Holt?
Dr. Holt. One witness wanted to say something.
Mr. Cramer. Oh, sure, continue. We've got a little time.
Dr. Holt. Yes, Mr. Santa.
Mr. Santa. Oh, Mr. Holt, thank you.
Dr. Holt. Yes.
Mr. Santa. I would note that in the 1970s the Department of
the Interior still interpreted the law to imply that it had the
authority to authorize natural gas pipelines on National Park
Service land, but it did not change that interpretation until
the mid to late 1980s. So I would question whether an
interpretation of the 1973 action by Congress to explicitly
exclude that authority from National Park Service----
Dr. Holt. Well, it may----
Mr. Santa [continuing]. Some question on that.
Dr. Holt. It may be that the Park Service wasn't clear on
it, but Congress was. I think it is well recorded that this was
a deliberate exclusion. That is the way it was intended. And
the Park Service came to understand that.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you. We may have time for a second round
of questioning. We could pursue this further. At this time I
would recognize Mr. Mullin.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, sir, and thank you for allowing me
to bring my son in with me. There are never enough
opportunities to have your kids with you.
Mr. Cramer. Just so you know, Mr. Mullin, you don't get
another 5 minutes because he is with you.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Mullin. Oh, he doesn't get another 5 minutes? Well,
maybe he could probably do a better job than I could.
Either way, I appreciate the panel for being here. And I
just have a few questions that I kind of want to get through.
Being from Oklahoma, obviously we are a State that is very well
known for natural resources. And it is vitally important to our
economy.
And, Mr. Nedd, I have heard you sit up here and you took a
lot of credit for what this Administration supposedly has done
since they have been in office. But I find it quite interesting
that a lot of the stuff they are bragging about is stuff that
has been done on the private land, not Federal land. But you
guys are quick to take credit for it. In fact, if we start
looking at the development of what has happened on private land
versus Federal land, it is astonishing.
I am Cherokee, and we have a lot of land, obviously, in
Oklahoma that is owned by our nations. And you brought up that
BLM has quite a bit of land, and with different tribes across
there, and you started to talk just a second about the
improvements that you guys have made on Indian territory. And I
am kind of curious what you are meaning by that, because I hear
from the tribes all the time, and we have so many natural
resources underneath our feet, but yet we are always having to
turn around and ask you guys for permission. If we were treated
like private land, we would be so much farther along than we
are today. But our biggest hindrance we have is your
Department.
So, how is it that you are sitting there just a second ago
during your testimony, that you were referring to taking credit
for something that we have been asking for? I will let you
respond to that.
Mr. Nedd. Well, Congressman, the BLM, certainly through the
Secretary, works on tribal land for the authorizing of
minerals. And the BLM works hand in hand to ensure, whether it
is through BIA leases are issued, or whether it is through the
permitting of oil and gas. And so, Congressman, I will stand by
that, that the BLM works with those agencies to permit those
activities----
Mr. Mullin. Works with or is a hindrance? Because if we
were treated like private land, we could get it a lot farther
and a lot faster. I mean it is private land, it is our land,
but yet we are asking you for permission. ``Working with,'' you
make it sound like you are trying to help us out. You are not.
You are our biggest hindrance, by far. We have been trying to
be treated like private land, because we are private land. But
you guys, for some reason, you don't want to let go.
And I understand the bureaucracy in Washington, DC, that
you never want to let go of anything. In fact, I understand
that you oppose all these new bills that are coming out,
because you guys want control of it. But you have to admit
there are problems. There are problems with the permitting.
There are problems when we have the tremendous amount of
backlog.
So what would you suggest we do to try speeding this
process up? Look, we are right on the verge of being able to be
completely independent of other countries and keeping our gas
skyrocketing every time there is a little bit of uprising
happening over in Iraq or other places. And we have to pay for
it here in America, when we have it underneath our feet, but
yet we are trying to develop it and we can't. And we have some
bills here that would help push that along, and yet you guys
are opposed to it.
So, tell me, what are your suggestions? Keep it the way
that it is?
Mr. Nedd. Again, Congressman, through the Indian Minerals
Leasing Act, Congress granted the Secretary certain authority
when it comes to Indian trust land.
Mr. Mullin. I asked you a question on what your suggestion
is. If you oppose these bills, give me a better alternative.
Mr. Nedd. Again, Congressman, I was attempting to respond
to you. So through that Indian Minerals Act, the Bureau of Land
Management, on behalf of the Secretary, works with tribes for
the permitting of oil and gas. We believe, again, it takes
about less than 3 months to approve a gathering line. And so we
are willing to work with that process and continue to see how
best we can move forward.
Mr. Mullin. Less than 3 months? There are projects that
have been on there a lot longer than that we have been asking
for. I would like to know where you came up with less than 3
months.
Once again, I am asking you for suggestions. Give me some
suggestions. I have quite a few employees that work for me. I
don't mind them coming to me with their problems, except come
to me with your problems with suggestions. If the only thing
you want to do is oppose, you are not helping the situation.
You are hindering it. You are just sitting in the way of
progress. And that is what I see your Administration doing
right now, is sitting in the way of progress.
We are trying to advance this country. And yet, you guys
take credit for it every day. And you are not the one doing it,
it is private sector doing it.
Thank you, and I will yield back my time.
Mr. Cramer. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you,
Mr. Mullin.
Just for the good of the order, just to remind people, we
expect to be voting around 11:20 now, so the House is in recess
until 11:20.
At this time, Mr. Lowenthal, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I am kind of
confused. I know in the opening statement that the author, the
sponsor, mentioned that one of the problems with NEPA was that
there were greater amounts of flaring. I would believe the
understanding is because of the timing and what takes place
because of NEPA on Federal lands, than there are on State or
private lands where NEPA is not required.
Yet, in testimony and questions that were raised by the
Ranking Member, Mr. Holt, he identified that in 2013 the
majority of flaring occurred at wells located on private or
State lands, 72 percent, and the rate of flaring is no higher
on Federal public lands than on private State lands.
I want to ask Ms. Mall. Is there a higher rate of flaring
on Federal lands? Or are there no real differences? Has NEPA
been the impediment in this?
Ms. Mall. I am not aware of any projects to reduce flaring
that have been delayed by the NEPA process.
Dr. Lowenthal. OK. I guess Mr. Nedd, is that true also? Has
NEPA been an impediment? And are there higher rates to, again,
I think you addressed this a little bit earlier, are there
higher rates of flaring on Federal lands versus private lands?
And so, where there is no NEPA requirement, to your knowledge?
Mr. Nedd. Congressman, I can't say there is a higher rate
of flaring, especially in the Bakken. I have no knowledge of
where NEPA has been an impediment that contributed to the
flaring.
Dr. Lowenthal. The other question I have, Mr. Nedd, is
that, are you concerned, is the Department concerned that the
categorical exclusion in H.R. 4293 would be required to be
carried out without any consideration of the extraordinary
circumstances? And what would that mean, if it was done without
taking into account extraordinary circumstances?
Mr. Nedd. Again, Congressman, from our interpretation or
understanding of the bill, that is true with no extraordinary
circumstances. So, therefore, the BLM would not be able to
determine the impact of a specific action on the resources.
Dr. Lowenthal. So, therefore, you would not have an
assessment by not having, when you are doing the assessment of
extraordinary circumstances, I know you addressed this also.
Does that have an impact in terms of the delay, in terms of
getting permits?
Mr. Nedd. There is no delay in terms of extraordinary
circumstances in terms of getting a permit, Congressman.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mr. Lowenthal. Mrs. Lummis, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lummis. I thank the gentleman from North Dakota. My
first question is for Mr. Soth. I would like to ask about not
only the environmental benefits of not flaring gas, which
should be obvious, but what about the economic benefits of
gathering and piping natural gas instead of flaring it?
Mr. Soth. Representative, I was able to show a chart that
demonstrated that in the oil and gas pipelines subsector, the
industry group of construction, according to the most recent
data available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics demonstrates
that we are at an all-time high in the country right now in
that sort of employment.
Those are great jobs. Those are jobs that pay, on average,
for production and non-supervisory workers, over $26 an hour.
These are private-sector jobs, and that compares to other jobs
in the private sector of less than $20. So that is a
substantial differential. Those are great jobs. We are at an
all-time high in the USA right now, and there is substantial
investment expected.
It should be self-evident that having limited
infrastructure and capacity to move natural gas away from
extraction sites to processing facilities is a necessary
component to reduce flaring. Those gathering lines and the
construction thereof will create jobs for operating engineers
and other pipeline craft workers, and we are anxious to make
sure that Congress is updating and modernizing the structure
about this regulatory framework in a whole number of arenas,
especially around this concern with NEPA, to ensure that we
realize that energy future that all of us have identified in
natural gas for this country.
Mrs. Lummis. I am sorry I missed that chart, but I will
grab it from an exhibit from the Chairman.
You reference the existing pipeline permitting system on
Federal lands. Could the pipeline infrastructure grow fast
enough to catch up with the boom in oil production, if the
process were more streamlined, which, as I understand it, is
what the gentleman from North Dakota is attempting to
accomplish with his bill?
Mr. Soth. Well, we really believe that a comprehensive
review is necessary right now. What we have seen in natural gas
has been unprecedented. There are a whole range of things that
need to be done.
We have been supportive, for example, of H.R. 1900 that has
been in the Energy and Commerce Committee's jurisdiction around
FERC regulatory authority, as well. There are really a whole
host of things that need to be done, particularly around
pipeline regulatory framework, to ensure that we have the
energy future that we want in this country, and to ensure that
we have the kind of investment and job growth that will enable
all of us to have a cleaner and better economy and environment.
Mrs. Lummis. Quick question, Mr. Nedd, for you. Is the BLM
doing anything to speed up the approval of infrastructure
necessary to reduce flaring? Certainly the BLM understands and
appreciates the desire of taking an economically beneficial
product from being vented or flared into the air, thereby
exacerbating air quality problems, and getting it into a
pipeline where it can provide economic and heating benefits
around the country.
Mr. Nedd. Congresswoman, certainly the BLM has taken a
number of steps. For instance, in the Bakken area, they are a
part of the Federal family that works with partners to see how
to streamline the process.
The BLM continues to maintain, as part of the APD process,
operators can, in fact, include information for a gas line
gathering, that it would be allowed to be analyzed at that time
and approved. So we believe there are some vehicles that
already exist within our authority that can help to expedite
this. And in the Bakken, again, I said because of the newly
formed play or the infrastructure not fully developed,
operators are making certain decisions.
Mrs. Lummis. Well, let me shift then to Wyoming instead of
the Bakken. In the Pinedale Anticline, in the Jonah Field and
the Jonah expansion, which are Federal lands, we have seen the
talent, the people, the jobs, migrate up to the Bakken because
permitting is going at a more expedited manner, and there seems
to have been a slow-down of permitting, especially air quality-
related permitting, that is slowing down the ability of us to
produce oil and gas on Federal land in Wyoming. And, of course,
Wyoming being half Federal lands, we are at the mercy of the
Federal Government to extract oil and gas from Federal lands.
North Dakota largely is not Federal lands, it is mostly
private lands. And so, they are in a position to be more
expeditious about protecting air quality because of their
dealing with private lands and not the BLM.
I just find it rather frustrating that, as the focus of
this Administration seems to be on air quality, and now they
are shifting over to water, trying to usurp a lot of State
water rights, and under new Federal regulations, just the way
they did under air quality regulations, that the result is to
release more hydrocarbons into the air when it could be
gathered and put to beneficial use. And so I just simply
express that as a frustration.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you, Mrs. Lummis. Since we do have some
time, and there are so few of us, I am going to have another
round of questioning. It may not be long, but I do want to
pursue a couple of things since we have you all, and we have
the time. So I will recognize myself again for 5 minutes.
And I want to help clarify, because Mr. Lowenthal asked a
good question, and there is a distinction I think that we
should clarify since we have the opportunity. Mr. Holt placed
into the record this Clean Air Task Force report that was
developed in the Bakken by I think the North Dakota Industrial
Commissioner as part of the North Dakota Industrial
Commission's efforts. And I also will be placing into the
record later, without objection, the North Dakota Industrial
Commissioner's Flaring Task Force report done by the North
Dakota Petroleum Council, which has similar information.
And here is, I think, why there is some conflict. The
report that Mr. Holt placed into the record states that on
private and State land in North Dakota, this says specifically,
flaring is 29 percent. On other Federal land it is 27 percent.
But specifically on the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation
flaring is 46 percent. And it is this relationship, as I
started to talk about earlier, with the BIA, the tribes, the
BLM. Let's face it, when you take the Federal bureaucracy and
throw it into another Federal bureaucracy like the BIA, it
seems it is hard to deny that it wouldn't be more cumbersome
than on private land or perhaps even other Federal land.
So that is the distinction. It is the distinction between
the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation, which, in North Dakota,
by the way, is the heart of the Bakken. A fourth to a third of
the Bakken is the Fort Berthold Indian Reservation. So this
distinction is really rather massive.
And I don't want to speak for anyone else, but I sat in a
meeting with Chairman Tex Hall, the Chairman of the three
affiliated tribes, and EPA administrator Gina McCarthy, where
the Chairman was rather pointed about this reality, that the
process for permitting anything, not just the drilling, but the
infrastructure, is so onerous that there are at least, as he
said, 10 permits required to do things on Indian lands that
aren't on other lands.
And that brings me to, I think, Mr. Nedd, I want to pursue
this a little bit more with you, because in your testimony you
actually mentioned a provision that gives the Administration
some concern regarding legal responsibility for consultation,
stewardship, and oversight service for production on tribal
lands.
So, this provision that you are referring to says that the
provisions in this bill, that the bill, my bill, shall be
applied if and only if the Indian tribe with jurisdiction over
the Indian land submits to the Secretary of the Interior a
written request that it apply. Can you tell me why the
Administration is concerned about giving the tribe a choice of
whether or not it wants a Federal agency to manage its land?
I mean I was just with the President of the United States
on a North Dakota Reservation a week ago, where he talked about
honoring sovereignty. And here, the Administration seems to be
going against that very concept of sovereignty for the tribe.
Mr. Nedd. Congressman, what I can say, again, is the
authority under the Indian Minerals Leasing Act certainly
allows the BLM to work with the tribes in managing those trust
lands, that 56 million acres. And in working with the tribes
through consultation, the BLM certainly incorporates their
input into that.
And so, the Administration feels, again, they have enough
authority to proceed to conduct the work under the authority
Congress has given them, and this bill would just interdict
confusion. And the Administration position is that we believe
they have enough authority already to do that.
Mr. Cramer. With all due respect, I think this bill
clarifies, it doesn't further confuse. It simply states that it
is up to the tribe and its administration, in its sovereignty,
to determine whether the Secretary of the Interior has anything
to say about it or not. So, I don't find that confusing.
It may be in conflict with the Administration's position,
but the Administration's own position as stated in the last
week seems to be in conflict. On the one hand they support
sovereignty; on the other hand, they want to continue to have
this authority, which is adding burden and making job creation
on the Indian reservation that much more difficult. So, with
all due respect, I don't find that answer to be consistent with
what I heard from the President a week ago. That concludes my
questioning.
Mr. Lowenthal, anything--I thought you might. So, Mr.
Lowenthal, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Thank you.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I think this is a
fascinating discussion.
Mr. Cramer. I am sure you do.
Dr. Lowenthal. Again, and I just want to be clear, in the
Clean Air Task Force it talks about in 2013 the total amount of
gas produced in the entire State of North Dakota, which was
approximately, I am not sure what the unit was, but it was
335,665.
Private or State lands was 262,100, which was
approximately, the largest percentage of the total amount of
gas produced in North Dakota came from private or State lands,
46,000, approximately, from the Indian reservation, and other
Federal lands about 26,000. On private or State lands, of the
amount that was flared, 74 percent--or 74,000, or 29 percent,
was on private or State lands. Other Federal lands was the 27
percent. And so, when you just compare, even though the largest
amount was on private or State, that is, the largest amount of
total gas produced in North Dakota was on private or State
lands, there really isn't any significant difference between
that and the other Federal lands.
You are right that something is going on on the Indian
reservation, that is true. And we should understand that. And I
think what you pointed out is possibly it is the interaction of
Federal agencies. But that really is not NEPA.
That is another problem that we should address, why it
becomes so difficult. Because if we just look at the State and
private versus Federal, it is not NEPA that is doing it in
North Dakota, in terms of producing the difficulties or that we
are seeing that we need a solution to this problem. The
solution looks at that interaction and the inability to
coordinate Federal agencies, and to do that in a more succinct
way. And I think that is something that we potentially might
want to look at and work on.
But I think that, as Mr. Holt, our Ranking Member, has
said, if we go down this road, we may be solving a problem that
doesn't exist. And it may have some help, but it really might
be solving the wrong problem. Not that there is not a problem,
and especially on tribal lands. There is, something is going
on, and that you have identified, and that is really true.
My other question I would like to ask to Mr. Frost is, what
makes oil and gas pipelines different than the other kinds of
infrastructure that the National Park Service has now the
authority to permit on park lands? Why is it different?
Dr. Frost. Oil and gas has a lot of infrastructure
associated with it. They have pump houses, there is a lot of
maintenance, there are roads. And so, just the footprint of the
oil and gas pipeline necessary to move the material has a huge
footprint that could impact park resources.
The other thing is, in the case of an oil spill, the
potential to damage resources, both short-term and long-term,
are inherently much larger than a transmission line. You know,
if a transmission line tips over, it is going to maybe knock
some trees down or something.
But let's look at an example. Back in 1996, at Chattanooga
and Chickamauga National Battlefield, there was a 100,000-
gallon oil spill that went into the park. Only 2,000 gallons
were recovered. So that means 98,000 gallons of oil is still in
the park somewhere. So there is a huge difference in terms of
the potential impact and then the infrastructure impact needed
to sort of support the facilities.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. Ms. Mall, I have a question. Your
organization pays a lot of attention to NEPA reviews, I would
assume. Are you aware of any environmental impact statements on
gas gathering pipelines that have been particularly contentious
or challenged by environmental groups?
Ms. Mall. I am not, no.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I wonder if Mr. Lund, if you are
aware of any environmental impact statements on gas gathering
pipelines that have been particularly contentious or challenged
by environmental groups.
Mr. Lund. I am not aware of any, either.
Dr. Lowenthal. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you. And I would now recognize Mrs.
Lummis for 5 minutes for a second round of questioning.
Mrs. Lummis. I thank the Chairman. And I am delighted to
hear Mr. Lowenthal say that we have problems on Indian lands
with regard to multiple layers of bureaucracy. And it does
transcend just oil and gas production. It goes to grazing and a
whole variety of things. And it is recognized as a bipartisan
issue. In other words, during Republican presidencies, heads of
the BIA were extremely frustrated. During Democrat
administrations the heads of the BIA were tremendously
frustrated.
I know when Larry Echo Hawk was the BIA Director under the
Obama administration and came to Interior and Environment
Appropriations Subcommittee, which I served on, he expressed a
lot of frustration about the bureaucratic web that seems almost
impossible to fix. And one would think a man of his stature and
knowledge and legal skills and background and capabilities
might have been able to cut through some of that. And even he,
I believe, left frustrated. So, you think of the frustration at
the top, think of the frustration of the people who are living
under this web and layers of bureaucracy.
I know that on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming, in
Indian County elsewhere in the country as well, you have to get
permission from the Federal Government to turn your cattle into
a specific pasture, and it can be delayed for weeks, if not
months, after which the issue is moot. I mean you have to make
hay while the sun shines, as they say.
And so, we have a genuine, serious problem with multiple
layers of bureaucracy with regard to the Bureau of Indian
Affairs. And it is just paralyzing progress in Indian country.
And I appreciate that it is acknowledged as a issue by both
parties that needs to be addressed. And you know, God help us
do that at some point.
Question now. I am pivoting to Mr. Marino's bill. And, Mr.
Santa, can you tell me if Mr. Marino's bill will modify the
amount of environmental analysis that the Park Service has to
conduct for a pipeline project?
Mr. Santa. Mrs. Lummis, I do not believe that it will,
because, under the current law, even though separate statutory
authorization is required to authorize the Park Service to
grant the right-of-way, the Park Service still needs to conduct
that review. So the current law is duplicative, and I think in
no way would add to the work that the Park Service would have
to perform.
Mrs. Lummis. Following up, then, does it remove the ability
of the Park Service to say no to a project?
Mr. Santa. As with other forms of infrastructure, where it
has the authority to grant rights-of-way, the Park Service
would have the authority to deny or condition the grant of a
right-of-way.
Mrs. Lummis. What other safeguards are already built into
the permitting process to make sure infrastructure like
pipelines have only negligible impacts on a park?
Mr. Santa. Well, interstate pipelines have to be authorized
by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. That involves NEPA
review. In addition to that, there are a host of other Federal
environmental laws with which pipelines need to comply, and
with which pipelines need to obtain permits from Federal
agencies or, in many cases, State agencies acting pursuant to
delegated authority.
Mrs. Lummis. Do you have an opinion about whether the Park
Service has a good track record in managing infrastructure
projects to protect the parks?
Mr. Santa. I have no reason to believe that they do not
have a good record in doing so.
Mrs. Lummis. Do you expect anything less when it comes to
gas pipelines?
Mr. Santa. No, I do not. I think they will fulfill their
responsibilities.
Mrs. Lummis. You know, we have created a lot of new
monuments and Federal designations while I have been here in
Congress, and that means more and more lands are being subject
to these extra layers of scrutiny. And so I think that, because
of that, and because some of these areas are absolutely
geographically massive, that we do have to come to terms with
this issue.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back with appreciation
for your fine work as a former regulator and a knowledgeable
member of your State's----
Mr. Cramer. Thank you.
Mrs. Lummis [continuing]. Massive house delegation.
Mr. Cramer. Thank you very much. And thank all of you. This
will end our questioning at this time.
I might just mention that this committee and this House
did, in fact, pass the Native American Energy Act some time
ago, Mr. Young's bill, you may recall, that did similar things,
perhaps even on a grander scale, codifying without any doubt
the tribe's jurisdiction over its own land. That is yet to be
taken up in the Senate.
So, again, Members may have additional questions for the
record, and I would encourage all of you to answer those if
they provide them in writing.
And then one final order of business. I ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record a letter from the Southern Ute
Indian Tribe in support of H.R. 4293; also some written
testimony provided by Continental Resources; and also this
report, the NDPC Flaring Task Force, North Dakota Industrial
Commission, which has, I think, some of the same information
that Ranking Member Holt offered up earlier.
[No response.]
Mr. Cramer. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information submitted by Mr. Cramer for the record
follows:]
Prepared Statement of Blu Hulsey, Vice President of Government and
Regulatory Affairs, Continental Resources, Inc. on H.R. 4293
Good morning Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Holt and members of
the subcommittee. My name is Blu Hulsey and I am Vice President of
Government and Regulatory Affairs for Continental Resources, Inc.
Continental is an oil and gas company that explores and produces
primarily in the Bakken play in North Dakota and Montana and the SCOOP
play in Oklahoma. Continental is a top 10 independent oil and gas
producer in America and currently produces approximately 155,000
barrels of oil per day. I appreciate the opportunity to testify in
front of this committee today and specifically to comment on H.R. 4293,
``The Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act'' authored by Congressman
Cramer.
Continental Resources is currently the largest acreage holder in
the Bakken formation with more than 1.2 million acres under lease. As a
State relatively new to oil and gas production, North Dakota is rapidly
expanding infrastructure and has recently adopted a program requiring
that operators develop and adopt Gas Capture Plans (GCPs) to encourage
the planning of gas gathering infrastructure and to encourage the use
of current technology to capture produced gas, thereby curtailing
flaring. The North Dakota Industrial Commission (NDIC), in cooperation
with the North Dakota Petroleum Council (NDPC), has explored many
technologies and actions that could be included in these GCPs to
facilitate the capture and usage of natural gas thereby setting a
process to curtail flaring in North Dakota. While Continental continues
to search for additional methods to effectively capture gas and thereby
reduce flaring, we still face some challenges and one of those major
challenges is securing right-of-ways for connection activities.
Challenges with infrastructure development also include delays in
zoning by counties and townships for midstream facilities, a short
construction season due to weather, and a limited number of available
construction crews in the State. All of these issues make timing
reliability of right-of-way permits that much more critical.
Continental understands and is committed to reducing flared natural
gas volumes and has been successful in reducing the percentage of gas
flared from Continental operated wells in the North Dakota Bakken to
less than 11 percent of the total volume of gas produced from those
wells. One of the impediments to capturing this gas and reducing
flaring is the development of infrastructure in the form of natural gas
gathering lines and pipelines required to deliver this gas to market.
The ability to secure right-of-way for these gathering systems is at
the root of this infrastructure issue. On private lands, in most cases,
this right-of-way can be obtained through negotiation with the property
owner. The process for obtaining access across Federal lands can take
much longer and for National Park Service (NPS) lands, it requires an
act of Congress.
The current process of obtaining right-of-way through National
Parks for gas gathering lines requires the National Parks Service to
obtain approval from Congress, making this much more complicated than
any other Federal right-of-way process. This antiquated approval system
dates back to 1901 and should be brought up to modern standards. This
bill would allow the Secretary of the Interior to grant that authority
for natural gas pipelines provided the action is consistent with the
primary purposes of the proposed area and the applicant fulfills all
other legal requirements of the Department. For example all NEPA
requirements would still have to be fulfilled. We support this effort
to streamline the decisionmaking process and feel this is a common
sense approach to what should be a simple process.
H.R. 4293 also partially consolidates the National Environmental
Policy Act (NEPA) process by categorically excluding the issuance of
right-of-way for natural gas gathering lines and compressor stations
from NEPA in a field or unit where an environmental document has
already been prepared under NEPA or which are adjacent to an existing
disturbed area for the construction of a road or well pad. This change
in statute will remove yet another impediment to the overall permitting
process by consolidating regulatory requirements. The benefits of
applying an existing NEPA review to a project in an area already
subject to a NEPA document simply makes sense and eliminates costly
duplicative studies on the same piece of land. By consolidating these
regulatory steps, the NEPA requirement is maintained but the process is
much less onerous on the developers of the infrastructure.
The issuance of Federal permits may be held up for many different
reasons. The proposed legislation establishes enforceable deadlines for
the issuance of permits for natural gas gathering lines. Continental
would even suggest this portion of the act be modified to establish a
``date certain'' after which a decision of some sort would be granted
by default. It has been our experience that delays tend to be the rule
rather than the exception and a ``date certain'' would allow for
improved planning to occur and a decision would be certain on the
established deadline, 30 or 60 days from the date of receipt of a
completed application.
Finally, H.R. 4293 provides an assessment whereby this enhanced
permitting process can be monitored for effectiveness and whereby mid-
course corrections can be made. It is our feeling that any positive
movement toward streamlining the permit to drill or right-of-way
approval process is a move in the right direction. The Federal
Government should always be reviewing its regulatory and permitting
processes in such a way that it is constantly moving toward a more
effective and efficient permitting process.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to comment on this very
important legislation. Continental understands the need to conserve our
valuable natural resources and is making every effort to deliver every
molecule of the fossil fuels its wells produce to the markets where
they needed most. We therefore support any action on behalf of this
body and Congressman Cramer to streamline regulatory processes to
assist our industry in more effectively building the infrastructure
that delivers these valuable assets to market.

______

Letter Submitted for the Record in Support of H.R. 4293
Southern Ute Indian Tribe,
Ignacio, CO,
June 17, 2014.
Hon. Doug Lamborn, Chairman,
Hon. Rush Holt, Ranking Member,
House Subcommittee on Energy & Minerals,
Washington, DC 20515.

Re: Tribe 's Support for the Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act
(H.R. 4293)

Dear Chairman Lamborn and Ranking Member Holt:

I am writing in support of H.R. 4293, the ``Natural Gas Gathering
Enhancement Act,'' introduced by Rep. Cramer in March 2014, and
referred to this subcommittee thereafter.
On behalf of the Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council (the Tribe), I
appreciate the opportunity to express the Tribe's support for this
important natural gas-related legislation. Before commenting on the
bill, some background is in order.
For more than a decade, the Tribe has worked with its congressional
delegation and the committees of jurisdiction to achieve positive
changes to statutes, regulations and policies so that it can develop
its energy resources in an effective way for the benefit of the Tribe's
members. In so doing, the Tribe has become a major producer of natural
gas and the economic engine of southwest Colorado.
Profile of the Southern Ute Indian Tribe
Despite the challenging land ownership pattern on the Reservation,
the Tribe has worked hard to establish solid working relationships with
the State of Colorado and local governmental entities, which have
minimized conflict and emphasized cooperation.
Our Reservation is a part of the San Juan Basin, which has been a
prolific source of oil and natural gas production since the 1940s.
Commencing in 1949, the Tribe began issuing leases under the
supervision of the Secretary of the Interior. For several decades, we
remained the recipients of modest royalty revenue, but were not engaged
in any active, comprehensive resource management planning. That changed
in the 1970s as we and other energy resource tribes in the West
recognized the potential importance of monitoring oil and gas companies
for lease compliance and maintaining a watchful eye on the Federal
agencies charged with managing our resources.
A series of events in the 1980s laid the groundwork for our
subsequent success in energy development. In 1980, the Tribal Council
established an in-house Energy Department, which spent several years
gathering historical information about our energy resources and lease
records. In 1982, following a key U.S. Supreme Court decision, the
Tribe enacted a severance tax, which has produced more than $500
million in revenue over the last three decades. After Congress passed
the Indian Mineral Development Act of 1982, we carefully negotiated
mineral development agreements with oil and gas companies involving
unleased lands and insisted upon flexible provisions that vested our
tribe with business options and greater involvement in resource
development.
In 1992, the Tribe launched its own gas operating company, Red
Willow Production Company, which was initially capitalized through a
secretarially-approved plan for use of $8 million of tribal trust funds
received by our tribe in settlement of reserved water right claims.
Through conservative acquisition of on-Reservation leasehold interests,
we began operating our own wells and received working interest income
as well as royalty and severance tax revenue. In 1994, we participated
with a partner to purchase one of the main pipeline gathering companies
on the Reservation.
Energy Development and Development of the Tribe's Economy
Today, the Tribe is the majority owner of Red Cedar Gathering
Company, which provides gathering and treating services throughout the
Reservation. Ownership of Red Cedar Gathering Company allowed us to put
the infrastructure in place to develop and market coal bed methane gas
from Reservation lands and gave us an additional source of revenue. Our
Tribe's leaders recognized that the peak level of on-Reservation gas
development would be reached in approximately 2005, and, in order to
continue our economic growth, we expanded operations off the
Reservation.
As a result of these decisions and developments, today, the Tribe,
through its subsidiary energy companies, conducts sizable oil and gas
activities in approximately 10 States and in the Gulf of Mexico. We are
the largest employer in the Four Corners Region, and there is no
question that energy resource development has put the Tribe, our
members, and the surrounding community on stable economic footing.
The Southern Ute Indian Reservation consists of approximately
700,000 acres of land located in southwestern Colorado in the Four
Corners Region of the United States. The land ownership pattern within
our Reservation is complex and includes tribal trust lands, allotted
lands, non-Indian patented lands, Federal lands, and State lands. Based
in part upon the timing of issuance of homestead patents, sizable
portions of the Reservation lands involve split estates in which non-
Indians own the surface but the tribe is beneficial owner of oil and
gas or coal estates. Despite the challenging land ownership pattern on
the Reservation, the Tribe has worked hard to establish solid working
relationships with the State of Colorado and local governmental
entities, which have minimized conflict and emphasized cooperation.
These energy-related economic successes have resulted in a higher
standard of living for our tribal members. Our members have jobs and
health care, and our educational programs provide meaningful
opportunities at all levels. Our elders have stable retirement
benefits.
We have exceeded many of our financial goals, and we are well on
the way to providing our children and their children the potential to
maintain our tribe and its lands in perpetuity.
The road to energy-related prosperity has not been easy and along
the way, the Tribe has encountered and overcome numerous obstacles,
many of which are institutional in nature. Nonetheless, our close
collaboration with Congress over the decades has provided relief on a
number of fronts to make easier our development goals, and those of
other tribes as well.
The Natural Gas Gathering Enhancement Act of 2014
The legislation before this subcommittee recognizes the natural gas
boom and the enormous economic benefits that boom is bringing to
communities across the country. It also recognizes that the physical
infrastructure necessary to fully take advantage of the natural gas
bounty is not being developed quickly enough, often resulting in
venting and flaring. Last, the bill acknowledges that the Federal
permitting process can--and often does--hinder natural gas
infrastructure development such as pipelines and gathering lines on
Federal and Indian land.
The centerpiece of H.R. 4293 is section 4(b), which provides that
sundry notices or rights-of-way for gas gathering lines and related
field compression units located on Federal or Indian land shall be
considered an action that is categorically excluded under the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), if the lines or units are:

(a)  within a field or unit for which an approved land use plan or an
environmental document prepared pursuant to NEPA analyzed
transportation of gas produced from one or more oil wells
in that field or unit as a reasonably foreseeable activity;
or

(b)  located adjacent to an existing disturbed area for the
construction of a road or pad.

Importantly, section 4 also includes a provision which provides
that any Indian tribe interested in having the above provision apply to
its lands must submit a written request that it so apply. The Tribe
very much welcomes this demonstration of respect for tribal
decisionmaking and tribal sovereignty over its own lands and resources.
Sections 5 (``Deadlines for Permitting Natural Gas Gathering Lines
Under the Mineral Leasing Act'') and 6 (``Deadlines for Permitting
Natural Gas Gathering Lines under the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act of 1976'') provide discrete deadlines for the Department
of the Interior to issue sundry notices or rights-of-way for gas
gathering lines and related field compression units.
Indian tribes are thoroughly familiar with lengthy and costly
delays involved with the Federal approval and permitting process and,
accordingly, suggest this legislation be amended to bring real
discipline to the issuance of such notices and rights-of-way when it
comes to natural gas infrastructure located on or near Indian lands.
The Tribe is also very supportive of the study and report mandated
by section 4(c) that would be carried out in consultation with Federal
agencies, States and Indian tribes to both:

(a)  identify actions that can be taken immediately under current law
to expedite permitting for gas gathering lines and related
field compression units located on Federal and Indian land
for purposes of transporting to a processing plant or a
common carrier for distribution to the markets; and

(b)  identify changes to Federal law to expedite permitting for gas
gathering lines and related field compression units located
on Federal and Indian land for purposes of transporting to
a processing plant or a common carrier for distribution to
the markets.

I appreciate the opportunity to provide the Tribe's views on H.R.
4293 and respectfully urge the subcommittee and full committee to
expedite consideration of the bill with an eye toward having it enacted
in this calendar year.

Sincerely,

Clement J. Frost, Chairman,
Southern Ute Indian Tribal Council.

______

Mr. Cramer. If there is no further business, without
objection, the committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:56 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[LIST OF DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD RETAINED IN THE COMMITTEE'S
OFFICIAL FILES]

-- North Dakota Petroleum Council, North Dakota Industrial
Commission: NPDC Flaring Task Force

[all]
