- HEARING FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECEIVING TESTIMONY FROM THE HONORABLE ROSTIN BEHNAM, CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECEIVING TESTIMONY FROM THE HONORABLE
ROSTIN BEHNAM, CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

MARCH 6, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-20

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-222 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Ranking
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia, Vice          Minority Member
Chairman                             JIM COSTA, California
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
DOUG LaMALFA, California             ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             SHONTEL M. BROWN, Ohio
DON BACON, Nebraska                  SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota          YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana              ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
TRACEY MANN, Kansas                  MARIE GLUESENKAMP PEREZ,
RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa                 Washington
MARY E. MILLER, Illinois             DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina,
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                 Vice Ranking Minority Member
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                 JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois
JOHN W. ROSE, Tennessee              ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
MARCUS J. MOLINARO, New York         JASMINE CROCKETT, Texas
MONICA De La CRUZ, Texas             JONATHAN L. JACKSON, Illinois
NICHOLAS A. LANGWORTHY, New York     GREG CASAR, Texas
JOHN S. DUARTE, California           CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ZACHARY NUNN, Iowa                   SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         DARREN SOTO, Florida
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
MAX L. MILLER, Ohio

______

Parish Braden, Staff Director

Anne Simmons, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Johnson, Hon. Dusty, a Representative in Congress from South
Dakota, submitted articles.....................................    55
Nunn, Hon. Zachary, a Representative in Congress from Iowa,
submitted letter...............................................    59
Scott, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from Georgia,
opening statement..............................................     3
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
Pennsylvania, opening statement................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2

Witness

Behnam, Hon. Rostin, Chairman, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, Washington, D.C....................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Supplementary material.......................................    62
Submitted questions..........................................    63

HEARING FOR THE PURPOSE OF RECEIVING TESTIMONY FROM THE HONORABLE
ROSTIN BEHNAM, CHAIRMAN, COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 6, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in Room
1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Glenn
Thompson [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Thompson, Lucas, Austin
Scott of Georgia, LaMalfa, Rouzer, Bacon, Johnson, Mann,
Feenstra, Miller of Illinois, Cammack, Rose, Jackson of Texas,
Langworthy, Duarte, Nunn, Alford, Miller of Ohio, David Scott
of Georgia, McGovern, Adams, Hayes, Davids of Kansas, Salinas,
Davis of North Carolina, Budzinski, Sorensen, Vasquez, Jackson
of Illinois, Casar, Craig, and Soto.
Staff present: Paul Balzano, Wick Dudley, Nick Rockwell,
Kevin Webb, John Konya, Kate Fink, Emily German, Josh Lobert,
Clark Ogilvie, Ashley Smith, and Dana Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GLENN THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM PENNSYLVANIA

The Chairman. The Committee will come to order. Good
morning, everyone, and thank you for joining today's hearing
where we will hear from Chairman Rostin Behnam of the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission. After brief opening remarks,
Members will receive testimony from our witness today, and then
the hearing will be open to questions.
I will take the liberty of offering my opening statement.
But before I begin my opening statement actually, want to take
a little bit of time and a moment to remember Mike Gill, former
Chief Operating Officer and Chief of Staff at CFTC, who
tragically passed away last month. Mike was a dedicated public
servant, a loving father and husband, and friend to all he met,
and he will be truly missed.
Chairman Behnam, thank you again for joining us today to
discuss the pressing issues within the derivatives markets and
the upcoming work of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Under your leadership, the CFTC has tackled a robust rulemaking
agenda. This year, the agency's unified agenda is no exception.
It remains ambitious, covering a wide range of topics,
including rules related to cybersecurity and resilience,
conflicts of interest and governance, enhanced protections for
customer property, and event contracts. There is no doubt the
CFTC has a full rulemaking slate.
This Committee appreciates the CFTC's commitment to
providing effective oversight of our derivatives markets,
especially through its transparent public rulemaking and
advisory committee processes. This work is deliberative and
leads to better public policy outcomes. Now, I know the
Commission's ongoing rulemaking will benefit from this rigorous
and comprehensive public review.
Chairman Behnam, the House Agriculture Committee is closely
monitoring the Basel III endgame and the GSIB proposed rule,
and we are concerned that these proposals could adversely
affect commodity derivatives markets and could result in
increased costs and reduce hedging opportunities for commodity
end-users. Ultimately, the impacts of these rules could trickle
all the way down to consumers, driving up prices in agriculture
and energy markets, as well as for everyday goods and services
that we all rely on. I hope the Commission continues to review
these proposals and urge the Prudential Regulators to rethink
these flawed proposed rules.
As you are keenly aware, our Committee has been actively
engaged in crafting a much-needed regulatory framework that
protects consumers, investors, and fosters American leadership
in the digital asset space. In July, the Committee reported out
the Financial Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century
Act (H.R. 4763), a significant milestone, and I want to thank
you again for providing us with the Commission's expertise,
knowledge, and thoughtful feedback on FIT 21. And we look
forward to advancing this bill and finally bringing regulatory
clarity to these novel assets.
Further, we are all aware that the CFTC has not been
reauthorized since 2008. The Ranking Member and I remain
committed to reauthorizing the Commission and providing the
CFTC with the tools and the authorities it needs to
successfully execute its responsibilities. As we do so, it is
crucial that the Commission also ensure that it has the right
policies and procedures in place to execute its mission.
As with many other Federal agencies, the Commission must
transition back to normal operation, including by bringing the
Commission staff back into the office where they can most
effectively work together to protect our markets.
Again, Chairman Behnam, I appreciate you taking the time to
be with us today and look forward to our conversation.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Glenn Thompson, a Representative in Congress
from Pennsylvania
Before I begin my opening statement, I would like to take a moment
to remember Mike Gill, former Chief Operating Officer and Chief of
Staff at the CFTC, who tragically passed away last month. Mike was a
dedicated public servant, loving father and husband, and friend to all
he met. He will be truly missed.
Chairman Behnam, thank you again for joining us today to discuss
the pressing issues within the derivatives markets and the upcoming
work of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission.
Under your leadership, the CFTC has tackled a robust rulemaking
agenda.
This year, the Agency's Unified Agenda is no exception. It remains
ambitious, covering a wide range of topics including rules related to
cybersecurity and resilience, conflicts of interest and governance,
enhanced protections for customer property, and event contracts. There
is no doubt the CFTC has a full rulemaking slate.
This Committee appreciates the CFTC's commitment to providing
effective oversight of our derivatives markets, especially through its
transparent, public rulemaking and advisory committee processes. This
work is deliberative but leads to better public policy outcomes. I know
the Commission's ongoing rulemakings will benefit from this rigorous
and comprehensive public review.
Chairman Behnam, the House Agriculture Committee is closely
monitoring the Basel III Endgame Proposed Rule and the GSIB Proposed
Rule. We're concerned that these proposals could adversely affect
commodity derivatives markets and could result in increased costs and
reduce hedging opportunities for commodity end-users.
Ultimately, the impacts of these rules could trickle all the way
down to consumers, driving-up prices in agricultural and energy
markets, as well as for everyday goods and services we all rely on. I
hope the Commission continues to review these proposals and urge the
Prudential Regulators to rethink these flawed proposed rules.
As you are keenly aware, our Committee has been actively engaged in
crafting a much-needed regulatory framework that protects consumers and
investors and fosters American leadership in the digital asset space.
In July, the Committee reported out the Financial Innovation and
Technology for the 21st Century Act, a significant milestone.
I want to thank you again for providing us with the Commission's
expertise, knowledge, and thoughtful feedback on FIT21. We look forward
to advancing this bill and finally bringing regulatory clarity to these
novel assets.
Further, we are all aware that the CFTC has not been reauthorized
since 2008.
The Ranking Member and I remain committed to reauthorizing the
Commission and providing the CFTC with the tools and authorities it
needs to successfully execute its responsibilities.
As we do so, it is crucial that the Commission also ensures that it
has the right policies and procedures in place to execute its mission.
As with many other Federal agencies, the Commission must transition
back to normal operations, including by bringing the Commission staff
back into the office, where they can most effectively work together to
protect our markets.
Again, Chairman Behnam, I appreciate you making time to be with us
today and look forward to our conversation.

The Chairman. With that, I would now like to welcome the
distinguished Ranking Member, the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott, for any opening remarks that he would like to give.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SCOTT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM GEORGIA

Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Behnam, welcome. And first of all, I want to thank
you for your great service. And I want you to know, as the
Chairman just said, we remain committed to making sure that we
do more to get you all reauthorized. And we are going to make
sure that we get you the proper amount of fiscal and funding
that you need to do this extraordinary piece of work. And I
look forward to your testimony this morning. And, as you know,
I am very concerned about the reauthorization. You remember
when myself and my good partner over here Austin Scott and I
got together and we fought the European Union when they wanted
to take over controlling you. And we said, no way we are going
to let that happen. And, Austin, you remember that good fight
we did. And that was one of the good bipartisan fights that we
have done in this Committee. And so I look forward to your
testimony on that.
I want you to also explain what kind of damage is coming.
It is 10 years, and you haven't been reauthorized. And that is
what caused the European Union to want to come and use that as
a reason for them to authorize you.
And I want to take just a minute to say a few words about
my distinguished staff. First of all, I want to thank Ms. Emily
German, who will be unfortunately leaving us and going to you,
Chairman, over to the CFTC to be your deputy legislative
director. And I can tell you, you couldn't have a better
staffer than her. Emily was instrumental in our historic
bipartisan broadband bill and the CFTC reauthorization bill, on
all of our good work on cryptocurrency, and our extremely
important and successful work pushing back, as I mentioned, on
the European Union, during their proposal and implementation of
EMIR 2.2, which could have had the European Union regulating
our markets right here at home. And we fought that together in
a strong bipartisan way. And we will miss her dearly, but we
are very happy that, Chairman, you will have such a talented
and wonderful addition to your team.
And next, I want to mention one of our other staffers, Mr.
Britton Burdick, and all we want to say is happy birthday to
Britton, and a nice round for my staff.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so our witness can begin his
testimony and to ensure that there is ample time for questions.
I am pleased to welcome back to the Committee our witness
for today, CFTC Chairman Rostin Behnam. Mr. Chairman, thank you
for joining us, and we will now proceed to your testimony. You
will have 5 minutes. The timer is in front of you. It will
count down to zero, and at which point your time has expired.
Chairman Behnam, please begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROSTIN BEHNAM, CHAIRMAN,
COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. A few comments, first,
Ranking Member Scott, I am sorry for stealing Emily from you;
but, this is what happens to great staff. And we are very
pleased to have her coming over to the CFTC in the next month.
I think the benefit to the Committee is, as you mentioned, she
will be deputy of leg. affairs, so she will be very engaged on
a future basis with this Committee, so I think you will all
benefit from her expertise and her being at the CFTC.
And also, Mr. Chairman, I want to echo your comments about
Mike Gill, obviously a devastating loss for family and friends,
but also the CFTC community. Mike was a great Chief of Staff.
He was a great man, and we certainly miss him. And it is a
tragedy what happened, but we are thinking about him and his
family as they work through this tragedy.
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Scott, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today to provide an update on the work of the CFTC. For over a
century, derivatives markets have played a key role in the U.S.
economy, contributing to financial stability and predictability
of prices that impact the daily lives of all Americans,
especially our farmers and ranchers. Recognizing the historical
roots of our agency and the continued importance of derivatives
to agricultural stakeholders, I am very pleased to announce
that the CFTC and the Center for Risk Management Education and
Research at Kansas State University will be hosting the third
Agricultural Commodity Futures Conference on April 11 and 12 in
Overland Park, Kansas.
Today, technology is having a larger impact on CFTC
jurisdictional markets than ever before. Historically, the
CFTC's regulations developed over decades to oversee markets
made of individual, discrete entities, each typically
performing one function in a multi-step trade cycle. However,
we are seeing a shift to structures driven by technology that
combine or compress what have historically been unique and
separate activities into a single or fewer activities. This
compression raises important questions about such issues as
conflicts of interest; the strength of capital, margin, and
segregation requirements; the role of self-regulatory
organizations; affiliate risk management; and most importantly,
customer protections.
As this Committee continues to consider reauthorization of
the CFTC, I believe there are several important policy
questions that will benefit from broader Congressional
consideration and debate. With the support of the CFTC's
whistleblowers office, the Commission's exercise of its
enforcement authorities to address misconduct that has a direct
impact on CFTC jurisdictional markets, affects the larger
economy, causes public harm, or interferes with market
integrity is only just one facet of our approach to innovation
and the evolution of financial markets.
Nowhere have we been more active than in the digital asset
space. In Fiscal Year 2023, which ended in October of 2023, we
brought 47 actions involving conduct related to digital
commodities, representing more than 49 percent of all CFTC
actions filed, a staggering statistic given the fact that no
Federal agency retains any direct regulatory authority over the
underlying or cash digital commodity market.
One very important topic that continues to challenge the
derivatives industry and the CFTC is of course cyber risk.
Under my direction, the Commission voted unanimously in
December to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to require
futures commission merchants, swap dealers, and major swap
participants to establish an operational resilience framework
and adopt non-binding Commission guidance related to the
management of risks stemming from third-party relationships. As
I have often said, we recognize that our rules apply to covered
entities that represent many different business models and may
be a part of a larger corporate family subject to the
concurrent supervision of multiple domestic and perhaps
international regulators. We are actively working with our
fellow regulators on a number of matters that impact CFTC
regulated markets.
Another topic presenting challenges and opportunities for
the agency is artificial intelligence. I am proud to say that,
recently, the CFTC's new AI Task Force issued a request for
comment on the use of AI in CFTC-regulated markets. The AI RFC
is part of a greater vision I have had since my first days as
Chairman, advancing analytical capabilities through building
talent, leveraging the cloud, and developing a forward-looking
AI culture.
In December, the Commission proposed guidance regarding the
listing of voluntary carbon credit derivatives contracts. This
is the first proposed guidance on standards applicable to
exchanges, listing products aimed at providing tools to manage
risk, promote price discovery, and help encourage integrity in
these markets. All landowners, including America's farmers and
ranchers, can benefit from high-integrity voluntary carbon
markets.
Under my direction as Chairman, the CFTC hired its first
ever Chief Diversity Officer, who oversees the agency's Office
of Minority and Women Inclusion. In the near future, I plan to
release the CFTC's first DEIA strategic plan, and I am eager to
see the CFTC's OMWI statutorily authorized, similar to other
Federal financial regulators.
The CFTC has consistently been at the forefront of
identifying and addressing risks with a balanced, thoughtful,
and measured approach. I strongly believe our collective goal
is to keep the U.S. derivatives markets the safest, the
strongest, and the most effective, and the most desirable in
the world. By focusing on this goal, we can maintain America's
position as the preeminent economy in the world and uphold
national security for all Americans. As this Committee knows,
our nation's agricultural, energy, and precious metals
resources are some of our most critical assets. I believe that
without robust derivatives markets, these assets cannot be
optimally produced or sold.
An investment in the CFTC is an investment in America. As
Chairman of the agency, you have my commitment to work with
this Committee on achieving all of these goals, and I look
forward to your questions today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Behnam follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Rostin Behnam, Chairman, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.
Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Scott, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
provide an update on the work of the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (CFTC), our priorities, and some emerging trends in our
jurisdictional space.
For over a century, derivatives markets have played a key role in
the U.S. economy, contributing to financial stability and
predictability of prices that impact the daily lives of all Americans,
especially our nation's farmers and ranchers. Recognizing the
historical roots of our agency and the continued importance of
derivatives to agricultural stakeholders, I am pleased to announce that
the CFTC and the Center for Risk Management Education and Research
(CRMER) at Kansas State University will be hosting the third
Agriculture Commodity Futures Conference on April 11th and 12th in
Overland Park, Kansas.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Press Release Number 8857-24, CFTC, CFTC, Kansas State
University Announced Featured Panels for AgCon2024 (Feb. 8, 2023),
(https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8857-24); Press Release
Number 8832-23, CFTC, AgCon2024 Set for April 11-12 (Dec. 8, 2023),
(https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8832-23).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I know I speak for all the Commissioners when I thank CFTC staff
for their commitment to the agency and its mission. My team and I are
working closely with staff and their union representatives in order to
find a suitable work posture, post-pandemic, that honors the importance
of being present and together in the office with appropriate
flexibility, and ensures our accountability as good stewards of
taxpayer money. The agency's long-term health and success depend on it.
It has been over 13 years since the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act \2\ expanded the CFTC's authority. In that
time, derivatives markets have experienced massive growth: trading
volumes in exchange-traded futures and options have more than doubled;
and the swaps market brought within our jurisdiction pursuant to the
Dodd-Frank Act is now over $350 trillion,\3\ which is approximately \1/
2\ of the estimated $715 trillion global market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub.
L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010) (the ``Dodd-Frank Act'').
\3\ CFTC, Weekly Swaps Report, Weekly Swaps Report D CFTC (https://
www.cftc.gov/MarketReports/SwapsReports/L1GrossExpCS.html).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Today, technology is having a larger impact on CFTC jurisdictional
markets than ever before. Innovators eager to meet demand for products
and services are proposing traditional and nontraditional models that
leverage technology in synergistic ways. At the same time, a growing
number of less traditional retail participants are entering our
markets, enabled by mobile phone application technology and an endless
stream of information to pursue investment opportunities.
Surveying the current landscape, the CFTC's regulations have
developed over decades to oversee markets made of individual, discrete
entities, each typically performing one function in a multi-step trade
cycle. However, we are seeing a shift to structures, driven by
technology, that combine or compress what have historically been unique
and separate activities into a single or fewer entities. This
compression raises many important questions including those regarding
conflicts of interest within vertically integrated structures, the
strength of capital, margin, and segregation requirements, the role and
responsibilities of self-regulatory organizations, affiliate risk
management, and most importantly, customer protections.
As this Committee continues to consider reauthorization of the
CFTC, I believe there are several important policy questions that will
benefit from broader Congressional consideration and debate regarding
market structure, permissible products, and retail participation. While
our current regulatory agenda demonstrates significant agility within
our jurisdictional space, we periodically bump up against the limits of
what may be contemplated under existing law given the relatively rapid
evolution of markets, market structure, and technology.
To provide a glaring example from the past decade, the recent
technology driven increase in direct retail participation in the
derivatives markets and underlying commodity markets in areas such as
digital commodity assets has tested the limits of the existing
regulatory framework. The CFTC's mission and duties, while providing
room for some adaptation to new products and structures, are not
endlessly flexible: we must be able to ensure that the products offered
and available are suitable for all participants, that only appropriate
persons or entities may solicit or handle customer funds, and that the
disclosure information provided is material for main street customers.
As Chairman, I have stressed that new market structures and
participants eager to deploy all manner of financial technology must
comply with the agency's rules and regulations.\4\ This is especially
true when it comes to protecting customers, consumers, and the larger
financial markets from fraud, money laundering, and other financial
crimes. For example, when the use of digital assets and related
enabling technologies for illicit financial purposes threatens national
security and may fund acts of war and terrorism, our laws must continue
to aggressively demand that all market entrants implement and comply
with know-your-customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML)
procedures, and Customer Information Programs (CIPs).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, e.g., Rostin Behnam, Chairman, CFTC, Keynote of Chairman
Rostin Behnam at the 2023 U.S. Treasury Market Conference (Nov. 16,
2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opabehnam39).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Enforcement matters like the CFTC's globally significant BitMex \5\
and Binance \6\ cases amplify the urgency. I believe we could do even
more to protect customers and markets if given additional authority in
the KYC, AML, and CIP space and welcome the opportunity to work with
Congress on solutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Press Release Number 8412-21, CFTC, Federal Court Orders
BitMex to Pay $100 Million for Illegally Operating a Cryptocurrency
Trading Platform and Anti-Money Laundering Violations (Aug. 10, 2021),
(https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8412-21).
\6\ See Press Release Number 8680-23, CFTC, CFTC Charges Binance
and its Founder, Changpeng Zhao, with Willful Evasion of Federal Law
and Operating an Illegal Digital Asset Derivatives Exchange (Mar. 27,
2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8680-23).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commission's exercise of its enforcement authorities to address
misconduct that has a direct impact on CFTC jurisdictional markets,
affects the larger economy, causes public harm, or interferes with
market integrity is one facet of our approach to innovation and the
evolution of financial markets.
Nowhere have we been more active than in the digital asset space.
In FY 2023, we brought 47 actions involving conduct related to digital
commodities, representing more than 49% of all CFTC actions filed
during that period. A staggering statistic given the fact that no
Federal agency retains any direct regulatory authority over the
underlying (or cash) digital commodity asset market. To date, FY 2024
is demonstrating a similar cadence.
The lack of legislation addressing the regulatory gap over the
digital commodity asset spot market has not hindered the public's
enthusiasm for digital assets, and I continue to believe Congress must
act, as the 2022 FSOC report highlighted,\7\ and as I have mentioned
publicly on multiple occasions.\8\ I am grateful to Members of this
Committee for your continued leadership in recognizing these gaps, and
for leading legislative efforts to provide the CFTC with the necessary
authority to properly regulate digital commodity assets and protect the
U.S. financial system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Financial Stability Oversight Council, Report on Digital Assets
and Financial Stability Risks and Regulation (Oct. 2022) (https://
home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/FSOC-Digital-Assets-Report-
2022.pdf).
\8\ See, e.g., Rostin Behnam, Chairman, CFTC, Keynote of Chairman
Rostin Behnam at the ABA Business Law Section Derivatives & Futures Law
Commission Winter Meeting (Jan. 26, 2024), (https://www.cftc.gov/
PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opabehnam41).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key to the effectiveness of our enforcement division is the
CFTC's whistleblower program. The Dodd-Frank Act established the
Customer Protection Fund \9\ that supports our Whistleblower Program
\10\ and the Office of Customer Education and Outreach (OCEO). As of FY
2023, the Whistleblower program has issued 41 orders granting awards
totaling almost $350 million since its inception in FY 2010.\11\ In
Fiscal Year 2024, the program has, thus far, awarded $18 million to
whistleblowers. The total sanctions ordered in all whistleblower-
related enforcement actions has surpassed the $3 billion milestone.
Without this important program, the CFTC would not be as successful in
bringing actions against misconduct in the digital commodity asset spot
market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ CEA 23(g), 7 U.S.C. 26(g).
\10\ Commodity Futures Trading Commission Whistleblower Program,
(https://www.whistleblower.gov/).
\11\ See CFTC, FY 2023 Whistleblower Program & Customer Education
Initiatives 2023 Annual Report (Oct. 2023), (https://
www.whistleblower.gov/sites/whistleblower/files/2023-10/FY23 Customer
Protection Fund Annual Report to Congress.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As this Committee knows, the overwhelming success of the
Whistleblower Program has unintentionally led to the potential for
disruptions in these two vital offices due to their funding mechanisms.
In addition to the importance of a long-term fix to avoid depletions
greater than the total balance of the fund, I believe Congress should
amend the statutory provisions to clarify the permitted uses of the
Customer Protection Fund by the OCEO.\12\ This change would allow the
Commission to implement a host of new investor protection programs and
provide information aimed at ensuring American families have the
knowledge and tools to not only protect themselves from fraud and
manipulation, but to more fully engage with the Commission and the
markets we oversee.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See CEA section 23(g)(2); 7 U.S.C. 26(g)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One very important topic that continues to challenge the
derivatives industry and the CFTC is cyber risk. Last year at this
time, we were addressing the impacts of a cyber-related incident on ION
Cleared Derivatives, a third-party service provider.\13\ The severity
of the impact on each futures commission merchant's (FCM's) operations,
as well as each FCM's ability to work-around impacted applications,
varied based on the ION application used.\14\ Notably, the incident
impacted the timely and accurate submission of positions data to the
CFTC, and therefore delayed the timely release of the Commitments of
Traders (CoT) report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See CFTC, CFTC Statement on Ion and the Impact to the
Derivatives Markets (Feb. 2, 2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/
SpeechesTestimony/cftcstatement020223); see also, Press Release Number
8655-23, CFTC, CFTC Issues Statement on the Ongoing Impact to Reporting
(Feb. 10, 2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8655-
23); Press Release Number 8662-23, CFTC Announces Postponement of
Commitments of Traders Reports (Feb. 16, 2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/
PressRoom/PressReleases/8662-23).
\14\ See Rostin Behnam, Chairman, CFTC, Keynote of Chairman Rostin
Behnam at the FIA Boca 2023 International Futures Industry Conference,
Boca Raton, Florida (Mar. 15, 2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/
SpeechesTestimony/opabehnam33); Rostin Behnam, Chairman, CFTC,
Testimony of Chairman Rostin Behnam Regarding ``Oversight of the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission'' before the U.S. Senate Committee
on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry (Mar. 8, 2023), (https://
www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opabehnam32).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under my direction, the Commission voted unanimously in December to
issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to require FCMs, swap dealers
(SDs), and major swap participants (MSPs) to establish an operational
resilience framework and adopt non-binding Commission guidance related
to the management of risks stemming from third-party relationships.\15\
The proposed rule would require the covered entities to establish,
document, implement, and maintain an Operational Resilience Framework
(ORF). This proposal would require a process to identify, monitor,
manage, and assess risks relating to IT security, third-party
relationships, and emergencies or other significant disruptions to
their operations as a CFTC registrant.\16\ The ORF would need to
include three components: an IT security program, a third-party
relationship program, and a business continuity and disaster recovery
(BCDR) plan.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Operational Resilience Framework for Futures Commission
Merchants, Swap Dealers, and Major Swap Participants, 89 FR 4706
(Proposed Jan. 24, 2024) (to be codified at 17 CFR pts. 1 and 23),
(https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/2024/01/2023-28745a.pdf).
\16\ See CFTC, Fact Sheet and Q&A--Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to
Require Futures Commission Merchants, Swap Dealers, and Major Swap
Participants to Establish an Operational Resilience Framework (Dec. 13,
2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/Events/
opaeventopenmeeting121323).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As I have often said, we recognize that our rules apply to covered
entities that represent many different business models, and may be a
part of a larger corporate family subject to the concurrent supervision
of multiple domestic and perhaps international regulators. CFTC staff
have strong working relationships with our fellow market and prudential
regulators. Whether we are working on joint rulemakings or engaging in
discussions regarding policy that impacts the derivatives markets
directly or indirectly, our approach is always aimed at harmonizing
where we can and avoiding duplicative and unnecessarily burdensome
outcomes. We are actively working with our fellow regulators on a
number of matters that impact CFTC regulated markets.
Another topic presenting challenges and opportunities for the
agency is artificial intelligence (AI). I am proud to say that recently
the CFTC's new AI Task Force issued a request for comment (RFC) on the
use of AI in CFTC-regulated markets.\17\ The AI RFC is part of a
greater vision I have had since my first days as Chairman: advancing
analytical capabilities through building talent, leveraging the cloud,
and developing a forward-looking AI culture. We have a process in place
for exploring AI use cases to help the agency better monitor, regulate,
surveil, identify pockets of stress, and enforce compliance. Further,
our OCEO recently issued a Customer Advisory warning the public about
AI-driven fraud and scams.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ See Press Release Number 8853-24, CFTC, CFTC Staff Releases
Request for Comment on the Use of Artificial Intelligence in CFTC-
Regulated Markets (Jan. 25, 2024), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/
PressReleases/8853-24).
\18\ See Press Release Number 8854-24, CFTC, CFTC Customer Advisory
Cautions the Public to Beware of Artificial Intelligence Scams (Jan.
25, 2024), (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8854-24).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In December, the Commission proposed guidance regarding the listing
of voluntary carbon credit (VCC) derivative contracts.\19\ Identified
as one of the most important developments for the carbon industry,\20\
this is the first proposed guidance on standards applicable to
exchanges listing products aimed at providing tools to manage risk,
promote price discovery, and help encourage integrity in these
markets.\21\ All landowners, including America's farmers and ranchers,
can benefit from high integrity voluntary carbon markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Commission Guidance Regarding the Listing of Voluntary Carbon
Credit Derivative Contracts; Request for Comment, 88 FR 89410 (Dec. 27,
2023), (https://www.cftc.gov/sites/default/files/2023/12/2023-
28532a.pdf).
\20\ See Vasil Valev, COP28 Update on Day Six: The Most Important
Developments for the Carbon Industry, Carbon Herald (Dec. 5, 2023),
(https://www.cftc.gov/Exit/index.htm?https://carbonherald.com/cop28-
update-on-day-six-the-most-important-developments-for-the-carbon-
industry/).
\21\ See Rostin Behnam, Chairman, CFTC, Statement of Chairman
Rostin Behnam on the Proposed Commission Guidance Regarding the Listing
of Voluntary Carbon Credit Derivative Contracts (Dec. 4, 2023),
(https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/behnam
statement120423).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under my direction as Chairman, the CFTC hired its first ever Chief
Diversity Officer (CDO) who oversees the agency's Office of Minority
and Women Inclusion (OMWI). In the near future, I plan to release the
CFTC's first DEIA Strategic Plan. Among other things, the Plan will aim
to further develop our workforce. Current efforts through our OMWI
include establishing partnerships and recruiting at minority serving
institutions and rural colleges and universities, engaging urban and
rural communities and related professional associations, and planning a
robust mass media campaign to enhance our outreach efforts. I am eager
to see the CFTC's OMWI statutorily authorized, similar to other Federal
financial regulators.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Section 342 of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 12 U.S.C. 5452,
required the Departmental Offices of the Department of the Treasury,
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board), each of the Federal
reserve banks, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), the Bureau of Consumer
Financial Protection (CFPB), the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA),
and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to each establish an
Office of Minority and Women Inclusion (OMWI) to be responsible for all
matters of the agency relating to diversity in management, employment,
and business activities. The Act also instructed each OMWI Director to
develop standards for assessing the diversity policies and practices of
entities regulated by the respective agency.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Under my direction, the agency also is embarking on developing its
first centralized workforce succession planning program. The lack of
adequate succession planning poses several risks to the agency,
including disruption to processes, workflows, and protocols that can
threaten core functions; the loss of mission critical knowledge and
expertise; and the increased expense of retaining critical talent in
urgent situations. Looking at our workforce demographics and
trajectory, the inescapable conclusion is that roughly a decade of
budget uncertainty is degrading our ability to effectively and
consistently hire and maintain the skilled workforce necessary to keep
pace with our jurisdictional markets.
As we near the 50th anniversary of President Ford signing of the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974, we should reflect on
the past 50 years of market development, evolution, and growth, while
also looking forward to the next 50 years, and to the role the CFTC
will play in the continued health and dominance of the U.S. financial
markets and economy. We cannot simply sit back and hope that the next
50 years will replicate the success of the past 50. Technology is
driving change faster than it ever has, and we collectively must keep
up, both to set the guardrails that will serve as foundations for
customer protections and market resiliency, and to allow for growth and
innovation.
The CFTC has consistently been at the forefront of identifying and
addressing risks with a balanced, thoughtful, and measured approach. I
strongly believe our collective goal is to keep the U.S. derivatives
markets the safest, strongest, the most effective, and the most
desirable in the world. These goals are necessary to maintain America's
position as the preeminent economy in the world. These goals are also
necessary to maintain national security for all Americans. As this
Committee knows, our nation's agricultural, energy, and precious metals
resources are some of our most critical assets. I believe that without
a robust derivatives market, these assets cannot be optimally utilized.
An investment in the CFTC is an investment in America. As Chairman of
the agency, you have my commitment to work with this Committee on
achieving these goals. I look forward to your questions.

The Chairman. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for
your important testimony today, and we look forward to that
continue collaborative relationship.
At this time, Members will be recognized for questions in
order of seniority, alternating between Majority and Minority
Members and in order of arrival for those who joined us after
the hearing convened. You will be recognized for 5 minutes each
in order to allow us to get to as many questions as possible. I
will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Chairman Behnam, we have heard a lot about the potentially
disastrous ramifications of the Prudential Regulators, Basel
III Endgame, and the GSIB surcharge proposed rules, including
that they may curtail banks' ability to offer crucial hedging
services to clients such as farmers and ranchers and other end-
users who are seeking to manage the risks associated with
operating their businesses. You have stated publicly that CFTC
staff are looking at two proposals to determine if the changes
will harm end-users' ability to hedge risk in the commodity
derivatives markets. Can you please share with the Committee
any of the CFTC staff's findings on this issue?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, a very important
question. And I will tell you a few things that I think should
maybe level set. One, I have been personally engaged with other
colleagues at the Prudential Regulators and market regulators,
sharing some of the issues that we have examined and thought
about and wanting to help steer potentially their thought
process as they continue towards finalizing the rule.
I would say a few important data points that really
represent some of the issues that we have identified. Going
back to 2004, we had 177 registered FCMs, futures commission
merchants, at the CFTC. In 2024, currently, we have just about
64, a huge reduction in the capacity to clear and execute
transactions for all market participants, including end-users.
Also, at the same time, we have seen an increase in customer
funds from approximately $80 billion in 2004 to about $\1/2\
trillion, so huge growth in markets, reduction in capacity. We
see concentration in the largest five clearing members, just
about 60 percent or more clearing futures swaps and foreign
futures as well.
So I think we have to be very careful as we think about
capital. I would say this very confidently that capital is one
of the benchmarks and the foundations of good financial
regulation, and it is important that Prudential Regulators move
forward with Basel III and the surcharge, but we have to be
careful about how it is implemented. We have to create
incentives for clearing. Clearing is one of the hallmarks of
the financial crisis. We see the SEC recently finalized a rule
for clearing Treasury markets. I think this is a clear
indication that, collectively, we believe clearing works.
So we need to continue to incentivize clearing, make market
participants feel comfortable that the costs will not be
prohibitive, and ultimately create an avenue for clearing
members to provide services to all customers. So this is not
just large asset managers. This is not just large pension funds
or large financial institutions and manufacturers. We have to
think about all of your constituents--farmers, ranchers, small
business owners--to an extent, energy producers, any commodity
producer that needs to use our markets. They need to have
access and it needs to be a fair price. And as we think about
these rules going forward, we need to make sure that we are
ensuring the integrity of the derivatives market, but also
making sure it is accessible, fair, and at a reasonable price
such that there will be incentives to participate in the
market.
The Chairman. Mr. Chairman, an SEC-registered special
purpose broker dealer Prometheum announced recently that it
will custody customers' Ether beginning in March. According to
the SEC's guidance, SPBDs are only allowed to custody
securities. Now, you have previously stated on a number of
occasions that you consider Ether to be a commodity. To that
end, the CFTC has allowed CFTC-registered commodity derivatives
exchanges to list Ether derivatives contracts. And in October
2023, SEC approved an Ether exchange traded fund that
characterized Ether as a commodity and was based on those
futures contracts, thereby tacitly accepting that Ether is a
commodity. Can you please share with us your views on
Prometheum's plans to custody Ether an asset that you and at
least at one point the SEC considered to be a commodity?
Mr. Behnam. Mr. Chairman, I think the point you raise is
really the critical one. We do have listed Ether futures
contracts, and we have had them for a number of years, just
about 4 years. And by default, this is at least in part why
have I publicly stated that both Bitcoin and Ether are
commodities. I have not been in communication with Prometheum.
I have not discussed their decision-making, but from my
understanding, essentially reading the press and talking to my
staff who have reached out to the SEC, this was an independent
decision by Prometheum, which is, as you mentioned, a special
purpose broker dealer, to signal to the market that it is their
intent to custody Ether. So, it is my understanding that this
was not at all a decision by the SEC and that this was an
individual decision by the entity.
How this plays out, obviously, is very critical and really
goes to your point. And the issue is, if we do have any action
by the SEC to essentially validate that decision, i.e.,
constituting Ether as a security, it would then put our
registrants, our exchanges who list Ether as a futures contract
sort of in noncompliance of SEC rules as opposed to CFTC rules.
So I am working with Chairman Gensler. We are working with
his office. We are working with the agency to ensure that
whatever steps are taken are deliberate, that we are involved,
and that they understand certainly what the consequences would
be if there was a decision by the agency to determine that
Ether was a security. As of now, we need to preserve the
integrity of our markets and understand that this is a years-
old decision where these markets are functioning well under the
decision and the conclusion that Ether is a commodity.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
I now recognize the distinguished gentleman from Georgia,
the Ranking Member, for 5 minutes' worth of questions.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Behnam, I want to talk about a couple of things
here. First of all, I want you to address the dangers of
continuing after 10 years this whole failure for the CFTC to be
reauthorized. Can you tell us why this is a terrible mistake
and why we need to move on it right now?
Mr. Behnam. Ranking Member Scott, thanks for the question.
And I think I am going to highlight something you said, which
was the issue we had a few years ago and that this Committee
addressed very deliberately and intentionally and successfully
with the Europeans. I think it is easy for us collectively in
this room to realize, yes, the agency hasn't been reauthorized
for now 16 years. But the agency door is still open, we still
fulfill our mission, and we do a really good job at it.
But there is an external issue in terms of folks overseas
and perhaps folks not in Washington seeing that the agency is
not reauthorized. And I think that sends a bad signal not only
from the Committee's perspective, but from the agency's
perspective that it is not viewed as important as it needs to
be. So I think externally we have to reauthorize the agency to
ensure that the public, the investing public, that our
international partners understand that this Committee and this
Congress takes the derivatives markets and the U.S.'s supremacy
in derivatives markets very importantly, that we actively look
at these issues, that we are actively thinking about the
statute and the policy and how our markets are evolving and how
we need to evolve with the marketplace and others across the
globe. We have the deepest, biggest markets in the world, and I
think we all want to keep it that way. And reauthorization is
one step to ensure that that condition remains the same.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Well, I can tell you, I have
been in touch with our friends at CME and ICE clearinghouses,
and they are very much concerned about this issue. And I know a
number of us, both Democrats and Republicans, are very
concerned about this, as we have fought this tooth and nail,
and we will look to you for any recommendations you can make to
us on this Committee of what we need to do to stop this failure
to reauthorize the CFTC.
Now, let me also talk about this issue of inadequate
funding. You are still suffering from the lack of
appropriations. And even in this year, we have not been able to
give you the level of funding that you need. Can you please
express what this means to your agency?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Ranking Member. Certainly, as we are
all feeling costs going up, this is not unique to individuals
or organizations outside of Washington. So whether it is
hardware or software for cyber resilience, for IT, for services
from vendors and whatnot, we are seeing those costs go up,
salaries and expenses related to personnel recruitment,
retention, these important things that any large organization
has to deal with, ensuring that we have adequate funding to
make sure that we can fulfill the mission.
I can tell this Committee with confidence we continue to
fulfill our mission above par without a doubt, but as we look
forward to the future and the growth of the agency, as we see
growth in our markets, as we see new participants, as we see
new registration requirements, huge markets coming in,
obviously, crypto a huge part of that, this is pulling us in a
lot of different directions, requiring a lot of different areas
of personnel expertise that we need to be able to fund.
So as you think about our resources--and I appreciate you
being dogged about this for many, many years--I think we have
to look to the future. And as I said in my statement, this is
about national security. This is about us preserving the U.S.
derivatives markets as the best in the world. And this is a
long-term goal that we need to achieve in order to meet that
goal.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. And let me just say, I am very
appreciative and very delighted to see you move with your
excellent diversity program. But in my short time I have left,
you mentioned AI, and you mentioned some good things about it.
Let me ask you, do you see some dangers here? As other people
and other entities are mentioning, they are all not saying good
things about AI unless we are careful.
Mr. Behnam. Ranking Member, 100 percent. What I have done--
I mentioned this in my statement--we put out a request for
comment. This is in my mind a deliberate, intentional way of
seeking feedback from the market, from academics, from public
interest groups to see how AI is being used in the marketplace
right now and how it may be used in the future. And that is
both risks and benefits.
I think, as a regulator, we need to be very focused on the
risks of AI and what we need to do to preserve the integrity of
markets, and that really is the goal. So we are in the
factfinding stage right now. All things are on the table in
terms of policy advisory or guidance. But it was very
intentional that we sought comment and sought input from the
public at first to get a better understanding of how artificial
intelligence is being used so that we can eliminate and if, at
a minimum, mitigate these risks that can be caused to the
financial system and our economy ultimately if AI is not used
appropriately.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And
keep doing your excellent work.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
other distinguished gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Austin Scott,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Behnam, welcome to the House Agriculture
Committee. You have a lot of respect from this Committee for
personally the work you do and for your agency. I appreciate
your bipartisanship and just being a fact-based regulator.
You mentioned safe, strong, effective markets. I couldn't
agree with you more. I couldn't agree with you more about our
financial system and our economy being a big part of our
national security, just as big a part as our military and the
State Department is. My concern with kind of where we have
gotten here--and I heard you say already that you have
personally engaged in discussions with the regulators that
proposed the changes. Were you consulted prior to the rules
being proposed by the bank regulators, or did they ask you to
help with the analysis after they proposed the rules and how
they would impact end-users, or did you have to go to them?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, so we were not consulted as the
rule was being crafted. I regularly see members of the
Prudential Regulators at the Federal Reserve, the OCC, the
FDIC. So we have talked about it, sort of, over the course--I
knew this was coming because of the Basel requirements and
Basel III being sort of on the horizon. But we as an agency
were not consulted as the rule was being crafted, and we
proactively reached out after reviewing the rule and seeing the
potential impacts on derivatives markets.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. So you had to go to them?
Mr. Behnam. Correct.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. Thank you for that, and
thank you for being proactive because it is important that our
regulators work together if we are going to have those markets.
Are you aware that just, for example, a mutual insurance
carrier would be treated differently than a stock carrier under
the rule as it is proposed?
Mr. Behnam. I am not aware of that specific provision. We
could certainly look at it; but, I would think we would want
equity in terms of how they are treated, just hearing what your
issue is and how it is raised.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. That is one of my concerns is
that there has to be equitable treatment of competitive
companies. I mean, we don't want to benefit one and penalize
the other. So I would appreciate if you would stay in touch
with them on that. We don't want to put an industry, because of
their structure, at a competitive disadvantage. We want the
markets to be safe, strong, and effective for everybody.
I want to move on to another issue. Are you supportive of
the expansion of Federal Reserve deposit accounts for all CFTC-
regulated clearinghouses?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, I have stated this before. I think
master accounts at the Fed would provide a sense of financial
stability for our CCPs, our clearinghouses. I mentioned this
earlier. Since 2008, we have seen a huge growth in our markets,
which ultimately means there is risk being concentrated in
clearinghouses. We do have two clearinghouses that are
designated as significantly important, which gives them access
to the master accounts at the Fed, which provides stability and
certainty for the funds that they collect from customers and
other users. So I do think it would be an important policy
change I have stated in the past, and I continue to advocate
for it.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. So in your opening
testimony I think you said that 60 percent of the trades were
through the largest five. Is that correct?
Mr. Behnam. Sixty-two percent of customer money is in the
largest five clearing members.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Sixty-two percent?
Okay. How much is in those two?
Mr. Behnam. The top two?
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Right.
Mr. Behnam. I would have to look at the data.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. All right. I just think
that is something we need to do. I mean, it should be simple.
It is the safest place in the world for the money to be held,
and I am a little disappointed that we haven't been able to get
that done yet, as I am disappointed that we haven't yet been
able to get the reauthorization done.
Just one final question as I am running down, just what are
you hearing are the concerns from the end-users that you know?
Mr. Behnam. Well, it really does come down to access to
markets. And this goes to my statistic, which I raised in
response to the Chairman's question where we have seen a
reduction of clearing members, of FCMs, from 177 20 years ago
to about 64 right now. It is not like the largest ones are
leaving the market. It is the smaller FCMs. It is the FCMs that
facilitate and service smaller businesses, agricultural
stakeholders, energy stakeholders. So as much as that is a key
component of our constituency, as it is yours, I want to ensure
that the market is fair in offering these risk management
services to all participants.
And right now, we are seeing that business being
concentrated in the largest banks, significantly important
financial institutions, global banks. And you can imagine
because of economies-of-scale and because of costs like capital
and otherwise, it doesn't necessarily become a viable business
model to provide a co-op from Georgia a futures servicing
business. So we need to ensure that diversity of futures
commission merchants so that all American businesses, small and
large, can have access to derivatives markets to manage risk.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back now.
I am now pleased to recognize Ms. Adams from North Carolina
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Ranking
Member, for hosting the meeting today, the hearing. Chairman
Behnam, thank you for testifying today. It is good to see you
again. I do want to follow up on an issue that you spoke about
a bit last time when you came before the Committee. The Dodd-
Frank Act added a new core principle, diversity of board of
directors for future exchanges or designated contract markets.
Under the core principle, a DCM, if a publicly traded company,
shall endeavor to recruit individuals to serve on its board of
directors and its other decision-making bodies as determined by
the Commission from among them, reflecting a board and
culturally diverse pool of candidates. And so as I understand
it, it has been more than 10 years since this provision was
implemented by the CFTC. So after all of this time, are you
seeing a greater diversity in boards of directors at DMCs?
Mr. Behnam. Congresswoman, thanks for the question, a very
important one. And as you stated, this is a priority of mine. I
would say since 2010 we have seen an improvement, but there is
certainly more work to be done. And I am hopeful that the work
that we are doing at the agency by hiring a Chief Diversity
Officer, having a DEIA strategic plan is going to further
improve the diversity of boards across the industry and our
stakeholders. But ultimately, that is their decision, and we
are doing what we can at the CFTC to make sure that we are
casting a wide net for individuals and professionals across the
country.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. So how does diversity and leadership
at DCMs compare with the leadership of other publicly traded
entities regulated by the CFTC that operate under the Commodity
Exchange Act core principles?
Mr. Behnam. Congresswoman, I would probably have to look at
the specific number of DCMs, the designated contract markets,
and the other participants and identify the diversity of their
boards. It is not something I necessarily look at regularly,
but I am happy to look at that and work with your office to get
you some statistics, again, ensuring that that core principle
is complied with from Dodd-Frank.
[The information referred to is located on p. 62.]
Ms. Adams. Right. Well, let me switch gears for a moment to
climate change. I was glad to see the Commission issue its
proposed guidance regarding the listing of voluntary carbon
credit derivatives contracts. But critics wonder whether the
CFTC should be the source of this guidance. So could you
explain the justification for issuance of this guidance? And
was the CFTC getting questions on standards, or were there
concerns about the wide array of various standards for
voluntary carbon credits?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congresswoman. So we do have listed
futures on voluntary carbon credits on our registered
exchanges. So just by that fact, the reality that we have
listed futures, we then have, as an agency, as a regulatory
body, an interest in the health of the underlying market. Just
as we would in a corn contract, we want to make sure the
underlying cash market is healthy and free from fraud and
manipulation.
Concerns have been raised about the voluntary carbon credit
market for a number of years. There have been issues around
integrity and the sort of trustworthiness and intention of some
of the registries. So the intent from an agency perspective is
really to elevate the diligence that the DCMs, which you
mentioned earlier, the exchanges use when they list CFTC-
regulated futures contracts. We want to make sure those
contracts listed on our exchanges are free from fraud and
manipulation and fairly represent price discovery, bids and
offers, and supply and demand. And that is why we think and we
are hopeful that guidance will send a signal to the exchanges,
the regulated exchanges, that there needs to be a little bit of
diligence as they start to continue to list contracts around
voluntary carbon credits.
Ms. Adams. Right. Okay. Well, that was the second part of
my question in terms of what the expectation would be in terms
of the benefits of providing it. So thank you very much. Thank
you very much for being here, and thank you for your responses
and for the work that you do. I appreciate it.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia [presiding.] Thank you, Ms.
Adams.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Mann, from Kansas, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Mann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Chairman, thank you for being here. Good to see
you again.
I represent the 1st District of Kansas, which is a good bit
of the western \2/3\ of Kansas. We produce a lot of beef, a lot
of wheat, a lot of sorghum. We are the number-three ag-
producing district in the country. Our ag producers work hard
every day to deliver the food that feeds all of us and people
around the world. And I appreciate that you oversee the markets
that help our ag producers manage risk. When I think about
agriculture, such a risky business, and we can take a little
bit of the risk out of it by being able to hedge some of--not
all of--some of the market risk, which I appreciate that.
Early March, 4 years ago, the COVID pandemic was starting
to hit. I think most people remember where they were when the
NCAA basketball tournament got canceled. We have to remember
that not a single ag producer in my district around the country
took time off. They continued to go the fields, feed their
cattle, do the work that they do to feed us. But here we are 4
years later, and we still have a lot of people at CFTC and
other government agencies for that matter that still have not
returned back to their offices for work. Could you comment on
that, and specifically, what I should tell my ag producers who
are working every day when they find out that there are folks
at the CFTC that haven't even returned to their office yet? Any
thoughts on that?
Mr. Behnam. Yes, Congressman, I would say first thing I
would tell them is that the Chairman of the agency agrees with
you that I think it is extremely important that we are
together, we are in the office, and we are collaborating and we
are discussing issues that are extremely important to the
American economy and all Americans, farmers, ranchers, and
others.
Just to give you a little bit of a sense of our current
posture, I have about 700 full-time employees. I have about 180
managers, and the managers, by my request, are coming in 2 days
a week. I call it my quasi-cabinet, the leadership team, which
is about 10 to 15 individuals, are coming in 3 days a week. My
direct team and myself, we are in 4 or 5 days a week. There is
a large portion of the agency approximately, 500 individuals,
who are either a part of the National Treasury Employee Union,
the NTEU, or not necessarily part of the union, but not
managers either. And that is where we are in ongoing
negotiations to determine essentially the future of our work
posture at the CFTC.
My position and my strategy from day one, which I would say
was probably late 2021, maybe early 2022 when folks started
shifting back to work in person, is to play the long game. And
I hate to use sort of a phrase there, but the impact that--the
decision that is going to be made that is going to determine
the work posture will be one that will likely have an impact
for decades to come. So I haven't wanted to rush it.
We are negotiating with the union and its representatives
in good faith. I am mindful and very much support being in the
office and being together and collaborating, understanding the
risks that our markets have and having to have those bits of
communication, whether it is near a water cooler or by our
office. But I am also mindful of the current work environment,
that hybrid does work, and that we have to give some level of
balance. So I am trying to strike the right balance, bring
folks back, but negotiate in good faith with patience and
ultimately come up with an outcome that is suitable for
everyone.
Mr. Mann. Yes, and I appreciate that, appreciate your take
on the issue. Feel free to let the union know as you are
negotiating that there is at least one Member of the
Agriculture Committee that is very concerned about this, and I
know there are others as well. I would remind them that they
are overseeing markets that you have people that literally lay
it on the line 7 days a week, and it is hard for them to
understand when folks are in the office 0 days, 1 day, 2 days a
week. It just makes no sense.
With my remaining time, I would like to quickly touch on
Basel III, which I know was mentioned a couple times here.
Basel, Basel, bamboozle. When you name something--I know you
didn't name it. When you name something Basel III Endgame, it
sounds like an Avengers movie, right? I mean, it causes concern
and skepticism, as it should, across Kansas and across the
country. Any comments? I hear regularly from folks that are
concerned that these proposals are going to drive banks to
scale back or even abandon clearing services altogether. Any
thoughts on what your agency is getting ready to do as this
hits and how do we pick up the pieces and make sure that
markets stay intact and we continue to deliver the risk
management tools that our ag producers need?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. My
intention from the start has been to put together a team of
experts at the CFTC and to go work with our fellow regulators
at the Fed, at the OCC, at the FDIC and to help inform them the
best we can about what we are seeing in our markets, the
changes that have occurred--I mentioned this to the Chairman--
the concentration of participants and players, the lack of
access and services for smaller participants, and the
importance of the diversity of participants in this pool so
that farmers and ranchers in Kansas can have access to futures
markets.
You hit the nail on the head when you said the futures
markets are not going to eliminate all of your risk, but it can
be a part of a larger toolbox, some of the commodity programs
over at USDA, to mitigate risk and reduce it to a point where
that farmer can go into planting season every March or April
and feel confident they are going to come out during harvest on
the right end of the season.
Ultimately, we have to make sure that banking regulators
understand what we are seeing in our markets, that there is an
incentive to clear, and in order to clear, we need FCMs and
brokers offering these services to all constituents. So we will
continue working with them as the prudential, the banking
regulators have finalized a rule, and we will keep harping on
the importance of derivatives markets, clearing, and making
sure that we are not laying on unnecessary burdensome rules
that will essentially create further concentration and
ultimately increased risk in the markets.
Mr. Mann. Which will lead to higher food costs for all of
us. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for being here.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. The chair now recognizes Ms.
Salinas from Oregon.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. Thank you to the Chairman and
Ranking Member for today's hearing. And thank you to Chairman
Behnam to answer the Committee's questions and really to the
whole Commission and its staff. For all the hard work you are
doing, I know we are in challenging times.
I want to just start off by asking about something I am
particularly concerned by, the rise of political event
contracts or, in simpler terms, political gambling. I
understand that the legal battle surrounding the use of a no-
action letter that was issued to the platform PredictIt and
then subsequently withdrawn is still underway, but I don't want
to address the issue of no-action letters. Instead, I want to
focus on how we prevent these kinds of platforms from taking
root in the first place. In my view, public elections should
not be subject to the influence of betting markets.
And so to that end, how does the CFTC intend to prevent
sites like PredictIt from establishing themselves in the
future?
Mr. Behnam. Congresswoman, thanks for the question,
extremely important one, as you point out. We are sort of
dealing with litigation on multiple fronts, so I will be
mindful of what I say. But ultimately, there is a provision in
the statute, section 5, which prohibits certain types of
contracts, around war, terrorism, assassination, anything that
is illegal under state or Federal law, or anything that is not
in the public interest, and also gaming. And that is really the
tricky issue that we have been trying to navigate.
The Commission has said that political event contracts are
illegal under the law, under both the state prohibition and the
gaming prohibition. But obviously, there are differences of
opinion. And, our decisions to prohibit these contracts have
been challenged in court. So, my goal over the next couple of
months--and it has been one that has taken quite some time
because you can imagine producing a rule is quite complicated.
But it is to further clarify the existing rules that we have to
ensure that no new participant or company simply just starts
listing political event contracts.
At this point, we can't stop a company from organizing and
establishing an exchange. They have to comply with the law.
There will be an enforcement action if they don't. But
ultimately, there has just been a bit of confusion, I would
say. And because of the entity you suggested, the agency has
issued no-action letter relief on two instances in the past 30
years. But it has been very, very specific in what the
Commission has allowed, not-for-profit and essentially data-
gathering for academic purposes. We are seeing a shift away
from academic purposes and not-for-profit such that folks want
to do for-profit entities that are using elections as a means
to have an event contract-type product. So we are working
towards a rule, clarifying what we believe needs to be
clarified so we don't see these contracts in the future.
Ms. Salinas. In your view, would additional Congressional
clarification help?
Mr. Behnam. Always, yes.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. Thank you. Now shifting a little
bit, another element of the ever-changing landscape at CFTC is
the rise of artificial intelligence. In your testimony, you
noted CFTC's Office of Customer Education recently issued a
customer advisory warning about AI-driven fraud and scams. For
people back home in Oregon's 6th District, could you expand on
what the Commission is observing in terms of AI-driven fraud
and the scale of the threat it poses?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congresswoman. At this point, it is a
bit early. And we are aware through really anecdotal
conversations that artificial intelligence is being used by
some of the more sophisticated, well-resourced entities. But we
also know that it is growing, and it is going to grow beyond
these larger financial institutions, to potentially many
registrants, if not all registrants, given the sort of ubiquity
that AI seems to be having in our culture and our society these
days.
So my intention was to put out a request for information to
get a sense of what is going on in the market, how registrants
and participants are using it, what potential risks there are,
and what potential benefits there are, and from that bit of
information gathering, potentially use it as a tool to produce
policy through a rule, through an advisory, or through
guidance.
You can imagine a lot of registrants kind of keep this
close to their chest. They don't necessarily want to share what
they are doing or how they are using it. They view it as
intellectual property, which in many senses, I understand and I
agree with, but as a regulator, we need to see the whole
playing field. We want to get a sense of what they are doing,
making sure they know what the AI is, the artificial
intelligence program is, and how it would be impacted or how it
would react under different scenarios, and ultimately, make
sure that we are continuing to do our job. But ultimately, we
want to start right now at information gathering and then move
forward at a good cadence to move quickly, but also to move
cautiously so we don't get ahead of ourselves and do something
that really wouldn't apply to the way the technology is being
used.
Ms. Salinas. And thank you for your comments on just
balancing that investigation around risks and benefits because
I do think, yes, there is both to be had there.
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you.
Mr. Behnam. Thanks.
Ms. Salinas. I yield back.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. The chair now recognizes Mr.
Rose, from Tennessee, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you holding
this hearing, the Chairman holding this hearing, and appreciate
our witness for being with us today.
Chairman Behnam, considering the potential disruptions of
quantum computing in derivatives markets such as the ability to
break current encryption methods or to solve complex
optimization problems that could be exploited for manipulative
trading strategies, how is the CFTC preparing to address these
challenges?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. Quantum
and AI are in many respects related. Quantum is going to pose a
lot of issues and challenges. I think there are going to be
benefits, but it is also going to disrupt markets and cyber
issues and sort of protection of data. I have looked into this
a bit over the past actually couple of months. And this really
led to what I mentioned to the Congresswoman, the issuance of
this request for information about artificial intelligence.
And, if you have a chance, if you look at the document, we
asked a series of questions. I think they were very well-
crafted and very intentional in how we crafted them, going
pretty deep in terms of technical nature, but also wanting to
get a better sense of how market participants are using AI and
how technology is driving their business operations and what we
need to do as a regulator to address those risks or the
opportunities that might arise.
In some respects, our core principles already address these
issues. One could look through our core principles and think
about governance and markets being free from fraud and
manipulation and other core principles that really are the
driving engine of our statute. But this technology is so novel,
can pose so many unique risks, but also opportunities that we
really have to take a very unique look at what we need to do as
an agency and potentially this Committee legislatively to
address the adoption, the growth of AI, and how it might impact
our markets.
Mr. Rose. Do you think the Commission has sufficient
resources to stay abreast of this quickly changing environment?
Mr. Behnam. I would say so. Right now, I think the most
important thing I will say about resources--and this has been
an observation I have made over 15 years being around the
agency in a policy role--is consistency and certainty are the
most important things. If I have a sense as the head of the
organization that we are going to have this budget for the next
couple fiscal years, whether it is increasing at a small clip
or a large clip or not at all, it provides me that certainty so
I can allocate resources towards these types of things.
AI, cybersecurity, IT infrastructure, these are going to be
the components that drive the large costs, in addition to
salaries, of the agency into the future. And if we are going to
move with the market, we need as much certainty around our
budget going forward so that we can have that ability to
recruit the best talent, to retain the best talent, and
ultimately build a diverse workforce.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I appreciate that. I would like to
briefly discuss a recent news story that detailed a case of
insider trading. An individual overheard their spouse's work
conversations while both were working from home and used that
information to trade stocks based on a planned acquisition. The
case involved the oil company British Petroleum. Considering a
significant portion of the CFTC's workforce is currently
working--or teleworking, that is--can you please detail the
specific policies and procedures in place to safeguard
sensitive data accessed by CFTC employees who are working
remotely?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congressman, important question. And,
the same requirements that we have around retention of
confidential information apply at home. We have sent out
periodic notices to staff going back to 2020 when we went into
full remote posture after COVID hit 4 years ago to ensure that
your work environment is safe. And in this particular instance,
which I am familiar with, that spouse, family, friends are not
becoming privy to any information that is confidential.
So we work hard with it, constantly reminding staff of the
importance of the information they have, that it is a violation
of Federal law to provide information, either to trade on it or
to leak information. I do that quite often, actually. But it is
something that we continually drumbeat and ultimately drives me
towards what I said to Mr. Mann is the importance of being back
in the office and feeling that sort of continuity of work,
office, and collegiality among colleagues.
Mr. Rose. Sir, we don't have much time left, but are you
aware of any incidents of CFTC employees accidentally
disclosing or misusing confidential data while working
remotely?
Mr. Behnam. I am not aware of any information being leaked
by any staff.
Mr. Rose. If you wouldn't mind checking with your team and
getting back to us if there had been any examples of that?
Mr. Behnam. Of course.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman [presiding.] The gentleman from Tennessee
yields back. I am now pleased to recognize the gentlelady from
Illinois, Congresswoman Budzinski, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Budzinski. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Chairman Behnam, for being here today.
Last summer when the Agriculture Committee came together to
mark up the FIT for the 21st Century Act, I was glad to
introduce two amendments to safeguard consumers. One of my
amendments was written to close loopholes that threaten
consumers' rights and to protect against market volatility. It
provides bankruptcy support for companies and individuals and
allows customers to access their investments in the event of a
collapse, protecting the little guy, the small-time investors
who would otherwise be unable to access those funds. I am very
glad to say that that amendment was agreed to in Committee, and
I am grateful to the Chairman and his staff for the bipartisan
work we did here.
Chairman Behnam, the joint rulemaking requirement for the
FIT for the 21st Century Act poses a number of implementation
concerns, from differences in opinion on whether additional
authorities are needed to size and funding. should Congress
move forward with a bill that addresses only the CFTC's
expanded regulatory authority needs? And assuming sufficient
funding is included, what would the time frame and logistics of
implementation look like from your perspective?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congresswoman. I have said this before,
and I will say it certainly again, we need to fill the gap in
crypto regulation. I think, as I am sure you are reading and
others on the Committee, Bitcoin is again hitting all-time
highs. It feels like every day I read in The Wall Street
Journal or the Financial Times or The New York Times or The
Washington Post that there is some storyline about crypto and
that it is back from 2022. This notion of crypto going away I
think is just a false narrative and potentially it wouldn't be
an understatement to suggest that there is another period of
irrational exuberance going on with these price swings and the
volatility.
So I think this just validates the fact that we need to
act, Congress needs to act to fill this gap, specifically
around Bitcoin, which I think clearly is a commodity. And, as I
said to the Chairman, Ether as well. These are two of the
largest tokens, making up approximately 60 to 70 percent of the
whole market capitalization. In terms of implementation, with
funding, I am confident we could use the bill and the
framework--which I am very familiar with the FIT bill at this
point--and the expertise we have at the agency to implement a
regulatory structure within 12 months.
Ms. Budzinski. Great, thank you. And I will yield back.
Thanks.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back now. I am now
pleased to recognize the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Bacon,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to use this
opportunity to yield to my friend from Oklahoma.
The Chairman. The gentleman from Oklahoma is recognized.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank my
colleague from Nebraska.
Chairman Behnam, thank you for appearing before the
Agriculture Committee today. During our discussion when you
were last before the Committee, the Basel Endgame proposal had
not yet been proposed by the banking regulators. And since
then, we have seen an overwhelming response to the negative
consequences of the proposal, particularly to derivative end-
users. The proposal would have significant consequences for the
health of the U.S. derivatives market and would make hedging
more expensive for market participants like farmers and
ranchers.
I just had the chance to speak with the Federal Reserve
Chairman, Mr. Powell, on this topic over at the Financial
Services Committee, and Chairman Powell expressed that he was
willing to give these concerns a closer look. Chairman Behnam,
would you be willing to assist the Fed in taking a closer look?
And has the CFTC been asked by the Fed board to offer feedback?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congressman. Certainly, we are willing.
We have been quite active, me personally with my colleagues at
the board level, but also staff at the staff level, to share
some of these concerns around what I have sort of determined as
the shifting market structure and environment, which is fewer
FCMs, clearing brokers, less services for small ag and energy
producers in Oklahoma and across the country, and making sure,
as you remember well, after 2008 that we are incentivizing
clearing. In order to have a healthy clearing environment, we
need all the parts together, and we want to make sure that we
are not creating unnecessary barriers to clearing and clearing
services for end-users.
Mr. Lucas. Congress has a long history of broad bipartisan
support for not disadvantaging end-users, including in Dodd-
Frank, where I served on the conference committee.
Unfortunately, the Fed is proposing to undermine the work done
by Congress and this Committee and to cause disruption in the
U.S. derivatives market that your agency regulates.
I also had the opportunity to discuss with Chairman Powell
how the proposal will disincentivize banks from offering
clearing services. As you know, Chairman, in Dodd-Frank,
Congress mandated central clearing as a way to reduce risk in
the system. I know you have expressed concerns about the
decline in the number of banks that can clear derivatives for
end-users, which has made it harder for end-users to find a
bank to offer the service. Chairman Powell also acknowledged
this impact is something he is looking at in the Basel Endgame
proposal. How do you see the proposal impacting the willingness
of banks to clear derivatives for end-users? And will you
commit to working with the Fed to fix this?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, the clearing business has very
tight margins. And with low interest rates historically, I know
that has changed over the past couple years and the costs
related to clearing. There have been a number of clearing
members that have left the business. I stated earlier to the
Chairman, 20 years ago, we had 177 FCMs. Now, we are down to
64. We have concentration in the top five clearing members,
which are the largest banks, of over 60 percent of all customer
money. So, as you point out from 2008 in Dodd-Frank, we need to
incentivize clearing. Clearing is a risk-reducing function of
the market, and I think we need to recognize that risk-
reduction function to ensure that we incentivize participants
on the clearing side and then end-users from using these
markets.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Chairman, at the same time that this is
happening, the Securities Exchange Commission just finalized a
rule in December that will increase clearing in Treasury
markets. This will have a substantial impact on market access.
Chairman Behnam, with the current shortage of firms available
to provide clearing services to agriculture end-users, do you
see this being an additional stress on the Treasury markets?
Mr. Behnam. It is potentially an additional stress. We
would have to see how the rollout of the SEC is implemented, a
very different market, obviously, as you know, coming from the
Financial Services Committee, but ultimately, we need a diverse
pool of clearing members. And right now, we are seeing a
concentration of clearing members in the largest banks.
Historically, we have had non-bank clearing members. We have
had other small FCMs servicing end-users, and we are just not
seeing that population of clearing services like we did even 10
years ago, let alone 20 years ago.
Mr. Lucas. With my remaining time, I would just like to
reiterate that the futures markets play an important role in
price stability for consumers and businesses. And, Chairman
Behnam, could you offer any final thoughts on the importance of
protections in the Dodd-Frank Act for firms that use
derivatives hedging?
Mr. Behnam. Commercial end-users, as you noted, are very
much prioritized in Dodd-Frank, creating exemptions in part to
incentivize the use of markets, but ultimately to understand
that commercial end-users typically do not present risk like a
financial institution. And I think that treatment needs to
remain the same as we think about policy going forward.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentleman from Illinois,
Mr. Jackson, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Jackson of Illinois. Thank you so much. I was delighted
once again to have you and your participation. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
The concentration in banks, if you could further elaborate
on the challenges that you can see that could be unintended
that we should step in front of now to make sure there is
sufficient liquidity in the market. Any thoughts, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Behnam. So, Congressman, thanks. It is an extremely
important question because we think about policy and the shift
towards clearing and the benefits of clearing which I am a huge
advocate for, and we have seen the benefits of clearing and
mitigating risk and neutralizing risks. But ultimately, over
the past 15 years, nearly since Dodd-Frank, we have seen
concentration. We have seen a reduction in clearing members, as
I mentioned to Mr. Lucas. And ultimately, that puts a higher
point of pressure on just a few large banks. And as we think
about policy going forward, whether it is Basel III or the
capital surcharge, I think this has to be a serious,
intentional point of debate is to ensure that we are stopping
this trend that has been going on for the better part of 20
years.
I don't think it is a surprise that we are seeing
concentration in markets. We see them across different
industries. But ultimately, we have to strike the right balance
where we are seeing enough participants, especially in the
clearing ecosystem, so that not only that risk isn't
concentrated in just a few participants because if one or more
were to fail, you can imagine the consequences would be dire
for the financial system.
But ultimately, it is for smaller constituents who use
futures markets to manage risk. These larger institutions are
not going to necessarily have an economic incentive to provide
these services, these types of risk management services to
smaller participants, and this is really who all of you serve
and we serve. We want to make sure America's farmers, ranchers,
energy producers have access to futures markets. That makes
prices stable. That makes our economy strong for all consumers
across the country.
Mr. Jackson of Illinois. Once again, thank you for your
candor, your consistency, and your clarity. I yield back. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Duarte,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Chairman,
for being here to answer some questions.
I am mainly interested in my questioning on the regulation
of cryptocurrencies in the Chicago Board of Trade, and I also
have concerns of regulating them in the SEC, which I may get to
later, realizing that that is not really your responsibility.
When a commodity is listed on the Chicago Board of Trade,
what are the primary requirements for it to be eligible for
listing?
Mr. Behnam. Well, above all else, it needs to be a
commodity. The definition of commodity is quite broad. And it
is essentially in some respects a non-security. There are
enumerated commodities, many of which this Committee knows that
are physical commodities, but other types of commodities that
could be services, rights, or interests. This is just a
regurgitation of the statute.
But ultimately, there has been a process that has been
built over decades where the exchange--and in the case, you are
using, the Chicago Board of Trade--looks at the statute, our
statute and the regs, the implementing regulations of the law,
and essentially complies with the requirements around listing a
contract and providing specifications. And then----
Mr. Duarte. Is there a document that underlies these
qualifications like when Bitcoin or Ethereum were listed on the
Chicago Board of Trade as derivatives? Were there documents
that suggested what the criterion were and how they how they
met those criterion?
Mr. Behnam. In some respects, the Bitcoin or Ether listings
on the futures exchange were no different than the steps that
needed to be taken or have been taken to list an agricultural
or energy futures contract. It really just starts with that
definitional question is whether or not the product, the
underlying product is a commodity. If you can answer that
question in the affirmative, everything else kind of falls into
place.
Mr. Duarte. Do you take interest in, is it a broadly held
commodity, is their transparent diversity of producers? Are
there transparent diversity of buyers and sellers?
Mr. Behnam. Yes. So from an exchange perspective, an
exchange is never going to list a contract that it knows will
not succeed, so they want to make sure they have a sufficient
amount of buyers and sellers and that the contract will succeed
in that respect.
Mr. Duarte. Have there been commodities that failed to be
qualified for listing on the exchange?
Mr. Behnam. I don't think we would have ever gotten to a
point where it would have been listed if there was a question
about the definitional structure of the underlying product. We
would largely answer that question in the affirmative with
confidence before the exchange self-certifies or it seeks
approval from the agency to list a contract.
Mr. Duarte. So with Bitcoin, Ethereum, these
cryptocurrencies, what is it that is being sold? What is it
that it meets the essence of a commodity, a physical commodity,
or like an interest rate swap derivative that has a real-world
business purpose? What is it at the end of the day that
qualifies these things to be sold as something other than
Beanie Babies, pop-tops, baseball cards?
Mr. Behnam. So in the cash market, in the underlying
market, which is what I take your question to be really the
interpretation of what it is, is less a physical commodity,
which are enumerated in the statute, whether it is corn,
soybeans, or a metal--gold, silver--or an energy product like
natural gas or fuel. It is mostly used in the counter, the
negative, it is not a security. And if it is not a security,
then it is a commodity, in which case, the analysis has to take
place to make a determination that it is not a security, which
is frequently the Howey test, whether it is an investment
contract. If you can't answer that question in the affirmative,
that it is not a security, then it becomes a commodity.
Mr. Duarte. So anything that seeks to get on the Chicago
Board of Trade that can't be categorized as a security, meaning
maybe it is a common stock that has dividends, earnings per
share, forward-looking statements, a board, a management team
book value.
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mr. Duarte. Anything that doesn't meet the qualifications
of a security can be listed on the Chicago Board of Trade
simply because it is not a security?
Mr. Behnam. So differentiating a Beanie Baby from the
company that produces Beanie Babies and has a board of
directors and an executive team and et cetera, like that share
of the company that it is used to invest or to raise capital is
a security, but the actual product itself, in this case, the
Beanie Baby is likely a commodity.
Mr. Duarte. Yes.
So our current legislation to regulate cryptocurrencies
begins with the cryptocurrencies being traded as commodities,
but then elevates the currencies themselves, not the company,
which you just elaborated very clearly, to be traded as a
security. How is a cryptocurrency in your mind, realizing that
you are a commodities guy, ever going to meet the standards of
a security?
Mr. Behnam. So you can imagine that there are
cryptocurrencies, and this happened certainly 4 or 5 years ago.
We will see if it starts again, highly unlikely, where a group
of individuals tries to raise money, and in exchange for
raising fiat, capital, whether it is dollars or some non-U.S.
currency, issues a token, a cryptocurrency, as opposed to a
traditional share of stock, which we are accustomed to in
traditional equity markets. It is in that situation where that
group of individuals would raise money and use that money to
develop some sort of software or protocol that you could
interpret that token to be a security.
Mr. Duarte. But it has no share issuance.
It has no board of directors. It has no management team. It
has no earnings per share. It has no book value. It is simply a
broadly traded issuance of crypto. It really doesn't match any
of the tools available to the SEC to regulate forward-looking
statements, insider trading. There are a lot of gaps, in my
opinion, both on the commodities exchange, as well as the SEC,
to treat cryptocurrencies as either commodities or securities.
And I think we are shoehorning here to try and fit them into
regulatory schemes and give them credibility that they don't
deserve.
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, I don't disagree with you on the
former part, that we are shoehorning to an extent. I think
there are some points which are more clear than others. But
given the nature of the technology and what I have observed
over 7 years at the CFTC, it demands legislative change. I
would disagree with you in part on the second part of your
comment. Legitimacy is neither here nor there from my
perspective as a regulator. What I have observed is a market
evolve, develop, and see extreme amounts of adoption by retail
investors. And I have a responsibility to protect those
investors, and I need the tools to do that.
Mr. Duarte. Well, protecting the investors is accomplished
by giving credibility in a regulatory scheme that has failed in
many ways to provide investor protection.
Mr. Behnam. Well, I mean, we can look at the history of
Bitcoin right now and where we are today, and the fact of the
matter is there are investors who continue to want exposure,
both institutional and retail, to Bitcoin. So for me to step
back and say I don't want to legitimize it, that is an option,
but ultimately, people are going to get hurt. They are going to
lose money. And I feel like I need to use the tools I have----
Mr. Duarte. Well, there is nothing ``there'' that is going
to cause people to lose money.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Behnam. That is a subjective----
Mr. Duarte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You have been very
generous.
Mr. Behnam. Thanks.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the gentleman from South Dakota, Mr. Johnson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir. First off, Mr. Chairman, I
would observe that you have exhibited great leadership over the
course of the last year, as we have really been trying together
on a bipartisan basis to plug these gaps that you and Mr.
Duarte were talking about. We do need to plug those gaps. We do
need to fill this in, so thanks for your leadership there.
Number two, I grew interested in Mr. Mann's line of
questioning, and I want to make sure I understand this. Your
managers are in 2 days a week in the office?
Mr. Behnam. The layer of management, which is about 180
people, are in 2 days a week.
Mr. Johnson. And so below that, not the 170 managers but
the others of the 700 workers, what is the average number of
days that they are physically in the office?
Mr. Behnam. I mean, if I were to have to take the average
of about 500 people, it would probably be less than a single
day across the board. Some do come in, but very few come in at
all.
Mr. Johnson. You mentioned negotiating with the union.
Presumably, the previous contract did not lay out any right to
remote work days, did it?
Mr. Behnam. So we actually, prior to COVID, had a scheme
which allowed staff, the union representatives, the union staff
to work remotely 2 days per week, but they had to be in the
office 3 days a week.
Mr. Johnson. I mean, the national health emergency is over.
Why doesn't that framework apply today?
Mr. Behnam. So a good question, but one, when we went into
full telework posture at the start of COVID, the negotiation
and the contract had to essentially be rewritten such that
there were certain rights afforded the union members when we
went into full telework posture. In order to return to either
status quo or something where the staff were coming in, we
would again have to--we are renegotiating the existing posture.
Mr. Johnson. Well, Mr. Chairman, I understand your desire
to move in a deliberate and long-term, focused fashion. I would
just mention to the bargaining unit, they are absolutely behind
the times. I mean, I observe a CNBC article that notes that 90
percent of companies say they will return to the office by the
end of this year. That article outlines the negative impacts on
productivity, collaboration, and employee engagement. And then
the Society for Human Resource Managers on their website, they
observed that 63 percent of CEOs predict a full return to in-
office work. And, Mr. Chairman, I would ask unanimous consent
to submit for the record both the CNBC analysis, as well as
that from SHRM.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The articles referred to are located on p. 55.]
Mr. Johnson. So I would just keep doing what you are doing.
Let's get people back in the office. Again, the literature is
becoming increasingly clear about the benefits of in-person
interaction.
And then we have talked a little bit about the importance
of these derivative markets to provide risk management tools
and strategies for American producers, as well as other market
participants. As you look out, say, 3 or 5 years, sir, what
changes might evolve in the marketplace that would require
additional or new efforts from you all to make sure that we are
providing that market predictability and safety?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. What I
have seen and observed--and I made this briefly--this note in
my opening statement--it is interesting to look back 20 years,
30 years, and how some technological changes move traders off
of floors and onto desks across the country and the globe
trading electronically. And then we had different variations of
trading techniques that used high-frequency trading, and now we
are certainly moving towards artificial intelligence and
programmable trading, which I am sure has been around for
years.
But then what we are seeing also is structures changing.
And I mentioned this in my statement where the traditional--the
Commodity Exchange Act is built around unique structures,
right, an introducing broker, associated person, a futures
commission merchant, an exchange, a DCM, a clearinghouse, a
DCO. And we are seeing that compressed, and we are seeing it
compressed because of technology. This was an issue we had to
deal with FTX a couple years ago, and we had the hearing where
they wanted to do non-intermediated leveraged trading, huge
amounts of risk and something we had to think about.
But ultimately, and as I have said to this Committee
before, we are going to continue to see these new market
structures and models be presented to the Commission. And I
have said this, that the statute doesn't contemplate these
things clearly, both from the benefit side and the risk side,
because every time you take out one of those layers, whether it
is the FCM, the introducing broker, the associated person, the
exchange itself if you have a direct clearing model, you are
taking away some benefit. You are reducing friction, so you
might have a quicker executed trade, but if you are taking away
an FCM, you are taking away disclosures, customer segregation,
other components.
So as I look to the future, and I would hope you as chair
of the Subcommittee think into the future, we want to preserve
our preeminence from a markets perspective. We are seeing
changes in the market structure, and we have to be very
deliberate collectively about what we want to see in the
future. And I am not suggesting this is what we want. I am just
suggesting that the statute doesn't contemplate it. So we are
seeing a number of new applications saying we want to do it
this way; CFTC, approve us. And we are being very cautious. We
are being very deliberative. But there are enough gaps in the
statute where it is not clear that we have to do things the
old-fashioned way, so to speak.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir. One more quick comment, Mr.
Chairman. As we move toward Fiscal Year 2025 appropriations, I
will have, as one of my factors for consideration for each
agency, whether or not they have returned to the office in a
way that best serves the American people. And I would just ask
my colleagues to be willing to do the same.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentlelady from
Connecticut, Congresswoman Hayes, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Behnam, for
being here today. And I apologize for being in and out. I
promise, it is not you, it is me. We have multiple hearings
going on, so please excuse me.
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission is tasked with
overseeing futures and swap markets, in addition to the
emerging digital asset market. Going after fraud and penalizing
bad actors is a crucial part of keeping markets stable and
protecting the financial well-being of Americans. The Office of
Customer Education and Outreach at the CFTC is responsible for
identifying fraud trends, producing educational content, and
public engagement on a range of issues. Administrative costs
for the OCEO are funded by the Customer Protection Fund, which
receives money from CFTC's enforcement actions. The Customer
Protection Fund can only receive additional funds if its
balance falls below $100 million, and must also grant awards
through the whistleblower program.
My question for you today, Chairman Behnam, is how much
money from the customer protection funds goes to the
whistleblower program and the OCEO respectively?
Mr. Behnam. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. An
extremely important program, one that has been extremely
successful over the years since Dodd-Frank and I think has
served customers and Americans quite well. The budget is
relatively small compared to the number you just stated, the
$100 million. The legislative language from 2008
unintentionally sort of crafted a little bit of a loophole,
which we are trying to fix. And I know Congress has been vocal
and sort of active in trying to fix it. But ultimately, it is
just a couple million dollars that we are using for a number of
staff which we are growing up. We have also just appointed a
new OCEO director, which we are very proud of and very excited
about. So this has been a priority of mine to build out that
office as much as possible, increase that budget because it
does come from the Customer Protection Fund, and ultimately,
provide as much education and awareness to Americans across the
board.
There are some legal limitations to what we can do with the
fund and how we use it. We can't give legal advice, obviously,
but we want to just get as much information out about the risks
of our markets and some of these scams that folks are seeing on
the internet and other digital means.
Mrs. Hayes. Yes, thank you. Trust me, I am from
Connecticut, and every time I run into Senator Dodd, this is
the conversation. In 2020, the Government Accountability Office
found that in the event the Consumer Protection Fund has
insufficient funds to cover the whistleblower program or the
OCEO, staff must be furloughed until it can be sufficiently
replenished. This would mean that CFTC's efforts like recent
advisories on online romance fraud and artificial intelligence
scams would not move forward.
In your testimony, you pointed out the need for a
legislative fix to address permitted uses of the Customer
Protection Fund by the Office of Customer Education and
Outreach. Can you tell us, how are education outreach funds
limited by current law? And what specific changes would you
recommend that Congress enact to improve the work of the Office
of Customer Education and Outreach? And what would your agency
be able to accomplish with greater flexibility over the
Customer Protection Fund?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congresswoman. Certainly, the fix,
which you mentioned, is the number one priority because we have
had--it is the success of the program which has been its
Achilles heel, which is great to say, but also painful because
we, over the past couple years, have issued such large awards
to whistleblowers that it has immediately drained the fund
before it could be replenished with new enforcement fees. So we
would just need to make a small fix to ensure that there is
always money there so, as you pointed out, no staff are
furloughed, going forward.
And you also point out a very important--a second point
about the limitations of who we can go out to and how we can
use these funds to provide advisories, to provide guidance, and
to provide information to customers. We have been working with
your Committee staff to make some very discrete technical
changes to the statute so that it could expand the scope of who
we can talk to and how we can use the funds in a broader, more
comprehensive way. I think it is going to benefit everyone.
And, as you know, as you mentioned earlier, we are just
seeing so many different venues for information to get out to
consumers internationally, domestically, and it is unfortunate,
whether it is crypto or traditional markets, a scam is a scam,
and the scammers are out there, and they continue to use
digital and other means to steal money.
Mrs. Hayes. Well, thank you. And I appreciate your
testimony today. And I think another important point to make is
that even the most well-meaning legislation, when we find out
that there are unintended consequences of that legislation, we
have a responsibility to come back to the table and work
together to close those loopholes and fix those things so that
we are doing the best that we can for the Americans that we
represent.
So again, thank you for your testimony today, and I yield
back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back. I am now pleased
to recognize gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Alford, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Alford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. How are you doing?
Mr. Behnam. I am fine. Thank you.
Mr. Alford. You holding up all right? You are almost done.
Mr. Behnam. Just fine.
Mr. Alford. I am Mark Alford. I am from Missouri, just
south of Kansas City. I hate to beat a dead horse, but I am
going to talk about showing up at work. I just left--I am on
Small Business as well, and we were talking with two members of
the GAO there about this very issue. One of the first things I
did, Mr. Chairman, when I came here--and I am new to Congress--
I wanted to visit the agencies that we had oversight over, not
to go in there and stir up trouble or cause trouble. I wanted
to meet people. I want to see what they--I wanted to feel the
dynamics of what they were doing so when they come to testify,
we have a relationship, and we can work together for the
American people because I feel like that is very important. I
don't care what party you are from. We have to work together
for the American people.
I was denied, our staff, repeatedly denied from entering
the USDA, which has 2 million square feet, just a beautiful
building down there. I can't get in. We were denied getting in
the Small Business Administration. I have been to the Pentagon.
I am on the Armed Services Committee. I have heard stories of
others being denied entry to the Veterans Administration, and
yet we have oversight of these agencies.
So we filed the Congressional Access and Bureaucratic
Offices Act, the CABO, to force these administrators to let us
in the building. After we filed that, we finally got into the
Small Business Administration. It is very discouraging because
I have heard some of your testimony in between running around
here. I know that you want to get the workers back to work. How
many days a week are you actually at the office?
Mr. Behnam. So I travel a bit, and I live in Baltimore, but
I do come into the office, I would say, 3 to 4 days a week
minimum, and then sometimes it is 5.
Mr. Alford. But if you are in town you are at your desk,
right?
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mr. Alford. Why? Why? Why is it important to come in to see
the people you lead or work with?
Mr. Behnam. Well, one, I feel a sense of responsibility to
the lead and set an example. But, two, some of my team is
behind me. I have about six people on my direct team. I have a
leadership team of 15 people. And just a quick anecdote, 10
seconds, 15 seconds, one of my directors, we periodically chat
on the phone, whatever is most convenient. But she came into my
office a few weeks ago, and we had our weekly 30 minute
meeting. And we talked business, we talked about issues, but we
also just caught up on personal matters----
Mr. Alford. You can't do that over the phone----
Mr. Behnam. You can't do that over the phone.
Mr. Alford.--over Zoom----
Mr. Behnam. That was a different experience for me that I
had felt in 4 years.
Mr. Alford. GSA just worked out a new lease in Kansas City
for a building there in Crown Center. Have you been there? Are
you familiar with that for your offices?
Mr. Behnam. And I am not familiar yet.
Mr. Alford. Okay.
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mr. Alford. My understanding is there is a lease that has
already been worked out or being worked out for more office
space in Kansas City.
Mr. Behnam. In Kansas City, yes----
Mr. Alford. Correct.
Mr. Behnam.--for us?
Mr. Alford. Yes.
Mr. Behnam. We have been in that space for a couple of
years at this point.
Mr. Alford. So this is a lease renewal. Do you know how
many square feet are there?
Mr. Behnam. In the Kansas City space? I could check, but
what I do know is we have reduced our footprint by about 50
percent from our previous space. So we have been in that
space----
Mr. Alford. Is that because people are phoning in to go to
work or is that----
Mr. Behnam. No, there is a little bit of a history to this,
but we were independent--we were leasing independently from
private, commercial landowners or commercial property owners.
And then over the course of the past, I would say, 10 years,
there has been a transition to GSA space. And transitioning to
GSA space has a number of requirements in terms of square
footage per employee, and that ultimately reduced our footprint
by 50 percent.
Mr. Alford. Right. But bottom line is, I would think you
would agree, it sounds like you do, we have to get Federal
workers back in the office. It is going to lead to greater
productivity for the American people. You would not believe how
many calls we get a day in our Congressional office from people
desperate to get money back, to get services from the Federal
Government, but people aren't picking up the phones. People are
not helping our constituents in the 4th Congressional District.
And look, I don't mind our staff helping. We helped over
800 people so far since we have been in office and have helped
return more than $1 million that are rightfully due to
taxpayers, but they shouldn't have to be coming to us. They
need to be calling the agencies. And I appreciate your
willingness to do something about it. Thank you for being here,
sir.
Mr. Behnam. Thank you.
Mr. Alford. With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Davis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Davis of North Carolina. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, thank
you for being with us today and coming to share.
My first question, how is the CFTC utilizing tools and
strategies to identify and prevent potential price manipulation
in the futures markets and particularly concerning agricultural
commodities to protect farmers and agriculture investors?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. It really
is core to what we do at the agency. We work closely with the
exchanges. We have a regulatory structure that has been built
out over decades based on the statute, the law that Congress
has written to ensure that contracts, whether agricultural or
energy or otherwise, are free from fraud and manipulation.
We have a very well-built-out surveillance team and
surveillance experts, market experts that are constantly
monitoring markets and movements of markets. We are analyzing
anomalous trading activity. We are looking at data that we
collect. We work closely with our SRO, the National Futures
Association and, like I said, the exchanges to ensure markets
are functioning as intended and that supply and demand
discovery is happening as it should.
Mr. Davis of North Carolina. And can you discuss the
effects of Russian sanctions and how conflicts in the Middle
East and Ukraine are having on U.S. commodity prices,
especially agriculture ones?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thank you. It has been an
interesting period obviously over the past couple years
observing some of the changes in commodity markets. I would say
first to your point about sanctions, we work closely with
Treasury going back to 2022 and the initial invasion such that
we were identifying any individuals or organizations that were
on the sanctions list, and we took appropriate steps to ensure
that their market access was eliminated prior to the sanctions
coming in and as they did.
In terms of market prices, I would say the market responded
to the anticipation of an invasion by Russia against Ukraine
with huge price spikes across the agricultural complex and the
energy complex, so natural gas, oil, and then most notably
wheat, but also soybeans, and corn. Ultimately, I would say
production from North America and also South America and some
of the access that was permitted through the Black Sea,
allowing Ukraine to export a number of commodity products,
really did not have as much of an impact as we anticipated.
Prices have come down pretty significantly from their highs
across all complexes. And we have seen relative stability. Same
with the Red Sea issues. We saw some minor bumps in prices,
most notably across the energy complex, less the agricultural
complex.
But I would say a statistic, which I am sure you have read,
the U.S. is producing over 13 million barrels of oil a day, so
a lot of the concerns that might have existed a few decades
ago, not as much because the concentration and production has
been spread out across the globe. And certainly the U.S. has a
level of energy independence which allows these prices across
the energy complex to be relatively stable. We have seen a huge
dip in natural gas because the weather has been a bit warmer,
and also production remains at relatively all-time highs.
Mr. Davis of North Carolina. And, Mr. Chairman, as a
sponsor of the CFTC Agricultural Advisory Committee, which is a
vehicle to get input from the agriculture community on the
market issues and concerns, how can the Commission's
Agricultural Advisory Committee be used as a vehicle to hear
and address the concerns in particular of local rule farming
communities, especially like eastern North Carolina?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. It is a
great privilege to sponsor that Committee and one that I take
very seriously, I have been engaged with for a number of years.
And ultimately, it is the ability--not unlike you going back to
your home district and talking to constituents, it is my
ability to talk to producers, to talk to some trade
organizations and representatives across the country and see
what they are feeling and see what they are seeing in markets
and also some of the challenges that they are facing in terms
of production, whether it is livestock, or whether it is corn
and soybeans, wheat, or other physical commodities.
And from those engagements, we had three meetings last
year, some hybrid, some in D.C., we are going to meet again in
Kansas City next month, it is the consistent engagement which
allows us and me personally as sponsor to reflect on what they
are seeing and what we could be doing to better regulate
markets, but also to better facilitate access to markets for
them and ensuring that they feel that they have fair access to
markets at a cost-effective way.
I say this often, the history--we are entering the 50th
anniversary of the CFTC this year and next, and we should all
remember very carefully that CFTC was a part of USDA. And we
were reauthorized just like the farm bill every 5 years, and we
are just one toolkit in a toolbox, just like a commodity
program or conservation or crop insurance. And it is one of the
big responsibilities I feel to make sure that futures markets
remain accessible, fairly priced, and fair and free from fraud
and manipulation so farmers and ranchers can use them to manage
risk.
Mr. Davis of North Carolina. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. I now recognize the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Langworthy, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Behnam, as you know, global commodity markets play
a pivotal role in risk management strategies of both our
agricultural and energy sectors. My district in western New
York and the southern tier of New York along the Pennsylvania
line produces a diverse array of agricultural products,
including maple syrup, grapes, and dairy. Specifically within
our dairy industry, they are reliant on the well-functioning
agricultural derivative markets that the CFTC regulates to
hedge the commercial risks inherent to dairy production,
processing, and marketing.
As crucial as it is that the Commission focuses on emerging
issues and new technologies such as digital assets and
cybersecurity, I just want to emphasize the importance of your
work in ensuring the integrity of the more traditional
commodity markets our agricultural producers and processors
rely on for risk management purposes as they form the bedrock
for these economic activities.
And with that, Chairman Behnam, as you may have seen, the
crypto market cap recently surpassed $2.5 trillion. And while
this milestone has been great for some, the U.S. continues to
cede more jobs and leadership in this sector. And in fact, many
market participants say that the lack of regulatory framework
in the U.S. is driving these developers overseas. How can we
reverse this trend in Congress? And what can the CFTC do
alongside other agencies to ensure that the U.S. retains a
high-quality workforce in this innovative and emerging sector?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congressman. To your first point, I
just want to emphasize and make sure that you understand our
traditional markets are the number one priority for me and for
the agency, whether it is dairy or grains or energy products.
We understand these markets well. We have for a number of
decades, and it continues to be a priority, despite, I think--
to the second part of your question, a lot of news these days
about the CFTC is more around digital assets, but we can walk
and chew gum at the same time. We do quite well, and we are
always happy to help you and your constituents around dairy or
other commodity markets.
On the latter question, I think the number one thing that
we can do--it is something I have said for a number of years, I
have said it earlier today--we need to move on legislation to
fill gaps. I focus very much on the regulatory side. Obviously,
you have a responsibility to your constituents in the industry
as it relates to innovation and moving the industry forward. I
have heard anecdotally the stories that you recited around
business going offshore because there is a lack of clarity in
the U.S., and there is really no demand or desire to have this
technology rooted here in the U.S. Regardless of my opinion on
that--and I just don't think that is necessarily my
responsibility as chair of the agency--I think regulation and
clear regulation is a component of that.
In order to run a business, whether you are running a dairy
or a startup that has VC capital, you need regulatory certainty
at the state level and the Federal level. And certainly, I
think there is some ambiguity and uncertainty around rules,
laws, and regulations, putting aside desire, and what impact
some may or may not have on how these businesses should run.
And with that, some, in fact, do go overseas because there
has been a number of jurisdictions--and I can say this with
certainty, having been in this role as chair for 3 years now--
that when I first started this job in January of 2021, there
were a number of jurisdictions in Europe and Asia, in the
Middle East that really were not very necessarily far along in
terms of rulemaking or policy around digital assets. That has
changed. That has changed quite significantly in 3 years. And I
can say, Europe, the UK, the Middle East, Asia, if they have
not already finalized regulatory structures or policies, they
are near that. So I do think it is important as the U.S. that
we move forward on policy to ensure that certainty for market
participants.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you. I understand that the CFTC is
seeing a significant increase in the interest in the
disintermediated clearing where a market participant no longer
has to use the services of a futures commission merchant to
trade on an exchange or have that trade cleared in a
clearinghouse. Could you explain the traditional brokerage
exchange clearing model and alternatives being considered by
the industry? And could you also share your perspectives on
these novel approaches and whether the agency will address them
via rulemaking?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congressman. So traditionally--and I
think this is a part and sort of a product of technology in the
history of markets being physically present on a trading floor
where you had a commercial end-user, say, a dairy producer in
western New York who phoned in an order to the Chicago Board of
Trade that had to go through a clearing broker, an executing
broker, which then was transacted on an exchange and then
cleared at a clearinghouse. That was sort of the trade cycle
historically, and by and large, it still is the trade cycle. So
much of it is technological at this point, as opposed to having
floor traders.
Over the past 15 or 20 years, we have seen an emergence of
a direct clearing model where you remove that broker phase. We
have had a number of direct clearing models approved going back
10 or 15 years, but we have seen a little bit of a kick up in
that in the past, I would say, 2 to 4 years. And I think this
is really a product of technology where you can look at that
trade cycle--the broker, the exchange, the clearinghouse--as
points of friction where if you can remove one of the points of
friction, you have more direct, quicker execution of the trade.
That could be the perceived benefit. The perceived risk is that
broker, that layer provides protections. It provides
protections for customers. It provides disclosures for
customers. It is in fact a barrier that provides market
integrity.
So as we continue to see these applications for non-
intermediation or direct clearing, I think it is important
collectively, both as this Committee and the agency, to think
very hard and deliberately about the models, whether or not,
quite frankly, we want to see them emerge as a new market
structure, but if in fact they continue to emerge, what are
those benefits from the traditional historical model, and can
we extract those in the newer models that have these fewer
barriers?
There is potentially a way. I feel like when we do these
models at the agency, we are very deliberate, we are very
intentional, we are very cautious, but we also want to preserve
all of these benefits and components that have made our markets
the strongest and customer money and customer protections the
most important in the world.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I am now pleased to recognize gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Soto, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Behnam, thank you for being here. I know it has
been a long day for you, and we are very grateful for your work
to help continue to have stabilization of commodities and
investments.
Lowering food prices, or at least stabilizing them, is a
key priority for our Committee as we go through with the farm
bill. We saw during the pandemic supply chains were rattled,
and then Ukraine war affected everything from wheat to
fertilizer and others. How can you as CFTC Chairman and with
policies that you all work with ensure that commodity
investments are helping play a role to stabilize and perhaps
even grant more efficiencies to help stabilize and/or lower
food prices?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. This goes
to what I was saying earlier, that we have to collectively
ensure that futures markets remain vibrant, healthy, and
liquid. And that means we have to potentially lower the cost of
entry, not compromising on protections and regulatory
structures, but ensuring that the ecosystem is healthy. I
mentioned earlier that we have seen a significant reduction in
clearing members over the past 20 years. That is never good.
Concentration in large banking institutions creates risk, but
it also eliminates access for some small producers, energy or
agricultural in Florida or across the country.
So we need that diverse pool of market participants so that
the ecosystem is healthy and that farmers and ranchers can feel
that futures markets are accessible, that they are fair, that
they are reflective of price discovery, essentially supply and
demand, and that when they enter thinking about a soybean and
corn farmer, that they enter planting season just around this
time of year, that they can hedge on the Chicago Board of Trade
and know that that hedge will be held through the season and
harvest, and whatever risks come between now and then in the
cash market, whether it is weather, geopolitics, or trade, that
hedge is going to protect that instability by giving them the
price they need so that they can maintain their mortgage, their
equipment, their seed, their feed, and everything else that
goes into operating a large production facility.
Mr. Soto. So our commodities exchange continues to allow
for more stability and long-term planning for our growers, our
ranchers, our farmers, very key. We welcome a continued
partnership with this Committee to continue to address
stability and lowering food prices where we are able to.
Turning to the FIT Act, I know we had some great
discussions. I appreciate you being generous with your time
meeting with me. How critical is it to your mission should the
Congress pass the FIT Act and provide you all as the primary
regulator of cryptocurrency for the $120 million in funding to
allow you to be able to do this job?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congressman. It is critical in order
for us to appropriately, as intended by this Committee, to
implement that bill, having the resources to hire up where
appropriate and where needed, but also to build the hardware
and the software infrastructure that needs to essentially
develop the foundation of a regulatory framework is critical.
This is a whole new market. I have mentioned this in my
statement. Forty-nine percent of our enforcement docket last
year was crypto-related, and I said this. It is a staggering
statistic that a market we don't directly regulate is taking up
half of our enforcement docket. And it is not just the Division
of Enforcement resources that are consumed. We need the experts
from the different divisions to build a case.
So we are continuing to see the growth of the market. We
are obviously seeing a bit of a surge in price and a renewed
optimism by retail investors, which can be a very cautionary
tale about crypto. And I think it really validates what work
this Committee has done over the past couple of years, that we
need a regulatory structure. This is not about legitimizing the
technology. This is about protecting Americans and protecting
investors. Whether or not they want to invest in it in the
future is their choice, but the fact of the matter is the
technology is here, and we need to protect investors and
protect the American economy.
Mr. Soto. Sure. In central Florida, we are seeing folks
utilize cryptocurrency for remittances. It has helped stabilize
certain economies when the fiat has collapsed like in Venezuela
and Ukraine. And also we do a lot of international transactions
because a lot of folks come to our world-class theme park. So
this is something we are following closely. And, the fact that
you spent--having spent almost 50 percent of your budget when
the commodities market is such a more mature, larger market,
tells me--it screams to Congress needing to act on this to
finally establish jurisdiction and rules of the road. So we
welcome that continued partnership, Chairman Behnam, and thank
you for being here today.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Rouzer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Behnam, thank
you so much for being here.
Based on the CFTC's January request for comment on the use
of artificial intelligence in CFTC-regulated markets, the
Commission recognizes the need, obviously, to proactively
explore current and potential uses and risks of AI
technologies. Rapid development and new platforms and
technologies can expose our financial systems to vulnerability
and bad actors that want to weaponize them. The U.S. is the
proving ground of these new technologies, but rapid adoption
could result in extreme market changes.
In the commodity space, this obviously presents a challenge
to the industries that lean on the CFTC to create a regulatory
environment that seeks to maintain stability and prices and
market conditions. Personally, I believe it is imperative that
we bring regulators and the regulated entities utilizing these
technologies together to develop a sound regulatory framework
going forward.
Last year, the United Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority
permanently launched the Digital Sandbox, a testing environment
to allow firms to test their products on protected data assets
while removing market risk.
So my question is, could the CFTC pursue something similar
to develop innovative ways to combat illicit activity by
partnering with the private-sector to better understand the
benefits and risks of AI, protecting the market, and harnessing
their experience, just your general thoughts on that?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question, extremely
important. I would say a few things. By nature of issuing the
request for information, we are trying to engage, right? We are
trying to collect information before we act. I personally as
chair am not predetermining any conclusions about what role AI
may or may not have in our markets, but it clearly is an issue
we have to address and attack aggressively so that we get ahead
of it, whether it is on the risk side or the opportunity side.
We have an Office of Technology Innovation, which has been
evolving over a number of years. It was first started as
LabCFTC. It is now the OTI. And we staff it with individuals
who are both intellectually curious, and willing to engage with
the industry and learn what is happening in the sort of
financial market ecosystem so that we can be better prepared
from a regulatory or policy perspective.
So we are doing what we can with what we have. The sandbox
issue you raise that the UK has done, something that I know my
predecessors have thought about, I have thought about, there
are legal limitations to us being able to provide a sandbox
environment for stakeholders. So if that is a priority of
yours, you might want to consider it legislatively. But we do
have limitations legally to provide a sandbox where,
essentially, as you know, you would be protected from certain
regulatory actions. But we are seeing a lot of change because
of technology, and we are doing what we can with what we have
both legally and personnel-wise to make sure we are engaging as
much as possible and getting ahead of this very rapidly moving
curve.
Mr. Rouzer. Yes, I would love to get those legal
impediments, if your team can provide that list to give us some
guidance on that so we could explore.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Editor's note: the information referred to is located on p. 62.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One other quick item, I am also interested in knowing your
general view regarding the legality of election event contracts
under the CEA and Commission regulations. Do you believe that
all election event contracts constitute gaming and are
therefore prohibited from being listed on the exchange? What is
your general view on that?
Mr. Behnam. Thanks, Congressman. So, as you know, we have a
number of litigation matters that are active right now so I
want to be careful with what I say. But this is an issue that
derives from section 5 of our statute where you have a
prohibition on contracts that involve gaming and anything that
is against state or Federal law and against the public
interest, among other things. So it has been the Commission's
position most recently, which I know is contrary to some in
this sort of industry, that a political election contract or
event contract is against both the provisions against gaming
and state law specifically.
But because of this disagreement, and I think some
confusion, not on my end, but just general confusion from the
stakeholder community, I decided a few years ago to further
define and clarify the existing rules that are derived from the
law so that there is, to the extent we can provide, 100 percent
certainty that political event contracts do fly sort of in the
face or against the Commodity Exchange Act.
But we will continue to work with stakeholders as much as
we can. I have said this before, and this is something this
Committee should know, we have fraud and manipulation authority
in underlying cash markets. That is corn, that is natural gas,
that is oil, that is gold. In this case, if we have election
contracts, if there is fraud or manipulation or allegations of
fraud or manipulation that could impact a listed CFTC contract,
that de facto makes the CFTC an election cop. And I don't
think--but certainly clarify if I am wrong--that is the intent
of Congress for our mission. And it certainly would pull us in
a lot of different directions, given some of the integrity
issues that have been raised recently around elections.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired. I
yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Casar, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Casar. Thank you. Chairman, thanks for joining us
today.
Today, I want to ask you about the Digital Assets and
Blockchain Technology Subcommittee report that came out from
the CFTC's advisory committee in January. As I understand it,
they were tackling the questions of DeFi and that you had a
diverse group put the report together, crypto firms, venture
capital firms, academics, blockchain analytic firms, other
folks, so on. Do you have a general sense of that report? Does
that sound like the----
Mr. Behnam. Yes, I have a general sense of what the report
is and its findings, yes.
Mr. Casar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate you
putting that report together. And that subcommittee found--and
I am quoting from it--that nothing is, quote, ``completely
decentralized or centralized in DeFi,'' that, quote, ``this
creates a real challenge in defining business and technology
models that would make systems sufficiently decentralized.''
The report found and names five different dimensions of
decentralization to be considered, six different technological
dimensions of decentralization. They created a matrix to try to
figure out what--how to really determine that something is
truly decentralized. It is a pretty complex set of findings.
But kind of the summary at the end of the day here was that
there is no single dimension or technology that will serve to
make a project or an enterprise decentralized and that there is
a great deal still to learn about these technologies and how to
determine if something's decentralized or not. Does that
generally check out with you?
Mr. Behnam. Yes, 100 percent.
Mr. Casar. So my concern is that around the FIT Act, which
has, of course, come out of this Committee, is making its way
through Congress, it doesn't directly tackle DeFi, but the
whole bill hinges on the question of decentralized governance
and decentralized networks. And my concern--and I am interested
in which concerns you share with me, which ones you may not--is
that we may be premature with passing this bill if this agency
report, which I appreciate you all putting together, has these
real concerns, that we may not yet be ready to define what is
truly decentralized and not.
And so do you have concerns about the amount of work that
it will take your agency to implement the FIT Act, given those
challenges defining decentralization? Do you have concerns that
these questions haven't been developed enough yet and there is
still so much to learn that we might just be handing you a
bill? I don't want to be setting you up to fail, and even more
importantly, I don't want to be setting up the American people
to potentially suffer financially if we don't regulate this
right.
Mr. Behnam. Yes, Congressman, thanks. It is an important
question. I would say, one, on the report you are mentioning,
it is an advisory committee largely made up--and you said
this--of practitioners, some academics, public interest, and I
am just going to get a little sort of wonky on the technical
side. It was a subcommittee, so it is not technically before
the Commission yet as a set of recommendations. The whole
technology committee would have to approve it in order for it
to officially come to the Commission. And there were a number--
or at least one dissenting opinion, so I think there are some
things to think about, about what were the pros and cons of the
report.
Regarding the FIT bill and your point about its
prematurity--and I appreciate that--the DeFi conversation is
quite complex. We have brought a number of enforcement cases,
which I think have raised policy concerns from folks outside of
the CFTC and even some inside. We had some dissenting opinions,
which is fine. But structurally, I do think regardless of the
level of decentralization, there are very clear rules--and that
they have been developed and mature over a number of years
within the Commodity Exchange Act--about what conduct is
permissible, not permissible. And if you do offer a derivatives
contract to a customer, you have to register or have to comply
with the rules. So it is definitely not what we have
historically been used to, but I think the principles still
apply, and that is what we are trying to do at the agency.
Mr. Casar. And just when you mentioned historically, you
mentioned just recently--and I want to get the number right--
that about half--was it half your budget or half your
enforcement budget is going to these cases now?
Mr. Behnam. So half of our enforcement docket, so out of 96
cases in Fiscal Year 2023, 47 cases or 49 percent of our
enforcement docket was crypto-related or digital asset-related.
Mr. Casar. And I guess just because I am short on time,
just my concern is if it is already half of your docket, and
then we are to hand you this whole industry to regulate
potentially with fewer resources than you have asked for, in an
area where this subcommittee's report is saying we are having a
lot of trouble even defining what is decentralized, I worry
that that is going to lead to lots of problems. You have an
industry that in just the last 3 years has lost $2 trillion on
its market cap. That is 60 percent that it has lost. It is
really volatile. And so I worry about that when we want you--we
really need to be protecting farmers and ranchers and dealing
with oil and wheat. And this other industry where some of these
experts are saying we still can't even really define what
decentralized is, I worry about setting the CFTC up or the
American people up for failure here. That is my concern.
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, I appreciate that point, and I
think we should always walk cautiously, whether it is
legislatively or administratively. But my observations over the
past 7 years and the enforcement cases we brought, I appreciate
your point of view on the size of the enforcement docket being
one where we are not focusing. As I said to Mr. Langworthy, our
number one priority is always traditional commodity markets.
But to me--and, yes, the market cap dropped from $3 trillion in
2021 down to less than $1 trillion a year ago, and now it is
back up over $2.5 trillion. To me, that just demonstrates there
is real persistent adoption and demand from Americans to invest
in this asset. It is unregulated. That has been proven across
the U.S. regulatory scheme. And I think every minute that goes
by is a new investor, a new retail participant who is
potentially going to lose money. And I think we need to act
quickly. If we need to subsequently act on DeFi or other areas,
that is fine, but we need to act. It is consuming a huge amount
of our resources because there is so much fraud out there in
the public space.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Feenstra for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for this
hearing. I also want to thank Commissioner Behnam for being
here today.
My district is home to some of the best soil in the world,
literally. Just recently, just a few miles from my home, we had
per acre sell for about $30,000, which is very significant. On
the ground, small challenges and conservation practices can
result in huge carbon benefits, and you guys are a part of
that. In December, the CFTC issued proposed guidance about
listing the voluntary carbon credits on CFTC-regulated
exchanges. You justify this authority to issue proposed
guidance under CFTC's anti-fraud and anti-manipulation
authority. When you start thinking about that carbon market and
where it is going to go, where it is today from $10 billion to
probably $30 billion, obviously, my farmers are very involved,
and it adds value to their farmland.
So Mr. Behnam, what is CFTC doing to ensure that farmers
and landowners are being protected from fraud and manipulation
of this voluntary carbon credit market?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for your question. And I
appreciate your recognition from your constituents. I worked
personally very closely, and my team did, with the ag community
as we crafted this guidance, and we wanted their feedback. We
wanted to see what they were observing, what they were being
offered. And I think there is a bit of a hesitation right now
because they don't quite feel confident that there is a level
of integrity in the market where they are willing to execute on
some conservation practice or change their traditional
practices for farming to sort of engage in this carbon market.
We have, as I said earlier, listed futures contracts and
voluntary carbon credits. As with any commodity, if we have a
listed futures contract on a CFTC exchange, we have an interest
in the health of the underlying market, which is to your point
about the fraud and manipulation authority. So the guidance
really is an effort to clarify expected diligence that the
registered exchanges would use when they list these voluntary
carbon credit contracts because ultimately, the listed CFTC
contracts are referencing an underlying registry or some other
cash market, voluntary carbon credit registry. And we want to
make sure that the exchange uses appropriate diligence when it
references these underlying exchanges. And ultimately, that is
going to protect your farmers and others across the country as
they start to engage in this marketplace.
Mr. Feenstra. And that is very good information. I fully
agree with where you are heading and where you are going with
this. The question is, how do we get this out to our landowners
and to our producers? Are you collaborating with USDA at all,
or can you collaborate with USDA and try to get this
information out? A lot of my producers, as you noted, are very
hesitant to go down these rabbit holes, go down the path of
better conservation, so forth. Can you extrapolate on that just
a little bit?
Mr. Behnam. So I can tell you that over the course of 2
years leading up to the issuance of the guidance in December of
2023, we held two convenings at the CFTC. USDA was a
participant, among other regulators. We have been in close
contact with the Secretary's office, Under Secretaries around
conservation and those that are engaged in the voluntary carbon
credit space. I know that they have some matters and some sort
of vision they have around the voluntary or the carbon market
generally. And I have been working closely with Farm Bureau
councils and farmer cooperatives, Corn Growers Association, and
others to make sure that we are as much engaged with them and
seeing what they are observing so that we can essentially, I
would say, produce a guidance document that is appropriate and
that is calibrated to what the marketplace is and ultimately
provide that protection for them that they are demanding.
Mr. Feenstra. Good. Well, I thank you for that. And I just
think this is such an added value for our farming community as
we move forward in the next decade. I appreciate what you are
doing. But again, this information that you have needs to get
out.
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mr. Feenstra. And please continue to work with USDA on this
progress. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Behnam. Thanks.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize the Forestry Subcommittee
Chairman, Mr. LaMalfa, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My regrets of having dueling committees here, so I missed a
good portion of today's, so I hope none of my comments or
questions are too duplicative. But thank you, Chairman Behnam.
Just a couple questions I wanted to ask on how CFTC is
pushing for new markets and carbon credits and in rare earth
minerals, but usually, a regulator waits for markets to develop
before setting standards for it. That is unless the law, made
by Congress, tells regulators to first set the standards. But
in this case, Congress has not done so with carbon credits or
rare earths. So do you think it is right for the CFTC to be
getting out ahead for these new markets without Congressional
approval or direction? Do you think the agency is justified in
basically twisting the current law to do its own initiative?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks for the question. As I said
to Mr. Feenstra just earlier, we do in fact on the carbon
credit side--and I will address the rare earth side as well--on
the carbon credit side, we do have listed futures contracts on
voluntary carbon credits already on several of our exchanges.
And we are seeing increased demand by CFTC customers to see
these contracts offer products.
Mr. LaMalfa. What is the nature of the carbon credits?
Mr. Behnam. Well, I can say that on at least two exchanges,
we have voluntary carbon futures contracts that reference an
underlying registry that issues the credits themselves. So
based on the price of the credit from the underlying registry,
the futures contract is using that that price reference to
price itself.
Mr. LaMalfa. Understood. I just wondered what more
directly--does the type of credit have to be generated in an
agricultural situation, or what is the actual carbon where the
rubber meets the road? Where is that credit?
Mr. Behnam. There are a number--so I can--I think I know
for sure that one of the contracts references a weighted
average of several registries, which includes nature-based
credits, which would be to your point, carbon sequestration
through some sort of conservation practice or forestry plan or
whatnot.
Mr. LaMalfa. So soil tilling or, as mentioned, forestry,
cutting trees in a particular way?
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right. So what is the target goal for
carbon? I mean, what number are you trying to in tons or--what
is the baseline? What percent of the atmosphere is carbon
dioxide to begin with?
Mr. Behnam. So my intent specifically with the guidance and
our efforts in this space is not to set the methodology or not
to set the amount of carbon that is pulled from the atmosphere.
I am simply trying to put out a document that would ask the
exchanges which are registered and regulated by the CFTC, who
list the carbon credit derivatives contracts, to use
appropriate diligence when they reference underlying registries
so that in fact, just say, for example, ABC registry which
issues credit, say a nature-based credit, which is used off of
a conservation practice, if they are selling a credit saying we
are sequestering 1,000 tons of carbon, we want to ensure that
credit is credible and that it actually sequesters the amount
of carbon that that registry is saying it does.
Mr. LaMalfa. Right. And that is sometimes very hard to
find. I am glad you have oversight on that.
Let me shift gears here quickly with my remaining time.
CFTC proposed a rule that requires certain derivatives to
establish what is called an operational resilience framework,
right? So you highlighted how you were working with domestic
regulators to ensure that ORF requirements are not duplicative.
Have you had similar conversations with foreign regulators? And
then how are they approaching these types of challenges?
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, we are very engaged certainly in
the foreign forums with other regulators across the globe. But
I would say more importantly, we are very engaged with domestic
regulators, both market regulators and the banking regulators.
There are frequent instances where our registrants are also
registered with other U.S. regulators, and you could have
scenarios where there is duplication of regulations. Around
cybersecurity, I certainly wouldn't want one of my swap dealers
or futures commission merchants, which is also a bank
prudentially regulated by the Fed, the OCC, FDIC, to have to
comply with two different sets of standards around cyber.
So our intent in this rule, which is a proposal phase, is
to ensure efficiency and compliance, but also being mindful of
the unique nature of derivatives markets so that if there are
any holes or gaps that a banking regulator might impose on a
holding company, we are filling that gap, but not creating
duplicative regulations that the bank regulators might have for
the holding company.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. All right. I have to yield back, but
maybe in some further comments, is there a substituted
compliance for other entities that might have a similar issue
in their home? But I will yield for now. Maybe you can touch on
that in a following comment. Thank you.
Mr. Behnam. Thanks.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Now I am now pleased to recognize the gentlelady from
Florida, Congresswoman Cammack, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate you
being with us today. No easy discussions happening in this
room.
So with that, I will just jump right into it and dispense
with comments.
Chairman Behnam, decentralized finance--and I know I have
heard some of my colleagues here today talk about this, and
again, I don't want to get into the weeds too much, but DeFi,
it is a growing component of the digital asset ecosystem, and
it has been receiving a lot of attention. So can you please
share with us any ongoing or planned rulemaking workstreams at
the agency regarding this issue?
Mr. Behnam. Congresswoman, thanks for the question. We are
certainly engaged with the market, the stakeholders I mentioned
earlier. We have an Office of Technology Innovation. We have
several advisory committees, and some of them look into this
space and convene members of the technology community. And we
are looking at how we can engage, we can learn, and to ensure
that our rules essentially reflect where the technology is.
I would say though that DeFi presents a lot of issues. We
have brought a number of enforcement cases where there have
been individuals offering derivatives products, but they don't
necessarily have a centralized traditional model of a broker,
an exchange or a company.
Mrs. Cammack. Right.
Mr. Behnam. It is an automated sort of trading platform.
The best way to think about it is you have a group of
individuals who program an automated trading platform, and it
just sort of self-executes on its own without any human
intervention after the start, so to speak. That doesn't change
the fact that this protocol or this program is offering
derivatives contracts to customers, often or at least on
occasion that we brought an enforcement action, people are
losing money or there is fraud or manipulation or they are not
registering with the CFTC as required by the law. And despite
the fact that there is no centralized group or there is an
individual who is the CEO or board of directors or
headquarters, the fact of the matter is, as courts have
determined in litigation that we have faced, DeFi can have the
same or similar characteristics as a traditional company or
entity such that we could bring a case.
Mrs. Cammack. Right.
Mr. Behnam. So tricky questions, I think it requires a lot
less legislative thought, but we are doing our best to work
through these issues, engage. But ultimately, I would hesitate
to say that we should stand back and not protect customers
because the law is not crystal clear, a decades-old law, about
what decentralized finance is.
Mrs. Cammack. And I appreciate that but I also am very wary
of over-regulation and government having a heavy hand, which
tends to stamp out innovation and opportunity. So I would love
to see more engagement and forward-facing engagement from some
of the industry partners.
But I want to shift a little bit, talking about blockchain
and how that that is really a huge part of this conversation.
With the evolving landscape on digital assets and DeFi, what
regulatory challenges specifically do you foresee in overseeing
blockchain-based financial products and services? And
specifically, what steps is the Commission taking--I know we
talked about this just a little bit, but I want you to talk on
the blockchain element specifically to ensure investor
protection.
Mr. Behnam. Yes, so blockchain has been really interesting
to observe because I have had a number of demonstrations by
large financial institutions or trade associations in town
which have demonstrated how blockchain is being used by some of
these traditional large financial institutions on settlement,
on payments, on custody, and really just creating, in their
view, a more efficient payment system from a customer
perspective or from a financial wholesale perspective.
In some respects, our core principles, which we have a
principles-based regulatory structure, is very helpful because
you can almost fit a lot of different technologies into a
principles-based regulatory structure. It is about compliance
and being free from fraud and manipulation, having a proper
governance structure, making sure you have system safeguards,
all things that would apply if you were on a trading floor or
if you had a blockchain. So we are engaging with the industry.
We are trying to learn what they are doing. I don't think
adoption has been so deep at this point that we necessarily
have to jump ahead and write rules. I think, in part, our
principles-based regulation is adequate, but there could be
components of blockchain that would require policy, either a
rule, advisory, or guidance, and we certainly want to see and
observe what is going on in the industry so whatever we do, to
your point, doesn't get ahead.
Mrs. Cammack. Well, and I will say, especially given the
fact that we don't want enforcement to become the mechanism by
which this gets rolled out we want legislative solutions so
that it is actually done correctly.
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mrs. Cammack. But given that the derivatives market is
largely overseas--and I know I am over my time, but I will just
leave us with this. Given the international nature of commodity
markets and global proliferation of blockchain technologies, is
there any cross-border cooperation or efforts underway on this?
Mr. Behnam. Yes, we work closely--so I am the Vice Chairman
of IOSCO, which is a multilateral organization across all
securities regulators in the globe. We participate with the
Financial Stability Board. I have frequent conversations with
fellow regulators in Europe, Asia, the Middle East. So we are
observing what others are doing and trying, to your point, to
draw comparable rules and regulations so there is a little bit
of a seamless entry and exit across borders because, as you
point out, we are in a global financial system, and to have
different regulations and rules creates barriers. Arbitrage
opportunities, which are risk, but ultimately prohibits these
businesses from doing a lot of the work that they hope to do.
Mrs. Cammack. I appreciate you being here. Thank you. My
time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I yield. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back now.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Jackson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to yield my time to the chair.
The Chairman. Much appreciated. Thank you, Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Chairman, can you talk about the difference between
CeFi and DeFi actors when it comes to regulation, and quite
specifically, the application of FIT 21 as it is proposed?
Mr. Behnam. Mr. Chairman, thank you for the question. This
is really the crux of the issue with CeFi versus DeFi. In CeFi,
you have more ascertainable participants. This is what we are
traditionally oriented with in a trade cycle or in a financial
ecosystem. DeFi, you don't have those identifiable partners
which could result in a registration, it could result in an
enforcement action, or in any number of other things.
But ultimately, what we have done historically--and this is
not, many years, this is just a few years--as it relates to
potentially regulatory requirements or enforcement actions, is
focused on the conduct and what exactly is being offered and
how it is interfacing with customers and investors. And
ultimately, if we see a DeFi product that is offering
derivatives contracts, as I was saying earlier, we have to do
what we can to identify who, if anyone, or the association
itself, which is a sort of a legal term of art, is providing
the derivative services outside of compliance of CFTC
registration. And that is who and where we have sort of steered
our attention.
In terms of the FIT bill, I do think it takes many
important steps to address these issues. As Mr. Casar was
saying, they are complicated. We are seeing a lot of variation
in how we should address these issues. And I think it will take
time. But ultimately, I am very much encouraged by what the FIT
bill aspires to do and what you are trying to accomplish, Mr.
Chairman, in terms of both regulating and filling these gaps,
but also thinking forward about some of these new technologies
and how they fit into the existing Commodity Exchange Act.
The Chairman. Well, thank you for that. I think our goal is
to make sure that we provide the guidelines and tools for you
to do that so digital commodities are regulated by clarity,
and, quite frankly, transparency, direction, guidance, versus
what we have seen in the past perhaps by another agency, which
is regulation by punishment.
I want to touch on, in February, the CFTC proposed a rule
that would establish minimum fitness standards and conflicts-
of-interest rules, among other things, for derivative
exchanges. Can you elaborate on what this rule requires? And
why is it necessary?
Mr. Behnam. Mr. Chairman, this was a rule, conflicts of
interest around SEFs and DCMs. Swap execution facilities and
designated contract markets essentially are exchanges. When I
first started as Chairman back in 2021, I convened my division
directors, my leadership team. I said, let's start identifying
areas that we need to write rules. This came out of the
Division of Market Oversight. It is actually about a decade-old
requirement going back to Dodd-Frank around conflicts of
interest to some extent, and then it just remained without a
final rule.
So over the course of 2 years, as you know, rules take time
to produce. They are long documents. There is legal analysis.
There is economic analysis, among other things. So the timing
came that we were able to produce the rule and propose it at
this point last month. I would say--and there was some dissent
or discussion about whether or not it went far enough,
especially in the conflicts-of-interest space. I have said this
publicly multiple times. Despite that initial conversation I
had back in January, February of 2021, when I first took over
as acting and then ultimately permanent chair, a lot has
changed. We have seen the emergence of vertically integrated
registrants and applications. We have seen decentralized or
non-intermediated in some respects applications. And I think
this raises, as I said in my opening statement, a number of
very unique and novel questions around conflicts of interest.
So what I did to address that particular issue, separate
from the rulemaking you address, is we put out a request for
comment. We asked the public to give us feedback on conflicts
of interest around affiliations so that if you have a holding
company that owns the exchange, that owns the broker, that owns
the clearinghouse, what potential conflicts exist if you have a
single owner of all three parts of this trade cycle? We got
great comments back. And as I have said publicly, we are
looking towards proposing a rule on conflicts of interest
around affiliations later this year.
It can be discrete and unique from what we did last month,
but it doesn't necessarily undermine what we are going to do. I
thought what we did last month was tremendously important. It
is going to bring integrity and safety to markets, but it is
only one step. We are going to take more steps. We can do
multiple things at once, and we are going to address issues as
they continue to evolve and present themselves to us.
The Chairman. Just a couple quick follow-ups to that. What
powers does the Commission have to engage with a registered
market participant regarding a transfer of ownership of a
registered entity?
Mr. Behnam. So it is a good question, Mr. Chairman. We
actually legally do not have authority to prohibit, to stop, or
to influence a merger, acquisition, or any sort of combination
of two entities. The authority we have is to ensure that if
there is a merger or an acquisition of two entities, one of
which is in compliance or registered with the CFTC, that the
new combined entity remains in compliance with the Commodity
Exchange Act. So if you had entity A and B and entity B was a
CFTC-registered FCM, entity A bought entity B, the new entity
would have to be in compliance with CFTC rules or regulations.
If it was not, that is the authority or that is where we could
step in and either require compliance or deregister the entity.
We cannot impose ourselves on an M&A activity or a merger/
acquisition just because we have feelings about concentration
or antitrust issues. Obviously, other agencies, criminal and
civil, deal with those issues, but certainly something I think
the Committee may want to think about going forward, not
advocating for it, per se, but an issue that has arisen, and I
just shared with you the limited powers we have around
compliance.
The Chairman. And it may be the same answer, but I am
curious in terms about potentially problematic vertical
integration situations where there appears to be potential
conflicts of interest with respect to the related operation of
a registered entity and one of its affiliates, for example, FTX
crypto exchange and its affiliate Alameda Research that traded
on the exchange.
Mr. Behnam. Yes, Mr. Chairman, extremely important
question, one we are dealing with actively to my point about
the request for comment and this possible rule 6 months down
the road. I would say, as I stated in my opening statement,
these are, in some respects, very new issues because we are
seeing an increase in the number of applicants and registrants
who want to see these vertically integrated stacks. Another
issue is we have existing entities who are registered with the
CFTC who have a vertically integrated sort of structure where
you have a broker, you have an exchange, and you have a
clearinghouse. We have dug into the legal analysis and the
legal direction that the Commodity Exchange Act might afford,
and I will share with you very clearly, there is nothing in the
Commodity Exchange Act which would allow us to prohibit or
prevent an entity from combining all of these--an organization
from combining all of these entities into a single parent. What
we can do is apply our conflicts-of-interests core principle
and other core principles to ensure that the affiliated
entities are sufficiently walled off, whether through
personnel, technology, boards of directors, leadership,
financial resources, but we can't necessarily prohibit one
holding company from owning multiple.
It is an interesting policy question. It is a product of
technology, competition, and I think we should continue to
collectively think about it because it really goes to the heart
of market structure and whether or not we want to see this type
of entity continue to grow and be adopted in our space because
there are a number of policy, risk, and innovation questions
that ultimately arise when you have these vertically integrated
stacks.
The Chairman. Very good. Well, thank you.
I am now pleased to recognize for 5 minutes for questioning
the gentleman from Altoona, Iowa, Mr. Nunn.
Mr. Nunn. Good Altoona is across America. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, both in Iowa and in your home state.
Chairman Behnam, thank you very much for the work that the
CFTC and your team has done in this area. We are unique in the
sense I get to sit on both the Agriculture Committee here, as
well as the Financial Services Committee across the way here, a
lot of exciting overlap, but also, I think everyone from my
farmers with a bushel of corn to my small business owners with
the desire to be pioneers in the digital asset space are
looking for guidance. And CFTC has been an open place for
innovation and stabilization to really take root, and so I want
to compliment you, first of all, on the work that you guys have
done there.
I also recognize that you have a large portfolio. So we
have received some feedback from a number of stakeholders
regarding some downstream impacts of Basel III and its proposal
on the derivative markets and ultimately the end-user. In a
number of ways this has been a challenge. In fact, working with
the Chairman here, we have called out some real flaws that we
see and emphasize the negative impacts that this proposal would
have on the agricultural community specifically. So, Chairman
Thompson, what I would like to do is submit this letter for the
record with the folks who have signed on with us.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The letter referred to is located on p. 59.]
Mr. Nunn. So first, Chairman Behnam, the futures commission
merchants, or FCMs, provide farmers with access to critical
parts of the market. The FCM consolidation is occurring at
alarming rates. I know you have seen this chart. My farmers
have certainly seen this chart. Folks not just inside Iowa but
across the country are facing this, which further decreases our
growers' ability to access markets. Talk to us a little bit
about how Basel will exacerbate this issue.
Mr. Behnam. Congressman, thanks. And I will just sort of
caveat that this could be a significant issue. As you point
out, this chart resonates very much with us. I said earlier
this morning that we have seen a significant decrease in a
number of FCMs over the past 20 years from 177 to just 64. And
at the same time, we have seen a huge growth in customer-
segregated money being held by fewer FCMs from $88 billion to
$\1/2\ trillion over 20 years, so huge decrease in FCMs, huge
growth in the amount of money being held by fewer FCMs.
Ultimately, with historically a low interest rate
environment and a more competitive landscape, FCM numbers have
reduced over time. Obviously, the interest rate environment is
changing, but I don't necessarily think that is going to change
the dynamic of new FCMs coming into place. There are huge
economies-of-scales and barriers to entry, and we sort of live
with what we have. My happiness or my content would be at a
minimum staying in this range. I don't want to see this
continued pattern of reduction of FCMs.
Ultimately, as you would imagine with any business on the
sort of P&L side or balance sheet side, if there are more
charges, more costs, it is going to create more impediments,
possibly being passed through, through end-users, farmers,
ranchers, energy producers. I think the larger policy issue,
one that I have spoken with members of the Federal Board about,
my staff with them as well, and other Prudential Regulators is
we have to think about the balancing act of incentivizing and
disincentivizing clearing. Clearing is a core component of the
G20 reforms in 2009 and the Dodd-Frank Act. We know that it
mutualizes risk, it reduces risk, it is a risk-reducing
feature.
Mr. Nunn. Right. I would agree.
Mr. Behnam. The SEC has just finalized a rule on clearing
treasuries. We mandated clearing swaps, building off of
clearing futures, which has been a component of the futures
market for decades. Point being is we all agree clearing is a
positive thing. It is a good thing for market risk, for market
stability. We want to make sure any new prudential rules--I
speak very confidently that capital is a core component of
financial regulation and good financial regulation, but it has
to be calibrated appropriately so we are incentivizing clearing
and not disincentivizing because ultimately, that is going to
reduce risk.
Mr. Nunn. Mr. Chairman, same page. I appreciate your
leadership on it. In the sake of time you have answered a
number of these things. I would just encourage you to continue
to work with your partners, particularly on the Fed, to
emphasize how important that is as well.
Mr. Behnam. Understood.
Mr. Nunn. I want to switch very quickly, I am proud to
support FIT 21. We have talked a lot about that today. It is an
area that continues to be just a growth opportunity. Prometheum
recently announced its intention to custody Ether. I am
concerned that the SEC will use this as an opportunity to
circumvent Congress and even the CFTC in this space to further
confuse participants who are already in the field. So I know I
have asked you this before, but, given the reports, do you
still believe Ether falls into that commodity area where CFTC
can really allow digital assets like this to take root and be
successful?
Mr. Behnam. Yes.
Mr. Nunn. With a follow-up then, until FIT 21 becomes law,
what can the CFTC do to continue to bring clarity to this? I
know I have 3 seconds left. Shoot.
Mr. Behnam. Well, ultimately, it goes down to the contracts
that are listed on an exchange. We don't do this without
analysis, legal analysis, policy analysis, so as the Bitcoin
futures contracts were listed in 2017 and then the Ether
futures contracts were listed in 2020, we worked closely with
fellow regulators, but we also do the analysis internally about
the underlying asset, whether it is a physical commodity,
whether it is interest rate, currency, or credit product or a
digital asset. We do the analysis under the Commodity Exchange
Act. We work with the exchanges, and we ensure that what they
are listing above all else is a commodity.
Mr. Nunn. Please continue that until FIT 21 becomes law,
and then let's collectively work not only bipartisan on this,
but with our private-sector and our agencies across the board.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the grace. I yield back the
remainder of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
As we prepare to close here, I will offer just a closing
statement. Chairman Behnam, on behalf of myself, Ranking Member
Scott, and quite frankly all our Members, thank you again for
joining us today. And thank you for your leadership, strong
leadership, collaborative leadership, and we are very
appreciative.
Our discussion covered a wide range of important topics
today, and thank you for your thoughts on bank capital
standards and the impact that they would have to our farmers
and energy producers and other end-users. It is so important
that we get these right. Do not be shy about engaging with
other financial regulators on the problems that you have
identified. We also appreciate your commitment to the future,
both in your advocacy of sound digital asset rules and the
Commission's focus on emerging issues.
And finally, you heard today the Members of this Committee
are serious about Federal employees across the entire Executive
Branch returning to the office in person on regular schedules.
In-person work fosters better communications, promotes greater
accountability, and builds deeper relationships. I can attest
to that with our Committee when we are in person versus the
days that we were trying to do this virtually. There is just no
comparison, that synergy that comes from that proximity. And so
COVID is over, and America needs to get back to work, so please
keep us apprised of the CFTC's plan for staff to return in
person to the office.
You, your fellow Commissioners, and the Commission staff
continue to serve a critical role protecting the public, and we
look forward to working with you to ensure the Commission has
the tools it needs to promote the integrity, resilience, and
vibrancy of the U.S. derivatives market. So thank you so much
for today.
Under the Rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to receive
additional materials and supplementary written responses from
the witness to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Articles by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Article 1

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[https://www.cnbc.com/2023/09/11/90percent-of-companies-say-theyll-
return-to-the-office-by-the-end-of-2024.html]
90% of companies say they'll return to the office by the end of 2024--
but the 5-day commute is `dead,' experts say
Published Mon, Sep 11 2023 10:00 AM EDT

Morgan Smith @THEWORDSMITHM \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://twitter.com/thewordsmithm.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mint Images Rf D Getty Images.

The debate over whether or not to return to the office is far from
settled--and yet, the push to get employees back to the office is
getting more aggressive.
Goldman Sachs \2\ wants employees in 5 days a week. Google \3\ is
factoring employees' in-office attendance into their performance
reviews.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.cnbc.com/2023/08/23/jim-cramers-top-10-things-to-
watch-in-the-stock-market-wednesday.html.
\3\ https://www.cnbc.com/2023/06/13/google-rto-crackdown-gets-
backlash-check-my-work-not-my-badge.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A whopping 90% of companies plan to implement return-to-office
policies by the end of 2024, according to an Aug. report from Resume
Builder,\4\ which surveyed 1,000 company leaders. Nearly 30% say their
company will threaten to fire employees who don't comply with in-office
requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.resumebuilder.com/90-of-companies-will-return-to-
office-by-the-end-of-2024/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Only 2% of business leaders said their company never plans to
require employees to work in person.
The renewed push to end remote work comes as more CEOs openly
acknowledge \5\ their disdain for the model, arguing that productivity,
collaboration and employee engagement all suffer without the office.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.cnbc.com/2023/03/30/more-companies-could-increase-
rto-requirements-soon.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``It's easier for executives to hold on to the old notion that
people are really working if they can see them down the hall,'' says
Dan Kaplan, a senior client partner at Korn Ferry. ``It's almost too
hard for some leaders to comprehend a world where that option doesn't
exist, or to consider a radical new approach.''
Even though more companies have introduced stricter in-office
requirements for employees, office occupancy has remained relatively
unchanged from the past year.
During the first week of September, the average occupancy rate in
offices in the top ten cities in the U.S. was 47.3% of pre-pandemic
levels, compared to 44% this time last year, according to data from
Kastle Systems.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.kastle.com/safety-wellness/getting-america-back-to-
work/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Why return to the office at all?
Companies are reluctant to give up their 9-to-5 in-person schedules
for ``more emotional than intellectual reasons,'' says Kaplan.
``The message I hear from executives is, `We never intended for the
world to change this dramatically and the office to just go away,' ''
he says. ``Then, there's the popular argument that people are less
connected to their company and to their peers without the office, which
is bad news for employee engagement and retention.''
In a 2022 Korn Ferry survey \7\ of 15,000 global executives, \2/3\
agreed that corporate culture accounts for more than 30% of their
company's market value. Many leaders, the report notes, believe that a
strong culture can only be established and maintained ``if everyone
is--at least some of the time--occupying the same workplace.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.kornferry.com/insights/briefings-magazine/issue-59/
back-to-work.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CEOs also justify their stance with the belief that workers are
more productive in the office. Amazon's Andy Jassy, for example, told
employees \8\ that ``it's easier to learn, model, practice and
strengthen our culture when we're in the office together most of the
time and surrounded by colleagues.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.aboutamazon.com/news/company-news/andy-jassy-
update-on-amazon-return-to-office.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet research has failed to draw definitive conclusions about remote
workers' productivity. In the U.S., employee productivity rose by 4.4%
in 2020 and 2.2% in 2021, before falling in 2022, according to the
Bureau of Labor Statistics.\9\ In 2023, however, labor productivity
rose 3.7% during the second quarter, and is up 1.3% compared to this
time last year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/prod2.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``The individual free-for-all work policy doesn't work,'' says
Brian Elliott, an executive advisor on flexibility and the founder of
the research consortium Future Forum. ``There really is some benefit to
getting people together on a regular basis to drive relationship-
building, mentorship and collaboration.''
Per Resume Builder, the ``vast majority'' of business leaders say
they have seen an improvement in revenue, productivity and employee
retention since returning to the office.
`Five days a week in the office is dead'
Even as large firms on Wall Street and in Silicon Valley consider a
full return to in-person work, workplace experts agree that most
organizations will stick with the post-pandemic norm of spending 2 to 3
days per week in the office.
``I think the concept of spending 5 days a week in the office is
dead,'' says Elliott. ``That top-down, one-size-fits-all approach can
lead to a lot of resentment among workers.''
With that kind of mandate, ``organizations are risking a real break
of trust with their employees,'' says Susan Vroman, a lecturer in
management at Bentley University.
Employees overwhelmingly prefer hybrid work: About 68% of full-time
workers support a hybrid work schedule, working at least one day a week
remotely and the other days in an office, a recent Bankrate survey \10\
of over 2,000 adults in the U.S. found.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.bankrate.com/personal-finance/hybrid-remote-and-4-
day-workweek-survey/#things-to-remember.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Whether a company is increasing its in-office requirements, or
introducing them for the first time, ``transparency is key,'' Vroman
adds. ``Especially for companies who said employees could work wherever
they wanted to, how do you convince them that going back to the office
is the right thing to do?''
The only industries Kaplan expects to continue to push for a full
return to the office are tech, financial services and retail, as
leaders in those fields tend to spend more \11\ on commercial real
estate and are ``the most adamant'' that remote work can pose security
concerns.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://therealdeal.com/new-york/2023/01/19/murdochs-6th-ave-
deal-tops-manhattans-most-valuable-office-leases-of-2022/.
\12\ https://www.cnbc.com/2023/03/17/svb-listed-remote-work-as-a-
business-risk-before-collapse-its-a-convenient-excuse-experts-say.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other companies, Vroman says, will opt for a more structured hybrid
work arrangement, requiring employees to come in on certain days of the
week rather than allowing them to choose the number of days they work
remotely, which can lead to ``people being on Zoom all day surrounded
by empty desks.''
Offering a flexible, hybrid model is also a smart recruiting
tactic, Elliott adds. ``The job market might have softened to some
degree, but there's always competition for top talent,'' he says.
``People still want flexibility at work, and they're ready to walk if
they don't get it.''
Article 2

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[https://www.shrm.org/topics-tools/news/employee-relations/ceos-
predict-end-of-remote-work]
CEOs Predict End of Remote Work
October 17, 2023 D Kylie Ora Lobell

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The pandemic ushered in a new era of work. Many workplaces went
fully remote, with some employers giving up their office space
altogether. In the post-pandemic era, a number of workplaces are hybrid
and have no plans to get back to full-time, in-office work. According
to the Pew Research Center, 35 percent of workers with jobs that can be
done remotely are working from home full time,\1\ and 41 percent of
those with positions that can be remote are working a hybrid schedule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2023/03/30/about-a-
third-of-us-workers-who-can-work-from-home-do-so-all-the-time/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, now that COVID-19 is better managed, employers are
attempting to bring workers back into the office, with some--like Zoom
and Meta \2\--requiring in-person work at least a few days per week.
Additionally, new research from KPMG's Global CEO Outlook showed that
63 percent of CEOs predict a full return to in-office work \3\ by the
end of 2026, while only seven percent believe that full-time remote
work will continue in the long term.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.shrm.org/ResourcesAndTools/hr-topics/benefits/
Pages/As-Summer-Ends-Workers-Head-Back-to-the-Office.aspx.
\3\ https://finance.yahoo.com/news/most-bosses-think-ll-back-
112925073.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following in the footsteps of Zoom and Meta are companies across
the U.S., which are trying to bring workers back into the office at
least part of the time.
Here's what they're doing to convince workers to come back, as well
as their reasons for advocating in-office work.
They're Encouraging In-Office Work for Gatherings
In a time when 90 percent of office workers said they don't wish to
return to the old ways of working \4\--and some are even threatening to
walk away from a job if they have to go into the office full time-
employers are treading lightly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.gallup.com/workplace/512006/office-workers-quietly-
changing.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sara Murdock, director of people and culture at architectural firm
Steinberg Hart, which has offices in California, Texas and New York
City, said her company allows for remote work among its 140 employees
and requests in-person attendance for specific types of gatherings.
``We encourage people to be in the office for major meetings,
training and group collaborations,'' she said. ``In other words, [we
want them] to be physically present during times that we are
interacting with one another or in interactive learning mode, not just
working on our computers.''
They're Looking at the Impact on Productivity
Amanda Webster, the chief operating officer of Fund&Grow, a U.S.-
based lending program in Florida with 55 employees, said the company
went remote during the pandemic but it wasn't a positive change.
``It had a negative impact on employee morale and their ability to
separate work and home,'' she said. ``Employee morale was low due to
feeling overwhelmed with work/life balance.''
Now, after seeing the effects of work from home, Webster only
allows remote work if there is a medical accommodation needed or if
it's approved in advance.
``Being in the office allows us to be the most efficient,'' she
said. ``Our employees enjoy the camaraderie of being in the office,
with the support of management and having the technology needed to be
successful.''
At Relay Payments, a 150-employee company in Atlanta, Chief People
Officer Amy Zimmerman requires employees to work in the office a few
days a week because it's proven to be better for business.
``We are a rapidly growing fintech that's disrupting much larger,
established businesses,'' she said. ``Our competitive advantage is
speed, and we feel it's important to be in the office 3 days a week to
collaborate, problem-solve in real time, connect, and to help onboard
new team members since we're on a hiring spree.''
They're Offering Commuting Stipends
Some employees who got used to working at home don't want to have
to commute and pay high fuel or transportation costs to get to work
again. In response to this, Steve Feiner, managing editor of Tech Jive
and CEO of ABF Group in Silicon Valley, is providing commuting stipends
to his 300 employees.
``[We] offer stipends for those who choose to commute, ensuring
they aren't burdened by additional costs,'' he said.
Since Feiner is in charge of a tech company, physical presence in
the office isn't always required.
``However, for brainstorming sessions, collaborative projects and
certain team-building activities, face-to-face interactions can be
invaluable,'' he said. ``The pandemic accelerated a trend we were
already observing: the rise of remote work facilitated by technology.''
They're Focusing on Relationship Building
One of the biggest upsides of in-person work is the ability to
cultivate relationships--something that could get lost on a Zoom call
or Slack message.
Zimmerman makes days in the office special for workers, using them
to focus on building bonds between employees.
``We cater lunch and host activities like our running club and
taking walks together to ensure we're building relationships with one
another,'' she said. ``On days when we're remote, we utilize our
internal messaging platforms to make sure we're still honoring our
culture by collaborating and engaging with each other.''
They're Balancing Business and Employee Needs
Overall, companies are taking a balanced look at the situation:
Even if they want employees in the office full time, they aren't
demanding it. Instead, they're working hand in hand with employees to
figure out the best solution moving forward.
``I'd suggest that more leaders do a deep dive into what,
precisely, helps their teams do phenomenal work over time,'' Murdock
said. ``Engage employee listening, and really get to know the ins and
outs of human motivation.''
While a majority of CEOs may believe that full-time in-person work
is going to return, Feiner has a different perspective: The nature of
work has changed, and companies have to change to keep up with it.
``The future of work is flexible,'' he said. ``With advancements in
technology, especially in the realm of communication and collaboration
tools, we have an opportunity to redefine traditional work structures.
It's essential to stay adaptable and prioritize both business needs and
employee well-being.''

Kylie Ora Lobell is a freelance writer based in Los Angeles.
______

Submitted Letter by Hon. Zachary Nunn, a Representative in Congress
from Iowa
January 19, 2024

Hon. Michael S. Barr,
Vice Chairman for Supervision,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Washington, D.C.;

Hon. Martin J. Gruenberg,
Chairman,
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
Washington, D.C.;

Mr. Michael J. Hsu,
Acting Comptroller of the Currency,
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency,
Washington, D.C.

Dear Vice Chair Barr, Chairman Gruenberg, and Acting Comptroller
Hsu:

Futures and derivatives markets provide critical tools to manage
risk for farmers, ranchers, grain and food processors, energy
producers, and other important commercial end-users. We have concerns,
however, that the GSIB Surcharge Proposal and the Basel III Endgame
Proposal (the proposals) will generate disincentives for prudent risk
management strategies and drive up the cost of hedging for end-users.
Ultimately, consumers who are already facing elevated prices from
record levels of inflation will pay the price at the grocery store and
the gas station.
On the heels of inflation rates not seen in over 40 years,
Americans are facing record high costs in grocery stores, at gas
stations, and in their energy bills. Futures and derivatives markets
play a stabilizing role for prices, helping to insulate consumers and
businesses from market instability while involving minimal risk for
end-users. For this reason, many nonfinancial firms that use
derivatives for traditional hedging purposes were exempt from a number
of regulations in the Dodd-Frank Act that would have made it more
expensive for them to manage their risk. Former Senate Banking,
Housing, and Urban Affairs Chairman Dodd, along with former Senate
Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Chairman Lincoln, highlighted the
importance of preserving these tools in the Dodd-Frank Act.
``Regulators, namely the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC),
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the prudential
regulators, must not make hedging so costly it becomes prohibitively
expensive for end-users to manage their risks.'' \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See letter from Senators Dodd and Lincoln to Chairman Frank and
Peterson, dated June 30, 2010. https://www.wsj.com/public/resources/
documents/dodd-lincoln-letter070110.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As policymakers and stakeholders review the proposals, we remain
concerned that the proposals ignore Congressional intent to keep
critical risk management tools accessible and low-cost.
When farmers, ranchers, or other end-users enter into futures or
other centrally-cleared derivatives contracts to mitigate the risk they
face from fluctuating commodity prices, they generally initiate the
trade through a Futures Commission Merchant (FCM) registered with the
CFTC. FCMs provide market access to their clients through memberships
at regulated derivatives exchanges and clearinghouses, and the vast
majority of FCMs today are banks that will be subject to the proposals.
Increasing regulatory capital charges for banks that provide end-users
with access to these hedging markets and risk management tools is a
misguided approach.
For another key hedging tool, uncleared swaps, the proposals would
represent a massive increase in the cost of trading these instruments.
The banking entities who facilitate these transactions as swap dealers
allocate capital on a business line basis, and as a result,
disproportionate capital requirements for a certain business line or
trading desk may cause banks to decrease their offerings of these risk-
reducing tools. As a result, liquidity in these markets could decrease
dramatically, and the costs of hedging for end-users would be driven
even higher.
The Basel III Proposal's public listing requirement would make it
more expensive for privately owned investment-grade companies to hedge
against risk, despite the lack of any empirical link between a public
listing and creditworthiness. In addition, the new capital requirements
for ``Credit Valuation Adjustment'' or ``CVA'' Risk on derivative
transactions could further penalize end-users. The new CVA requirements
are most severe for derivative transactions with end-users.
The GSIB Surcharge Proposal and Basel III Endgame Proposal
substantially exceed the Basel III framework and go significantly
further than what is being implemented in other jurisdictions, such as
Europe. This will inevitably put end-users seeking to hedge and manage
risk on an uneven playing field with competitors in other
jurisdictions.
In turn, we respectfully ask that you respond to the following
questions by February 16, 2024.

Have you conducted any economic analysis about these
disparities? Please provide your analysis with regard to the
international consistency of the U.S. proposals with other
major jurisdictions, and, in particular, how the U.S. and EU
jurisdictions treat end-users under the respective proposals.

As you were developing these proposals, how was the end-user
impact of increased capital charges for hedging and risk
management tools factored into your decision-making? Have you
produced any economic analysis about the impacts these
proposals will have on end-users?

How would increased FCM consolidation create more stability
in the derivatives marketplace?

The impact of these bank capital proposals will have a direct
effect on the economy and our constituents. It is vital to approach any
proposal regarding increased capital requirements, particularly
increased capital requirements for hedging and risk management tools,
with careful consideration and input from industry as well as a
comprehensive cost-benefit analysis.
With rising economic and geopolitical risks, now is not the time to
increase costs for farmers' cooperatives, energy producers, and food
processors seeking to responsibly hedge against instability.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Zachary Nunn,                                Hon. Jerry Moran,
Member of Congress                                United States Senator

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Andy Barr,          Hon. John Boozman,       Hon. Glenn
Thompson,\2\
\1\ Chairman, House
Committee on
Agriculture.
Member of Congress       United States Senator    Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. J. French Hill,     Hon. John Thune,         Hon. Kevin Cramer,
Member of Congress       United States Senator    United States Senator

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Blaine              Hon. Thom Tillis,        Hon. Frank D. Lucas,
Luetkemeyer,            United States Senator    Member of Congress
Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Roger Marshall,     Hon. Wiley Nickel,       Hon. Dusty Johnson,
United States Senator    Member of Congress       Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Austin Scott,       Hon. Scott Fitzgerald,   Hon. John W. Rose,
Member of Congress       Member of Congress       Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Roger Williams,     Hon. James R. Baird,     Hon. Cynthia M.
Lummis,
Member of Congress       Member of Congress       United States Senator

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Bill Hagerty,       Hon. Mike Flood,         Hon. Donald G. Davis,
United States Senator    Member of Congress       Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. John S. Duarte,     Hon. Tommy Tuberville,   Hon. Mike Braun,
Member of Congress       United States Senator    United States Senator

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Bryan Steil,        Hon. Cindy Hyde-Smith,   Hon. Erin Houchin,
Member of Congress       United States Senator    Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Monica De La Cruz,  Hon. Daniel Meuser,      Hon. Alexander X.
Member of Congress        Mooney,
Member of Congress                                Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Katie Boyd Britt
United States Senator

CC:

Federal Reserve Board Chair Jerome Powell
Federal Reserve Board Vice Chair Phillip Jefferson
Federal Reserve Board Governor Michelle Bowman
Federal Reserve Board Governor Christopher Waller
Federal Reserve Board Governor Lisa Cook
Federal Reserve Board Governor Adriana Kugler
Commodity Futures Trading Commission Chair Rostin Behnam
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Vice Chairman Travis Hill
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Director Jonathan McKernan
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Director Rohit Chopra
______

Supplementary Material Submitted by Hon. Rostin Behnam, Chairman,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
Insert 1
Mr. Behnam. . . .
So we are doing what we can with what we have. The sandbox
issue you raise that the UK has done, something that I know my
predecessors have thought about, I have thought about, there
are legal limitations to us being able to provide a sandbox
environment for stakeholders. So if that is a priority of
yours, you might want to consider it legislatively. But we do
have limitations legally to provide a sandbox where,
essentially, as you know, you would be protected from certain
regulatory actions. But we are seeing a lot of change because
of technology, and we are doing what we can with what we have
both legally and personnel-wise to make sure we are engaging as
much as possible and getting ahead of this very rapidly moving
curve.
Mr. Rouzer. Yes, I would love to get those legal impediments,
if your team can provide that list to give us some guidance on
that so we could explore.

While my predecessors requested additional authorities related to
testing new financial technology applications, I believe the agency has
what it needs at this time to address the changing landscape of our
markets. We have moved past the stage of digital assets as a research
project. Our core policy divisions are currently working with digital
asset firms that have set up legally-compliant CFTC-regulated entities,
and our enforcement division has brought numerous cases against non-
compliant firms. Under the Commodities Exchange Act, we cannot grant
blanket exemptions to digital asset firms that do not comply with our
regulatory requirements, and we are not requesting legislative
authority to do so.
We continue our efforts to understand the nature of digital assets
and the role that innovation can play in our markets. The agency's
Office of Technology Innovation works to incorporate innovation and
technology into our regulatory oversight and mission critical functions
by supporting each operating division as well as the Commission's
participation in domestic and international engagements. OTI's
structure gives the CFTC greater flexibility to serve internal and
external stakeholders in their efforts to grow expertise and address
head on the challenges and opportunities presented through advancements
in technology. Through the work of OTI and our operating divisions, we
have developed a deep understanding of this novel market and the
underlying innovations that fuel the market.
In my mind, the most important issue facing Congress related to
digital assets is to ensure that there is an imposition of regulatory
requirements focused on ensuring certain core principles are met to
protect consumers and the broader financial system. And, I am
encouraged by the bipartisan and bicameral support for legislation that
acknowledges the need for additional regulation of the digital asset
spot markets.
Insert 2
Ms. Adams. . . . So how does diversity and leadership at DCMs
compare with the leadership of other publicly traded entities
regulated by the CFTC that operate under the Commodity Exchange
Act core principles?
Mr. Behnam. Congresswoman, I would probably have to look at
the specific number of DCMs, the designated contract markets,
and the other participants and identify the diversity of their
boards. It is not something I necessarily look at regularly,
but I am happy to look at that and work with your office to get
you some statistics, again, ensuring that that core principle
is complied with from Dodd-Frank.

As you noted, the Dodd-Frank Act added a new core principle for
publicly-traded DCMs, Diversity of Board of Directors for futures
exchanges (DCMs). Although many DCMs are subsidiaries of publicly-
traded companies, none of the DCMs are themselves publicly-traded
companies. For example, the four CME Group DCMs (CME, CBOT, NYMEX and
COMEX) are subsidiaries of CME Group, Inc., the publicly-traded
company. Since DCM Core Principle 22 does not currently apply to any
DCMs, we do not collect this information.
To follow this question further--as you know, unlike our peer
Federal financial regulators, CFTC's Office of Minority & Women
Inclusion (OMWI) is not statutorily authorized under Section 342 of the
Dodd-Frank Act. Barring that statutory authorization, the CFTC does not
have the statutory authority specified under Section 342(2)(c) of the
Dodd-Frank Act to collect and assess the diversity policies and
practices of entities regulated by the CFTC.
Under my direction as Chairman, the CFTC hired its first ever Chief
Diversity Officer (CDO) who oversees the agency's Office of Minority
and Women Inclusion (OMWI). And, on April 18th the CFTC released its
first DEIA Strategic Plan. Among other things, the Plan will aim to
further develop our workforce. Current efforts through our OMWI include
establishing partnerships and recruiting at minority serving
institutions and rural colleges and universities, engaging urban and
rural communities and related professional associations, and planning a
robust mass media campaign to enhance our outreach efforts. I am eager
to see the CFTC's OMWI statutorily authorized, similar to other Federal
financial regulators.
______

Submitted Questions
Response from Hon. Rostin Behnam, Chairman, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission
Questions Submitted by Hon. Glenn Thompson, a Representative in
Congress from Pennsylvania
Question 1. Chairman Behnam, I know that the Commission has
recently signed new leases for space in New York, Chicago, and Kansas
City, and it in the process of relocating your Washington, D.C.
headquarters. How does the Commission currently determine its space
needs?
Answer. The CFTC works with GSA on all leasing matters. As part of
the leasing acquisition process GSA conducts a thorough needs
assessment and applies its experience in facilities planning to
determine an agency's space requirements. GSA then packages its
analysis and uses it as the basis for its solicitation to prospective
landlords.

Question 1a. I understand that many of the Commission staff are
currently not coming into the office regularly and the union is
fighting to make 100% telework a permanent option for all staff in the
next union contract. If that is accurate, who is using the office space
that the Commission is leasing and who do you expect will be using
under a 100% telework model?
Answer. Since January 1st more than 50% of CFTC staff have entered
the office. My office is in the building 3 to 5 days a week, the
division directors are in the office 3 days a week, and Supervisors and
Executives currently are in twice a week. The CFTC remains in
negotiations with NTEU for returning all staff to the office. The
CFTC's current lease for its D.C. location ends on September 30, 2025.
A new location has been found and will reduce the CFTC's D.C. footprint
by approximately 50%.

Question 1b. Mr. Chairman, as you finalize your return-to-work
plans, how are you making certain that the Commission is not wasting
money on unused or rarely used space, both in your existing leases and
in your upcoming lease in Washington, D.C.?
Answer. The CFTC, through GSA, has recently identified office space
in DC to relocate its headquarters to at the conclusion of the current
lease that expires September 30, 2025. The new facility will reduce the
CFTC's footprint by approximately 50% and will lead to a significant
annual savings compared to the current headquarters lease. The regional
leases are also relatively new and based on a similar needs assessment
conducted by GSA that reduced our footprint. Though not expected, the
CFTC is able to exit its regional leases should the future work
environment shift our space needs dramatically.

Question 2. Chairman Behnam, as you know, the Pathways Program is
designed to provide training and mentoring to students at the start of
their career and to provide them with an understanding of the CFTC and
its culture.
I am concerned about the ability for the Commission to provide that
training and mentorship, as well as to develop an effective, high
performing corporate culture, transmit institutional knowledge, and
promote teamwork, in an environment where most staff does not interact
in person day to day.
Do you share concerns about the sustainability of the culture and
institutional knowledge at the CFTC if staff interactions are limited
to Zoom calls and other scheduled interactions? How does remote work
impact the participants in the Pathways Program if the overwhelming
majority of staff works from home?
Answer. I believe that being in the office and interacting in
person is an important component of building and maintaining a good
culture. That said, it is also important to acknowledge that great work
can be, and is being, done while teleworking. Finding the right balance
is the key. Towards that effort, I have established in-office
requirements for managers and executives. For employees, while I have
encouraged agency staff to be in the office, we are in currently in
negotiations with the union regarding in-office requirements.
Regarding the Pathways Program, we recently expanded our early
career program to include the Pathways Recent Graduates Program. For
all those in the program, we designed the program to ensure that they
would benefit from a hybrid workplace by including in-office
requirements. Also, their in-office schedule is set up so they align to
when their manager is also in the office. To help them better
understand CFTC's culture and to make other connections within the
agency, each participant also has been assigned a mentor. We believe
these efforts as well as our revamped new employee orientation program
are contributing to early career program participants understanding of
CFTC's culture and being effective employees.

Question 3. Chairman Behnam, there have been a few recent CFTC
enforcement actions against Decentralized Finance (DeFi) entities. The
DeFi community has complained that those actions were taken without
notice to DeFi entities that their activity (e.g., merely creating an
online trading platform) could be considered a violation of the
Commodity Exchange Act and Regulations. Could you please tell me
whether the CFTC plans on publishing guidance regarding potential
liability for DeFi activities to ensure that DeFi entities are made
aware of their responsibilities?
Answer. Over the past few years, the Commission has brought
multiple actions against DeFi platforms to enforce the legal
requirements that apply to all platforms, whether centralized or
decentralized, that offer derivative products to the public. The CFTC's
actions did not find that DeFi technology was per se violative of the
CEA or illegal but rather that DeFi platforms are not exempt from our
regulations.
The legal requirements that apply to derivative platforms are
established under the Commodity Exchange Act and have been in place for
decades. Market participants are well aware of these rules.
The Commission has no current plans to issue guidance specific to
DeFi. We will continue to work to ensure that digital asset
transactions that should be conducted on regulated derivatives
platforms are in fact conducted on those platforms.

Question 4. Chairman Behnam, last year, the Commission lost its
long-serving Inspector General. It has been over 6 months without a
permanent replacement. What is the process for naming a permanent IG
and do you have a timeframe for when that will happen?
Answer. On April 10, 2024 the CFTC announced Christopher L. Skinner
as the newly appointed Inspector General for the agency. CFTC Appoints
Christopher Skinner as Inspector General D CFTC.\1\ *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8890-24.
* Editor's note: references annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.

Question 5. Chairman Behnam, I worry that we are not utilizing our
best efforts to secure our information from those that may seek to
disrupt our financial markets. Could you please detail the agency's
efforts to ensure that it and its systemically important market
participants are employing the strongest protections available against
cyber threats?
Answer. The CFTC is the primary market regulator for the designated
contract markets (``DCMs''), swap execution facilities (``SEFs''),
derivatives clearing organizations (``DCOs''), and swap data
repositories (``SDRs'') owned by CME Group, Inc. (``CME Group'') and
those owned by Intercontinental Exchange, Inc. (``ICE''). CME Group and
ICE are the two largest providers of derivatives trading and clearing
in the United States.
In July 2012, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (``FSOC'')
determined that the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Inc. (``CME''), a
subsidiary of CME Group, and ICE Clear Credit LLC (``ICC''), a
subsidiary of ICE, are systemically important financial market
utilities (``FMUs'') under Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The designations were based on
FSOC's determination that failure or disruption of the FMU's operations
could create or increase the risk of significant liquidity or credit
problems spreading among financial institutions or markets and thereby
threaten the stability of the U.S. financial system.
The CFTC has an established system safeguards and cybersecurity
regulatory framework. The framework covers all subsidiaries of CME
Group, and all subsidiaries of ICE that are registered with the CFTC,
including a number of DCMs, SEFs, DCOs, and SDRs. At both CME Group and
ICE, the DCMs, SEFs, DCOs, and SDRs share a common program of system
safeguards risk analysis and oversight for their automated systems.
Based on statutory and regulatory requirements, the CFTC oversight
framework requires each DCM, SEF, DCO, and SDR registered with the CFTC
to have a program of risk analysis and oversight to identify and
minimize sources of operational risk through the development of
appropriate controls and procedures, and the development of automated
systems that are reliable, secure, and have adequate scalable capacity.
These entities must have emergency procedures, backup facilities, and a
plan for disaster recovery that allows for the timely recovery and
resumption of operations. The entities must periodically test such
procedures to ensure continuity of operations. The program of system
safeguards risk analysis and oversight must follow generally accepted
standards and best practices for each required element of the program.
In addition, the program must address seven categories of system
safeguards risk analysis and oversight, including: (1) system
safeguards risk management and governance; (2) information security;
(3) business continuity and disaster recovery planning and resources;
(4) capacity and performance planning; (5) systems operations; (6)
systems development and quality assurance; and (7) physical security
and environmental controls.
CFTC regulations also require various types of system safeguards
and cybersecurity testing, including (1) vulnerability testing; (2)
external and internal penetration testing; (3) identification of key
controls and testing of all controls; (4) development and testing of a
security incident response plan; and (5) completion and annual updating
of an enterprise technology risk assessment.

Question 6. Chairman Behnam, in February, the CFTC issued a no-
action relief letter (NAL) that allows registered swap dealers to not
provide otherwise required information to a swap counterparty if: (1)
the counterparty agrees they don't need the information; and (2) the
information is otherwise easily available to the counterparty. Could
you please elaborate on the NAL and explain why this relief was given?
Answer. CFTC staff letter 24-02 was issued as part of the CFTC's
support for the industry-wide transition from use of the LIBOR interest
rate benchmark in CFTC-regulated derivatives to the risk-free-rate
benchmark, SOFR, chosen by the Alternative Reference Rate Committee
(ARRC) sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Importantly, the no-action letter only applies to a swap dealer's
disclosure of a ``pre-trade mid-market mark'' for certain interest rate
swaps referencing SOFR, and does not apply to any other disclosure
required by CFTC rules (i.e., disclosure of swap risks and
characteristics, disclosure of conflicts of interest, etc.). The no-
action letter does not apply to the ``daily mark'' disclosure
requirement, which is a requirement that a daily mid-market mark for a
swap be provided by a swap dealer to a counterparty each business day
after execution (or, if a cleared swap, provided by a DCO to the
counterparty each business day).
The no-action letter is a replacement for an existing no-action
position issued in 2012 for certain interest rate swaps referencing
LIBOR. It responds to a request from the ARRC as part of the ARRC-led
transition from LIBOR to SOFR. The no-action letter applies only to
SOFR swaps that are required to be cleared and are thus the most
widely-traded, most liquid interest rate swaps in the market. Pre-trade
prices for such SOFR swaps are widely available from public sources and
thus, requiring a swap dealer to also provide a pre-trade mid-market
price for such swaps is redundant and only causes possible delay in
execution.

Question 6a. Do you have any concerns that granting this relief may
increase systemic risk in the marketplace or impose greater risk on the
counterparties to these trades?
Answer. No. Again, the no-action letter applies only to a swap
dealer's disclosure of a pre-trade mid-market mark and does not apply
to any other disclosure required by CFTC rules, such as disclosure of
risks and characteristics of swaps and disclosure of conflicts of
interest of the swap dealer, etc. No-action letter 24-02 is a
replacement for a letter originally issued in 2012 for LIBOR swaps.
Thus, the no-action position has been in effect for the most widely
traded interest rate swaps for 14 years and CFTC Staff is unaware of
any increase in systemic risk or imposition of greater risk on
counterparties to these trades during the last 14 years.

Question 7. Chairman Behnam, in December, the CFTC proposed a rule
that would protect clearing member funds held by clearinghouses. Could
you please elaborate on what this rule does and why it is necessary?
Answer. Currently clearing members and participants, including
natural persons who clear directly at non-intermediated DCOs, do not
receive the same protections for their funds as those provided under
the CEA for the funds of customers of FCM clearing members. The
Commission has attempted to provide some measure of protection in some
cases through conditions to a DCO's order of registration, but given
that five of the 16 DCOs now registered with the Commission provide
non-intermediated clearing, it was long past time for the Commission to
promulgate rules to thoroughly protect participant funds held by DCOs.
As you indicated in your question, the proposed rule will provide
protections for participants' funds. These protections are practically
identical to those provided to FCM customer funds and include:
segregation of participant funds from the DCO's own funds; requiring
that participant funds be held in a depository that expressly
acknowledges the funds belong to participants and must remain
segregated from the DCO's own funds; limiting the ability of DCOs to
invest participant funds; and requiring the DCOs to conduct daily
accounting and reconciliation between the amounts held in their
accounts and the amounts owed to participants.
In addition, the rule encourages the holding of customer and
participant funds at central banks by proposing requirements specific
to obtaining written acknowledgements from central banks holding such
funds. As compared to commercial banks, central banks present lower
credit and liquidity risk. The proposal allows a DCO to hold customer
and participant funds at certain central banks with only a simple
written acknowledgment (in contrast to the previously adopted template
acknowledgment letter) the central bank was informed the funds
deposited are customer or participant funds and an agreement to respond
to requests from Commission staff for information about the account(s)
holding the funds.

Question 8. Chairman Behnam, in June 2023, the CFTC finalized a
rule that required clearinghouses to establish and listen to ``risk
management committees'' made up of their clearing members. Could you
please describe the relationship between a clearinghouse and its
clearing members and why this rule was undertaken?
Answer. The clearing members of a clearinghouse (which is also
called a derivative clearing organization, or ``DCO'') perform a
variety of risk management functions to support the financial integrity
of the DCO. Significantly, at most DCOs, clearing members contribute to
a default fund that helps ensure that the DCO is able to meet its
financial obligations to a DCO's participants even if a given clearing
member were to become insolvent or otherwise default on its obligations
to the DCO. In this way, default losses at a DCO may be mutualized
across its clearing members, who therefore have a significant stake in
the DCO's financial integrity. The CFTC's recent rule, which was based
on recommendations from a subcommittee of the CFTC's Market Risk
Advisory Committee that includes representatives from DCOs, clearing
members, and end-users, requires DCOs to consult with risk management
committees that include clearing member representation prior to making
certain significant risk decisions. This helps DCOs take advantage of
clearing members' risk management expertise and strong interest in the
DCO's risk management, in order to promote the safety and efficiency of
the DCO and the stability of the broader financial system.

Question 9. Chairman Behnam, in December, the CFTC proposed a rule
that would require certain derivatives market intermediaries to
establish Operational Resilience Frameworks (ORF).
In your testimony, you highlighted how you have highlighted how you
are working with domestic regulators to ensure that the ORF
requirements are not duplicative. Have you had similar conversations
with foreign regulators? How are they approaching these same
challenges? Will you be providing substituted compliance or other
relief for entities which face similar requirements in their home
jurisdiction?
Answer. Under my leadership, the agency has placed renewed focus on
cybersecurity and related risks to identify new ways to expand and
enhance our oversight in this area. To that end, in December 2023, the
Commission issued a proposed rulemaking that would require futures
commission merchants and swap dealers, which play crucial roles as
intermediaries in the derivatives markets, to develop an Operational
Resilience Framework. This framework would include enhanced
requirements relating to not only information and technology security
but to risks posed by third-party relationships and how to keep
operating in the face of emergencies or other significant disruptions
affecting the continuity of operations. The draft rule also included
proposed guidance relating to the management of risks stemming from
third-party relationships. Staff are now busy reviewing the comments on
this rulemaking, and we hope to be able to finalize the rule this fall.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Frank D. Lucas, a Representative in
Congress from Oklahoma
Question 1. Under the current CFTC margin rules, eligible
collateral for initial margin includes government related money market
funds (MMFs). These MMFs are allowed as eligible collateral under CFTC
and other regulatory regimes' noncleared margin rules, but the CFTC has
restrictions that could increase operational risk and jeopardize U.S.
firms' competitiveness. Currently, the CFTC does not permit the use of
MMFs issued in another jurisdiction without restrictions or MMFs that
transfer assets through securities lending and repurchase agreements
(``repos''). The CFTC has proposed amendments--suggested by the CFTC's
Global Markets Advisory Committee--to its margin rules that would
expand the use of these MMFs.
Chairman Behnam, I was pleased to see your 2023 notice of proposed
rulemaking expanding the use of money market funds (MMFs) as eligible
collateral. It is my understanding that MMFs are a key element of
managing liquidity and collateral, particularly during times of market
volatility. Can you provide a timeline for finalization of this
proposal?
Answer. Staff is continuing to review the comments received in
response to the Commission's NPRM regarding uncleared margin.
Commenters raised some operational concerns with respect to
implementation of certain aspects of the proposal that require careful
staff consideration. In light of this, it is challenging to provide an
estimate for possible finalization at this point.

Question 2. Chairman Behnam, data protection issues have been a
concern for many years. There has been concern from market participants
about the recent MOU between the CFTC and SEC as it relates to Form PF.
What steps have been taken to ensure the best possible transfer of
sensitive proprietary data between agencies, and does the CFTC's
analysis identify any risks for market participants?
Answer. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act of 2010 mandated that the SEC and the CFTC, in consultation with
the FSOC, jointly promulgate rules governing the form and substance of
reports required by investment advisers to private funds to be filed
with the SEC, and with the CFTC for those that are dually-registered
with both Commissions.\2\ Form PF provides the Commissions and FSOC
with important information about the basic operations and strategies of
private funds and has helped establish a baseline picture of the
private fund industry for use in assessing systemic risk. The
Commission also expects to use Form PF data to inform its regulatory
programs, including examinations, investigations and investor
protection efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Public Law 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Form PF data from both CFTC registrants and non-CFTC registrants is
expected to assist the Commission in providing effective oversight of
CFTC registrants and to protect the financial integrity of derivatives
markets. Form PF provides information from filers reflecting creditor
and counterparty exposures (including central clearing counterparties
or ``CCPs''), financing arrangements, and activities in cross-market
transactions. Understanding counterparty exposures allows the
Commission to assess who may be impacted by losses due to a reporting
fund's failure, and which reporting funds may be impacted by a
counterparty's failure. Form PF data, reported by non-CFTC registrants
with such financing exposures to CFTC registrants, therefore informs
the Commission of the risks to CFTC registrants such as Swap Dealers
and Derivatives Clearing Organizations (DCOs).
With respect to the protection of Form PF data, the Commission
respects its statutory obligations not to reveal information that would
disclose the transaction, positions, or trade secrets of customers.
Moreover, the MOU between the SEC and CFTC specifies minimum procedural
and data security requirements for receipt of the data. Many of these
guidelines are Federal requirements that the CFTC meets or exceeds in
regular practice.

Question 3. The CFTC regulates markets with a global impact. Will
you commit to allowing U.S. customer access in foreign markets when
necessary?
Answer. Yes, I am committed to allowing U.S. customer access in
foreign markets to the extent permitted by U.S. law. The Commodity
Exchange Act (CEA) has long allowed U.S. customer access to foreign
markets. For nearly 40 years, pursuant to the CFTC's Part 30 rules,
U.S. customers have been permitted to trade foreign futures listed on
any foreign board of trade, either through an FCM registered with the
Commission that has opened an omnibus account with a foreign broker or
directly through a foreign broker that the Commission has exempted from
registration as an FCM pursuant to CFTC rule 30.10. As outlined in
Appendix A to Part 30, a foreign regulator or foreign board of trade
seeking relief under rule 30.10 must demonstrate that it provides a
comparable system of regulation for foreign firms engaging in the
activities of an FCM with respect to U.S. persons, and enter into an
information-sharing arrangement with the Commission.
In addition, pursuant to Part 48 of the CFTC's rules, foreign
boards of trade have been permitted to provide U.S. customers with
direct access to their markets so long as such trades are cleared
through a registered FCM or a foreign broker exempted from FCM
registration pursuant CFTC rule 30.10.
A list of the foreign boards of trade accessible to U.S. customers
pursuant to Part 48 is available here: https://www.cftc.gov/
IndustryOversight/IndustryFilings/ForeignBoardsofTrade
A list of foreign markets that have obtained a 30.10 exemption is
available here: https://www.cftc.gov/IndustryOversight/IndustryFilings/
ForeignPart30Exemptions
With respect to swaps clearing, the Commission permits a foreign
clearinghouse to register with the Commission as a derivative clearing
organization (DCO) and clear for U.S. customers if the clearinghouse
can meet the DCO core principles set forth in the CEA and the
applicable CFTC rules, which are the same requirements for U.S. DCOs.
Under CFTC Rule 39.51, a foreign clearinghouse may be able to comply
with the DCO core principles through compliance with its home country
regulatory regime, as an alternative to CFTC rules.

Question 4. Compliance for the new block trade and cap size
reporting obligations is required beginning July 1, 2024. Commissioners
Mersinger and Pham noted in a joint release,\3\ more time is needed to
study the market impact of these reporting obligations. Additionally,
just last month, the CFTC's Global Markets Advisory Committee (GMAC)
recommended \4\ ``extending the compliance date for the post-initial
block and cap sizes for all asset classes to at least December 4,
2024,'' giving the Commission time to engage ``with market participants
in discussions and analysis to ensure the post-initial block and cap
sizes are appropriately tailored.'' Given the upcoming deadline, could
you please provide an update from the CFTC on the recommendations put
forward by GMAC and the Commission's intentions moving forward on this
topic?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https:/www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/
mersingerphamstatement101823.
\4\ https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8860-24.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. Commission staff published revised post-initial appropriate
minimum block sizes and extended the timeline for implementation on May
23, 2024.\5\ The revised block sizes take into consideration the data
improvements contemplated by the Commission's 2020 Swaps Data
Rulemakings.\6\ The Commission does not intend for the publication of
the revised block sizes to be associated with any formal notice and
public comment period.\7\ The Commission expended significant time and
resources in analyzing data and responding to public comments received
during the comment period associated with the 2020 Swaps Data
Rulemakings. The compliance date for the revised block sizes has been
extended to October 7, 2024. The Commission plans to continue to engage
with market participants informally and monitor the liquidity of its
jurisdictional markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Staff Letter 24-06 (https://www.cftc.gov/csl/23-15/download).
CFTC Staff Announces Updated Part 43 Block and Cap Sizes and Further
Extends No-Action Letter Regarding the Block and Cap Implementation
Timeline D CFTC (https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/8913-
24).
\6\ The revised block sizes were calculated in accordance with
Commission regulation 43.6(g), which requires use of a 67 percent
notional amount calculation. The revised block sizes were calculated
based on a 1 year window of reliable swap transaction and pricing data
transmitted to Swap Data Repositories (SDRs) between December 1, 2021
and November 30, 2022. The SDR that receives the vast majority of swap
transaction and pricing data reports had already implemented several
key aspects of the Commission's 2020 Swaps Data Rulemakings prior to
December 1, 2021.
\7\ The Commission's regulations require the Commission to update
the block sizes on its website at least once each calendar year, but
modify the block swap categories and block calculation methodology
through rulemaking. The Commission therefore does not intend for the
publication of the revised block sizes to be associated with a formal
notice and comment period, as the Commission noted its concern during
the 2020 Swaps Data Rulemakings that opening the results of applying
the block methodologies to data would suggest the methodologies are
open to public comment annually, when opening the rules for public
comment each year would be an inefficient use of Commission resources.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you know, the Commodity Exchange Act (CEA) directs the
Commission to provide for both real-time public swaps reporting and
appropriate block sizes. The Commission concluded in both 2013 and 2020
that a 67 percent notional amount block size calculation, applied to
the most liquid categories of products in certain swap asset classes,
strikes an appropriate balance between the benefits of transparency and
any potential costs to market participants. The Commission continues to
believe that transparency will increase liquidity, improve market
integrity and price discovery, while reducing information asymmetries
enjoyed by market makers. The currently effective block sizes, which
were calculated using a 50 percent notional amount calculation and
intended as an initial step towards a phase-in of thresholds determined
using a 67 percent notional amount calculation, have not changed in a
decade. The Commission is cognizant that the currently effective block
thresholds result in less transparency than the Commission has
previously determined is appropriate to effectuate its CEA
responsibilities.
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Chairman Behnam, data protection issues have been a
concern for many years. I commend the CFTC for setting up the Division
of Data to prioritize these issues. However, I am concerned about the
recent memorandum of understanding that you entered into with the SEC
granting the CFTC unrestricted access to all data submitted to the SEC
by all Form PF filers, including data submitted to the SEC by non-CFTC
registrants.
According to the CFTC and SEC's joint final rule for Form PF,
``Form PF elicits non-public information about private funds and their
trading strategies, the public disclosure of which could adversely
affect the funds and their investors.'' It is unclear why the CFTC
should be granted access to Form PF data for non-CFTC registrants.
Moreover, I am concerned about the protection of sensitive Form PF data
as it shared between the agencies.
Could you please tell me why the CFTC needs to access non-CFTC
registrant information and what the CFTC is doing to mitigate the risks
associated with sharing highly confidential information?
Answer. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act of 2010 mandated that the SEC and the CFTC, in consultation with
the FSOC, jointly promulgate rules governing the form and substance of
reports required by investment advisers to private funds to be filed
with the SEC, and with the CFTC for those that are dually-registered
with both Commissions.\8\ Form PF provides the Commissions and FSOC
with important information about the basic operations and strategies of
private funds and has helped establish a baseline picture of the
private fund industry for use in assessing systemic risk. The
Commission also expects to use Form PF data to inform its regulatory
programs, including examinations, investigations and investor
protection efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Public Law 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Form PF data from both CFTC registrants and non-CFTC registrants is
expected to assist the Commission in providing effective oversight of
CFTC registrants and to protect the financial integrity of derivatives
markets. Form PF provides information from filers reflecting creditor
and counterparty exposures (including central clearing counterparties
or ``CCPs''), financing arrangements, and activities in cross-market
transactions. Understanding counterparty exposures allows the
Commission to assess who may be impacted by losses due to a reporting
fund's failure, and which reporting funds may be impacted by a
counterparty's failure. Form PF data, reported by non-CFTC registrants
with such financing exposures to CFTC registrants, therefore informs
the Commission of the risks to CFTC registrants such as Swap Dealers
and Derivatives Clearing Organizations (DCOs).
With respect to the protection of Form PF data, the Commission
respects its statutory obligations not to reveal information that would
disclose the transaction, positions, or trade secrets of customers.
Moreover, the MOU between the SEC and CFTC specifies procedural and
data security requirements for receipt of the data. Many of these
guidelines are Federal requirements that the CFTC meets or exceeds in
regular practice.
Questions Submitted by Hon. John W. Rose, a Representative in Congress
from Tennessee
Question 1. Chairman Behnam, to ensure the continued security of
sensitive data, I'd like to inquire about potential incidents of
accidental disclosure or misuse of confidential CFTC data by employees
working remotely. Can you please specify if any such incidents have
occurred? If so, please list the details regarding the nature of the
incidents, including the date range and type of data involved, as well
as the measures taken by the CFTC to address them.
Answer. I cannot specify instances in which employees working
remotely accidentally disclosed or misused confidential CFTC data. I
can say, however, that there have been instances where media outlets
have reported on confidential CFTC information. It is not clear if the
source was a CFTC employee, or if it was a CFTC employee whether they
were working remotely. There is no indication that the information
reported was trade position or regulatory reporting data, but rather
other sensitive information. To address this situation, I have sent out
a number of emails reminding employees about the importance of keeping
confidential information confidential. As noted in these emails, the
leaking of any confidential CFTC information ultimately undermines the
public's trust in us to fulfill our mission.
Also, please know that the CFTC Security Operations Center (SOC)
has adequate security controls in place to allow us to monitor the CFTC
network and detect abnormal and malicious activities from inside and
outside the network. For example, we monitor and get alerts on many
things on the network, including but not limited to new account
creation, privilege account creation, and downloading and emailing of
large amounts of data. We do not allow USB thumb drives and USB drives
to be connected to our devices. Additionally, we block access to social
media, we monitor for CFTC emails sent to personal emails and we do not
allow the creation of email forwarding rules.

Question 2. Chairman Behnam, if the pending bank capital proposals
are implemented without major reforms this will require banks to
increase the costs of client clearing services and likely reduce the
clearing capacity they can provide clients. Or some banks may be forced
to completely exit the client clearing business which would cut off
access to certain derivatives markets for end-users. Non-bank futures
commission merchants can provide access to derivatives markets as well,
and may have capacity to take on some additional clients, but do they
have the capacity to replace a GSIB bank that offers client clearing
services?
Answer. It is important to emphasize that the efficient and
effective operation of the cleared derivatives markets relies on FCMs
to bring customers, including end-users, to the futures and cleared
swaps market, and to clear transactions on behalf of customers. FCMs
provide the infrastructure by which customers access the markets and
they also process customer margin payments to and from derivatives
clearing organizations (DCOs). DCOs and the clearing system also rely
on certain market intermediaries, in particular FCMs that are clearing
members, to be willing and able to participate in risk sharing
arrangements, both on ``sunny days,'' (e.g., guaranteeing clients'
financial performance to the DCO, contributing to DCO default resource
waterfalls) and on ``stormy days'' (e.g., porting a defaulting FCM's
customer position to a financially sound FCM.) The strength of the
system depends on, but goes beyond, the strength of each participant
considered individually. CFTC has been concerned the proposed capital
increases attributable to client clearing could:

Reduce the number of firms that offer client clearing (a
number that has already been on a steep decline, from 100 as of
January 2004 to 47 as of February 2024). There is a heavy
concentration of customer funds with FCMs that are part of U.S.
or foreign banking organizations. With respect to futures
customers, the top five FCMs are bank FCMs and they hold 55
percent of total customer funds required to be segregated. With
respect to cleared swaps transactions, only bank FCMs clear for
customers and the top five FCMs hold 75 percent of total
cleared swaps customer funds required to be segregated;

Make remaining clearing firms more selective, pushing out
clients other than those that generate significant revenue
through high levels of trading or other activities (such as
securities trading), and refusing to serve new clients who do
not meet that standard;

Reduce willingness of the remaining client-clearing firms to
take on client positions of failing firms (thus making bank
clearing firms more likely to be considered ``too big to
fail''); and

Even for clients that maintain access, increase costs to an
extent that would disincentivize cleared versus non-cleared
derivatives.

This would not be a question of whether non-bank clearing firms
could replace bank or bank-affiliated clearing firms, as the effects of
reducing options and competition would affect the entire ecosystem.
Moreover, it is possible that reduced availability of clearing services
may flow downhill--that is, non-bank clearing firms, having limited
capital to meet CFTC's and DCO's risk-margin-based minimum capital
requirements, might free up the capacity to accept more profitable
clients transferring from bank-affiliated clearing firms by displacing
some of their existing customers, including smaller business clients.
Should client clearing be reduced, the outcome could, paradoxically, be
an increase in system complexity, opacity, interconnectedness and lower
resilience.

Question 3. Chairman Behnam, could you please tell me about any
conversations that have taken place between the Commission and the SEC
regarding Prometheum's plans?
Answer. The CFTC has ongoing discussions with the SEC about topics
of mutual interest, and as part of these discussions we have talked
about Prometheum's plans and the status of Ethereum. As I have said
previously, I believe Ethereum is a commodity. There have been listed
futures on Ethereum on CFTC-regulated markets going back to 2020. And
the CFTC has brought cases against institutions or organizations that
are trading Ethereum in an illegal manner, including against Binance.

Question 3a. Have you had any conversations with SEC Chairman
Gensler regarding whether Ether is a commodity or a security?
Answer. Chairman Gensler and I have spoken about the classification
of Ether. I have stated clearly that I believe Ethereum is a commodity
and that there have been listed futures on that digital asset on CFTC-
regulated markets dating back to 2020. Our enforcement docket and the
case the agency brought against Binance reinforces that decision.

Question 4. Chairman Behnam, the Commission has been migrating its
data and analytics capabilities to the cloud. Is this process complete
yet? What efficiencies or capabilities does a move to the cloud
provide?
Answer. The Commission has now concluded a multi-year project to
transition its legacy data environment to the cloud. All of the
Commission's systems and data are currently in the cloud. However, the
Commission continues to leverage its prior cloud investments to
modernize its analytics capabilities and expand the Commission's use of
advanced analytics tools, such as artificial intelligence, in the cloud
environment. Transitioning the Commission's legacy data environment to
the cloud provides for many efficiencies and capabilities. Primary
among these efficiencies and capabilities are a reduction in
administrative maintenance costs, access to more modern analytical
tools, and the ability to meaningfully analyze certain market data for
the first time.
The Commission collects and maintains a wide range of data to
support its mission of fostering open, transparent, competitive, and
financially sound markets. Over time, the expansion of electronic and
automated trading in markets overseen by the Commission has led to the
Commission ingesting and managing over 15 billion records per day. Some
of these data sets reflecting certain market activity, such as orders
submitted to designated contract markets, were so large that it was
challenging to meaningfully process and analyze those data sets in the
Commission's legacy on-premise data environment. For these extremely
large data sets, the transition to a cloud environment enabled the
Commission to access the data storage and processing capabilities
necessary to more efficiently and more meaningfully analyze data
representing certain market activity.

Question 4a. Chairman Behnam, with a move to the cloud, the CFTC is
now exposed to the same sort of vendor risk that many market
participants are exposed to. What steps is the Commission taking to
ensure that its incredibly sensitive market data is never exposed to
the public or misused internally?
Answer. The Commission takes its responsibility to secure data as a
fundamental tenant of our operational philosophy, and has a robust
program designed to address threats to our security posture. Security
of the Commission's cloud environment is protected as mandated in
FEDRAMP directives. The Commission has a continuous monitoring program
established on the cloud environment to ensure that our environment
remains compliant with the latest security requirements. We also have
implemented security controls which limit connections between our main
analytical data environment and the outside internet. The result of
these controls is that assets on our data environment are not
discoverable from the outside internet. Additionally, the Commission is
actively working to implement a Data Loss Prevention program in our
environment as required in EO 14028 to protect against the threat of
internal misuse.
Questions Submitted by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Question 1. In its October 2022 Report on Digital Asset Financial
Stability Risks and Regulation, the Financial Stability Oversight
Council (FSOC) recommended that agencies (including the CFTC) conduct a
full analysis of the impact of vertical integration on conflicts of
interest, market volatility, and whether that type of market structure
should be accommodated. However, the Commission moved forward with a
proposed rule regarding clearing member funds at clearing houses even
though the proposal promotes a type of vertical integration by
facilitating a direct-to-retail clearing market structure by placing
futures commission merchant (FCM) responsibilities inside the DCO.

Has the Commission conducted this FSOC recommended analysis,
and if so what were the results and why wasn't it included or
referenced in the proposed rule?

If the Commission has not conducted this analysis, why did
you put this proposal before the Commission without completing
the analysis first?

Does the CFTC disagree with the FSOC's 2022 October Report's
recommendation or is it just ignoring it?

Answer. The FSOC report recommended an assessment as to whether
vertically integrated market structures can or should be accommodated
under existing laws and regulations. At the time FSOC issued its report
in October 2022, the CFTC had approved five DCOs for non-intermediated
clearing: North American Derivatives Exchange in 2004; Natural Gas
Exchange in 2008; Cantor Clearinghouse in 2010; LedgerX in 2017; and
Eris Clearing in 2019. In other words, non-intermediated clearing has
been permitted for 20 years and is not a new market structure.
Because participants--including natural persons who may be
considered retail--at non-intermediated DCOs are not customers of FCMs,
their funds do not receive the same protection provided for the funds
of customers of FCM clearing members under the CEA. Thus far the
Commission has attempted to provide some measure of protection through
conditions to each DCO's order of registration, but given that five of
the 16 DCOs now registered with the Commission provide non-
intermediated clearing, it was long past time for the Commission to
promulgate rules to thoroughly protect participant funds held by DCOs.
It would be irresponsible for the Commission to further delay those
necessary protections.

Question 2. The Commission moved forward with last December's
proposed rule regarding clearing member funds at clearinghouses or DCOs
(derivative clearing organizations) without addressing issues and
questions about anti-money laundering (AML), know-your-customer (KYC)
standards, and countering terrorist financing (CTF). These are
important requirements which are currently applicable to futures
commission merchants (FCMs) but do not yet apply to clearinghouses or
DCOs (derivative clearing organizations) under the proposed rule. I
know the Commission is currently reviewing its authority to apply such
AML, KYC, and CTF standards on clearinghouses.

Do you believe it is appropriate to finalize this proposed
rule and expand direct clearing for retail customers without
having these standards in place at DCOs.

Will you commit to not finalize this rule unless AMC, KYC,
and CTF protocols are either already in place or apply
currently with the final rule?

Answer. I agree that AML, KYC, and CTF are important issues, and
CFTC staff continues to analyze the Commission's authority to apply
AML, KYC, and CTF requirements to DCOs. But AML, KYC, and CTF are
separate and distinct issues from the protection of participant funds.
In the case of AML requirements, the statutory framework requires the
aid of FinCEN to designate DCOs as financial institutions, and staff
have been in contact with FinCEN staff and have requested that aid.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 31 U.S.C.  5312(a)(2) defines the set of ``financial
institutions'' that are subject to AML requirements in a manner that
does not include DCOs. Paragraph (a)(2)(Y), however, allows Treasury to
include, by regulation, additional businesses that perform similar
functions as financial institutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Permitting DCOs that engage in direct clearing of fully
collateralized contracts (with no leverage, extension of credit, or
potential for margin calls) for retail participants to pursue margined
clearing (with potential for margin calls, or liquidation if those are
not met) also raises important issues which staff are considering, but
this issue is also distinct from the protection of participant funds
held by DCOs.

Question 3. Currently, future commission merchants (FCMs) are
required to hold customer funds at a bank, trust or a CFTC-regulated
entity. That requirement is absent for member funds held by a
clearinghouse and is not added in the recently proposed rule regarding
clearing member funds at clearing houses. In its current form, the
proposed rule would allow clearinghouses to place the funds anywhere,
even an affiliate. Given the experience with FTX, do you think the rule
should be amended to impose a similar requirement on clearinghouses
directly holding ``member'' funds as FCMs have when holding customer
funds? Why or why not?
Answer. I also agree it is important that both FCM customer funds,
and direct participant funds, be held in depositories where the funds
will be safe. Currently, the CEA and CFTC regulations only require that
FCM customer funds be held in a bank or trust company, which I believe
is insufficient in light of recent bank failures (i.e., Silvergate
Bank) or the potentially limited assurances of safety that certain
trust companies may provide. I have directed staff to consider
standards for banks and trust companies acting as depositories for FCM
customer funds and direct participant funds. In the meantime, CFTC
staff use DCO Core Principle F in the CEA, which requires DCOs to
establish procedures to protect and ensure the safety of member and
participant funds, as a means to require that DCOs use safe
depositories--being a bank or trust company alone does not suffice.
All of these issues--protection of participant funds, AML, KYC, and
CFT, as well as which depositories should be considered sufficiently
safe--are important. The latter two sets of issues are complex, and
resolving them will take time. I cannot, in good conscience, allow
participant funds to remain insufficiently protected while these other
issues are sorted out, which is why I intend to proceed with finalizing
the rule.

[all]
