- EXAMINING THE CONSEQUENCES OF EPA'S ACTIONS ON AMERICAN AGRICULTURE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE CONSEQUENCES OF EPA'S
ACTIONS ON AMERICAN AGRICULTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

JULY 10, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-22

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

-------

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-627 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Ranking
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia, Vice            Minority Member
Chairman                             JIM COSTA, California
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
DOUG LaMALFA, California             ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             SHONTEL M. BROWN, Ohio
DON BACON, Nebraska                  SHARICE DAVIDS, Kansas
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota          YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana              ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
TRACEY MANN, Kansas                  MARIE GLUESENKAMP PEREZ,
RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa                   Washington
MARY E. MILLER, Illinois             DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina,
BARRY MOORE, Alabama                   Vice Ranking Minority Member
KAT CAMMACK, Florida                 JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              NIKKI BUDZINSKI, Illinois
JOHN W. ROSE, Tennessee              ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
MARCUS J. MOLINARO, New York         JASMINE CROCKETT, Texas
MONICA De La CRUZ, Texas             JONATHAN L. JACKSON, Illinois
NICHOLAS A. LANGWORTHY, New York     GREG CASAR, Texas
JOHN S. DUARTE, California           CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ZACHARY NUNN, Iowa                   SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota
DERRICK VAN ORDEN, Wisconsin         DARREN SOTO, Florida
LORI CHAVEZ-DeREMER, Oregon          SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
MAX L. MILLER, Ohio
______

Parish Braden, Staff Director
Anne Simmons, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Langworthy, Hon. Nicholas A., a Representative in Congress from
New York, submitted letter.....................................    77
Scott, Hon. Austin, a Representative in Congress from Georgia,
submitted letter...............................................    76
Scott, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from Georgia,
opening statement..............................................     4
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
Pennsylvania, opening statement................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Submitted letter.............................................    75

Witnesses

Kippley, Jeff, Vice President, National Farmers Union,
Washington, D.C................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Chinn, Chris, Director, Missouri Department of Agriculture;
Midwestern Region President, National Association of State
Departments of Agriculture; Chair, Plant Agriculture and
Pesticide Regulation Policy Committee, NASDA, Jefferson City,
MO.............................................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Cooper, Gary A., Chief Operating Officer, Cooper Farms, Oakwood,
OH; on behalf of National Pork Producers Council...............    19
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Larson, Ph.D., Rebecca L., Vice President, Chief Scientist, and
Governmental Affairs, Western Sugar Cooperative, Denver, CO....    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Submitted question...........................................    80

EXAMINING THE CONSEQUENCES OF EPA'S
ACTIONS ON AMERICAN AGRICULTURE

----------

WEDNESDAY JULY 10, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.House of Representatives,Committee on
AgricultureWashington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:00 p.m., in Room
1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Glenn
Thompson [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Thompson, Lucas, Austin
Scott of Georgia, Crawford, DesJarlais, LaMalfa, Rouzer, Kelly,
Bacon, Bost, Johnson, Baird, Mann, Feenstra, Miller of
Illinois, Moore, Cammack, Finstad, Rose, Jackson of Texas,
Molinaro, De La Cruz, Langworthy, Duarte, Nunn, Alford, Van
Orden, Chavez-DeRemer, Miller of Ohio, David Scott of Georgia,
Costa, McGovern, Adams, Spanberger, Hayes, Brown, Davids of
Kansas, Slotkin, Caraveo, Salinas, Perez, Davis of North
Carolina, Budzinski, Sorensen, Crockett, Jackson of Illinois,
Casar, Carbajal, Craig, and Soto.
Staff present: Wick Dudley, Halee Fisher, Tim Fitzgerald,
Ricki Schroeder, Patricia Straughn, Daniel Feingold, Ari
Perlmutter, Ashley Smith, Michael Stein, John Konya, and Dana
Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GLENN THOMPSON, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM PENNSYLVANIA

The Chairman. The Committee will come to order. Good
afternoon, everyone. Thank you for joining today's hearing
entitled, Examining the Consequences of EPA's Actions on
American Agriculture. After brief opening remarks, Members will
receive testimony from our witnesses today, and then the
hearing will be open to questions.
So, once again, good afternoon, and welcome to today's
hearing.
American farmers and ranchers are the original
conservationists. No one cares more for the environment than
those whose livelihoods depend on it. They work tirelessly to
ensure consumers have the safest, most abundant, and most
affordable food and fiber supply in the world.
Agriculture is unlike any other industry, where producers
are at the mercy of many uncontrollable factors including
extreme weather, natural disasters, pests and diseases, input
costs, and geopolitical unrest. What producers should not have
to worry about is the Federal Government working against them.
Unfortunately, the Biden Administration has compounded this
uncertainty with an unworkable regulatory regime that creates
even greater costs and ambiguity for our farmers and ranchers.
Because of the concerns this Committee has heard from
agricultural communities across the country, I was pleased to
host a hearing last April with Administrator Regan to talk
about the impact the Administration's actions have on American
agriculture. That hearing marked the first time an EPA
Administrator appeared before the Committee since 2016.
At that hearing, Administrator Regan repeatedly indicated
his willingness to work with farmers and ranchers as his agency
promulgated rules and regulations impacting their livelihoods.
While those statements appeared encouraging, since that
hearing, the agency has announced an onslaught of rules and
regulations that contradict these collaborative statements.
Not only is the agency targeting specific crop protection
tools that are important to production, it is also
fundamentally changing the pesticide registration and
registration review process.
Last summer, the EPA published the draft Vulnerable Species
Pilot Program and the draft Herbicide Strategy that will
directly impact the ability of producers to utilize these
critical tools and will cost billions to comply with. Even this
Administration's own U.S. Department of Agriculture expressed
significant concerns with these actions.
The Biden Administration's attacks on American agriculture
do not stop at crop protection tools. Earlier this year, the
EPA published a proposed rule that significantly changes the
effluent limitation guidelines for meat and poultry processing.
While Biden's USDA spends millions to supposedly expand
meat and poultry processing capacity, his EPA is simultaneously
proposing rules that would shutter processing plants and impose
significant compliance costs across industries vital to food
affordability.
These two examples of where USDA is directly at odds with
the EPA during this Administration are further proof that the
left hand does not know what the far-left hand is doing and
illustrates President Biden's continued failed leadership.
Further, the EPA has exacerbated the uncertainty
surrounding what constitutes waters of the United States and is
also considering a rule to require reporting of livestock air
emissions under the Emergency Planning and Community Right to
Know Act (Pub. L. 99-499).
Unfortunately, the EPA's war on agriculture does not end
here. Numerous other actions related to the Clean Air Act, the
Clean Water Act, and other statutes within EPA's jurisdiction
undermine the ability of producers to effectively manage their
operations.
I appreciate the Administrator's intent to work with the
agricultural community; however, something is clearly broken
with the current process. There's a disconnect between the
rhetoric of this Administration and the impact of their
regulatory actions on the ground. This is why I extended an
invitation last December for Administrator Regan to reappear
before the Committee.
Despite multiple requests since December, the Biden
Administration refuses to make Administrator Regan available
for requests by the Committee. Staff from the agency have even
said that: ``for Administrator Regan to appear a second time in
14 months would be unprecedented.''
I would argue the EPA's approach to punishing American
farmers and ranchers through regulation under this
Administration is also unprecedented.
Wrongheaded and often heavy-handed regulations are exactly
why producers do not trust the EPA and why I frequently hear it
referred to as the Excessive Punishment Agency. Simply put, the
EPA under the Biden Administration does not understand American
agriculture or rural America, nor do they understand the
consequences of their actions.
I am disappointed in too many of Administrator Regan's
misguided actions during his tenure and am even more
disappointed by his failure to timely comply with Congressional
requests for testimony. We look forward, at the Administrator's
convenience of course, to making his trip down Pennsylvania
Avenue to appear before the Committee.
With that said, the testimony of rural America through our
esteemed witnesses, some traveling from across the country,
cannot wait. And we thank all of you for your time and your
engagement.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Glenn Thompson, a Representative in Congress
from Pennsylvania

Good afternoon, and welcome to today's hearing to examine the
consequences of EPA's actions on American agriculture.
American farmers and ranchers are the original conservationists--no
one cares more for the environment than those whose livelihoods depend
on it. They work tirelessly to ensure consumers have the safest, most
abundant, and most affordable food and fiber supply in the world.
Agriculture is unlike any other industry, where producers are at
the mercy of many uncontrollable factors including extreme weather,
natural disasters, pests and diseases, input costs, and geopolitical
unrest. What producers should not have to worry about is the Federal
Government working against them.
Unfortunately, the Biden Administration has compounded this
uncertainty with an unworkable regulatory regime that creates even
greater costs and ambiguity for our farmers and ranchers.
Because of the concerns this Committee has heard from agricultural
communities across the country, I was pleased to host a hearing last
April with Administrator Regan to talk about the impact the
Administration's actions have on American agriculture. That hearing
marked the first time an EPA Administrator appeared before the
Committee since 2016.
At that hearing, Administrator Regan repeatedly indicated his
willingness to work with farmers and ranchers as his Agency promulgated
rules and regulations impacting their livelihoods.
While those statements appeared encouraging, since that hearing,
the Agency has announced an onslaught of rules and regulations that
contradict these collaborative statements.
Not only is the Agency targeting specific crop protection tools
that are important to production, it is also fundamentally changing the
pesticide registration and registration review process.
Last summer, the EPA published the draft Vulnerable Species Pilot
Program and the draft Herbicide Strategy that will directly impact the
ability of producers to utilize these critical tools and will cost
billions to comply with. Even this Administration's own U.S. Department
of Agriculture expressed significant concerns with these actions.
The Biden Administration's attacks on American agriculture do not
stop at crop protection tools.
Earlier this year, the EPA published a proposed rule that
significantly changes the effluent limitation guidelines for meat and
poultry processing.
While Biden's USDA spends millions to--supposedly--expand meat and
poultry processing capacity, his EPA is simultaneously proposing a rule
that would shutter processing plants and impose significant compliance
costs across industries vital to food affordability.
These two examples of where USDA is directly at odds with the EPA
during this Administration are further proof that the left hand does
not know what the far-left hand is doing, and illustrates President
Biden's continued, failed leadership.
Further, the EPA has exacerbated the uncertainty surrounding what
constitutes waters of the United States and is also considering a rule
to require reporting of livestock air emissions under the Emergency
Planning and Community Right to Know Act.
Unfortunately, the EPA's war on agriculture does not end here.
Numerous other actions related to the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water
Act, and other statutes within EPA's jurisdiction undermine the ability
of producers to effectively manage their operations.
I appreciate the Administrator's intent to work with the
agricultural community; however, something is clearly broken with the
current process. There's a disconnect between the rhetoric of this
Administration and the impact of their regulatory actions on the
ground. This is why I extended an invitation last December for
Administrator Regan to reappear before the Committee.
Despite multiple requests since December, the Biden Administration
refuses to make Administrator Regan available for requests by the
Committee. Staff from the Agency have even said that: ``for
Administrator Regan to appear a second time in fourteen months would be
unprecedented.''
I would argue the EPA's approach to punishing American farmers and
ranchers through regulation under this Administration is also
unprecedented.
Wrongheaded and often heavy-handed regulations are exactly why
producers do not trust the EPA and why I frequently hear it referred to
as the Excessive Punishment Agency.
Simply put, the EPA under the Biden Administration does not
understand American agriculture or rural America, nor do they
understand the consequences of their actions.
I am disappointed in too many of Administrator Regan's misguided
actions during his tenure and am even more disappointed by his failure
to timely comply with Congressional requests for testimony. We look
forward, at the Administrator's convenience of course, to making his
trip down Pennsylvania Avenue to appear before the Committee.
With that said, the testimony of rural America through our esteemed
witnesses, some traveling from across the country, cannot wait. And we
thank all of you for your time and engagement.
I now yield to the distinguished Ranking Member, Mr. Scott.

The Chairman. With that, I would now like to welcome the
distinguished Ranking Member, the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott, for any opening remarks that he would like to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SCOTT, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM GEORGIA

Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. I would like to thank our
witnesses for coming today, and providing their valuable
testimony on the EPA.
But before I get to today's hearing, I must express my deep
concerns about Chairman Thompson's willingness to forego the
farm bill. His stubborn refusal to engage on a bipartisan farm
bill is irresponsible for the American people, especially our
farmers who feed, fuel, clothe, and house our nation. Since our
very divisive markup almost 2 months ago, there has been
absolutely no progress on Chairman Thompson's bipartisan bill.
This delay hurts the American people, especially in rural
communities where our farms are, and it injects uncertainty
into our nation's economies, both rural and urban.
This willingness to delay the bill to play election year
politics is selfish. It is disrespectful to our farmers who
depend on us for their livelihoods to pass a bipartisan farm
bill. And this is not just a farm bill. This is also a national
security bill. Let us not be cute about this, ladies and
gentlemen. Food security is most definitely now a national
security, and Chairman Thompson knows this. He put it in the
title of the farm bill's hearing. It is the Farm, Food, and
National Security Act (H.R. 8467).
And you know, I thought about this. I had a word with
Speaker Johnson. My feeling is Speaker Johnson will not bring
this bill to the floor for a vote because it was not written as
a serious bill. It was written to be used as a campaign slogan,
nothing more.
Chairman Thompson can prove me wrong. All he has to do is
bring to the floor and put it up to a vote.
Now, in 2007, just 1 week after Democratic then-Chairman
Collin Peterson marked up his farm bill, I was there in 2007,
and Speaker Pelosi brought it to the House floor. She brought
it up in 2 weeks in July, which is the height now of
appropriations season. Because she brought it up, because it
was important, it was vital, we had urgency then. And since
2002, I have served on this Committee. After being elected in
2002, I have gone through the farm bills. I have been to
witness there, and I remember and I know what happened. And
even when our Republican Speaker, Speaker Boehner, who was a
good friend of mine, and Ryan, each brought up Chairmen Lucas's
bill and Conaway's respective farm bills only a month after
their markups. I was there then. We passed the most
comprehensive, bipartisan piece of legislation, and biracial,
in the 1890s scholarship during that momentous bill.
And here we are, 2 months past our markup, with the
calendar running out.
Ladies and gentlemen, August recess is right around the
corner. We will all be gone. We come back here in September,
and a week is gone there, and then the new appropriations year
starts 3 weeks later, October 1. Where are my Republican
friends? I will tell you where. They are scheduling votes on
refrigerators and dishwashers now. I don't have anything
against household appliances, but we are talking about people's
lives. We are talking about food security and national
security.
I do not want any more excuses. I appreciate you all taking
the time to hear my plea. It is time to fish or cut bait.
America deserves this farm bill, this national security bill.
Since the markup, Speaker Johnson has not indicated any
intention of moving Chairman Thompson's bill. That is why I am
talking to you. We are urgent here. We have to move. Treat this
bill as the title says. It is the farm bill. But most
importantly, it is a national security bill.
And I want to thank you all for hearing this plea. Our
farmers want action this year, not next. Our business community
wants action now, this year. Our families want action, and
therefore, I encourage my Republican colleagues: let's stop
playing politics, and just face reality, and let us move ahead
as we should.
And now, I would like to continue now with my remarks
briefly for our excellent panelists here with the EPA. I want
to thank you for coming, and I want you to know we are looking
forward to having your explicit testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. There is a lot I
could say, but I am not going to say anything. We are going to
move ahead with this hearing and stay grounded in reality.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so our witnesses may begin
their testimony and to ensure that there is ample time for
questions.
Our first witness today is Mr. Jeff Kippley, Vice President
of the National Farmers Union. To introduce our second witness
today, I am pleased to yield to the gentleman from Missouri,
Mr. Alford.
Mr. Alford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do appreciate
your leadership in passing a bipartisan farm bill out of this
Committee some 2 months ago in this very room, unless I was
dreaming.
Mr. Chairman, it is a distinct honor to introduce Director
Chris Chinn as Missouri's Director of Agriculture. Director
Chinn is a fifth-generation farmer from Clarence, Missouri,
where she and her family raise hogs, cattle, corn, soybeans,
and hay. She has served as Missouri's Director of Agriculture
since 2017 and chairs NASDA's Plant Agriculture and Pesticide
Committee, and the Midwest Association of State Departments of
Agriculture.
I am also proud to know Director Chinn on a personal level,
and to have worked with her throughout my time here in
Congress.
Director Chinn, of course, spent the day with us, Mr.
Chairman, a fun day at the Missouri State Fair just last year.
This is the same state fair where I have mentioned before that
Jonathan Jackson milked a cow. We have photographic proof of
that, and Representative Monica De La Cruz was there as well.
Director Chinn was a big part of the farm bill listening
session that we had there, along with the Governor and
Lieutenant Governor, and I glad that we could hear about the
concerns of our producers together and incorporate and fold
those into this bipartisan farm bill.
She is a champion for farmers and ranchers across the
United States of America and her knowledge and experience will
be a vital part of today's discussion. I look forward to
hearing your testimony.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Our third witness today is Mr. Gary Cooper, Chief Operating
Officer of Cooper Farms, and our fourth and final witness today
is Dr. Rebecca Larson, who is the Vice President, Chief
Scientist, and Governmental Affairs for the Western Sugar
Cooperative.
To all of our witnesses, thank you so much for joining us
today. You each have 5 minutes for your oral testimony. The
timer in front of you will count down to zero, at which point
your time is expired.
Mr. Kippley, please begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF JEFF KIPPLEY, VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL
FARMERS UNION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Kippley. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Scott, and
the Members of this Committee, thank you for the invitation to
testify about EPA's impact on American agriculture.
I am a farmer from Aberdeen, South Dakota, and I raise
cattle, corn, and soybeans along with my wife, Rachel, and my
father, John. Rachel and I have four children who participate
in our farm operation. In addition to farming, our family
operates a tax service business in Aberdeen, in which we help
family farmers complete their taxes.
I also serve as Vice President of the National Farmers
Union. NFU is a grassroots organization with more than 230,000
members nationwide, and we advocate on behalf of family farmers
and ranchers and our communities.
To build a successful business over the long-term, I need
my operation to be profitable. Sometimes, I worry that the
wrong Federal regulations could harm my business, but I also
know that it is important to have practical rules of the road
by which everyone must abide. Properly designed and enforced
regulations help protect us all from bad actors.
I believe sustainability isn't only about profitability,
but also about being a good steward of the land, air, and
water. Reasonable environmental regulations can leave everyone
better off if they are science-based, size- and risk-
appropriate, clear, and easy to follow.
EPA plays an essential role in protecting our environment,
but the Agency should do more to limit the impacts of its
regulations on family farmers and ranchers. One of the best
ways to do this is through regular engagement and partnership
with farmers and communities. We commend the Agency for
creating the new Office of Agriculture and Rural Affairs.
Farmers Union looks forward to working with the EPA and this
Committee to ensure our voices are heard clearly by the agency.
EPA regulations and programs affect farmers in many ways,
and I do not have time to touch on all of these issues, but I
would like to highlight a few.
One issue that has been especially troubling for farmers is
the definition of WOTUS, or waters of the United States, under
the Clean Water Act. The game of regulatory ping-pong over
WOTUS has gone on far too long. Like everyone else, we want
simplicity and clarity. EPA says with its latest rulemaking
that it has tried to establish a durable WOTUS definition, and
we hope this issue will be settled soon.
EPA has a very important role relating to crop protection
products through FIFRA and PRIA. Most farmers don't have the
scientific expertise to evaluate crop protection products for
safety, but we know these products are essential for our
operations. EPA's rules, oversight, and labeling guidelines
help keep us safe.
I want to thank my South Dakota Congressman Dusty Johnson
for introducing the Agriculture Labeling Uniformity Act (H.R.
4288) to reinforce EPA's existing Federal authority to regulate
pesticides through FIFRA.
If done right, legislative and regulatory actions can
create economic development opportunities for rural communities
and family farmers. That is certainly true of the Renewable
Fuel Standard. The RFS has been the most successful clean fuel
policy in the United States by making renewable fuel more
affordable, creating jobs, and reviving rural economies in
reducing oil imports and air pollution. Future action by the
EPA should support the program's growth and success, including
through the upcoming RFS SET 2 rulemaking. We support EPA's
move to year-round sales of E15 and there is still further
growth to E30.
We also appreciate the Administration's focus on
sustainable aviation fuel and hope the Committee will support
the adoption of agriculture feedstocks to the SAF production.
EPA is an important ally in supporting farmers' right to
repair. It is incredibly important that farmers have the option
to fix their own equipment, or go to an independent mechanic of
our choosing, just like everyone can with their cars and
trucks. But some farm equipment manufacturers believe farmers
cannot be trusted to repair their own equipment and use
software to lock down certain repairs. This can cost us our
crops when dealer-authorized repairs are difficult to access,
unavailable, or just too costly. Some farm equipment
manufacturers and dealers have invoked the EPA's clean air
regulation on tractor emission control systems as a reason to
restrict farmers' access to independent repair. This claim is
false and misleading, so NFU wrote EPA Administrator Regan last
year asking him to clarify this issue. In his reply,
Administrator Regan affirmed the EPA's regulations support
independent repair and that independent repair doesn't
facilitate emission tampering. We urge Congress to ensure the
right to repair.
I appreciate the Committee's diligent oversight of the EPA.
Thank you for holding this hearing and for the opportunity to
testify. I look forward to answering any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kippley follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jeff Kippley, Vice President, National Farmers
Union, Washington, D.C.

Good afternoon, Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Scott, and
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture. Thank you for the
invitation to testify and to be part of this hearing to shed light on
how the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) affects family farmers
and ranchers. My name is Jeff Kippley and I am a farmer from Aberdeen,
South Dakota, where my wife, Rachel, and father, John, and I raise
cattle, corn, and soybeans. Rachel and I have four children, Noah,
Titus, Aaron, and Moriah, and they all participate in the farming
operation as well. We also operate a tax preparation service, The
Kippley Group, which serves family farmers in our local community.
I serve as Vice President of National Farmers Union (NFU). Founded
in 1902, NFU is a grassroots organization with more than 230,000
members nationwide advocating on behalf of family farmers, ranchers,
and our communities. In my role as NFU Vice President, I work closely
with Farmers Union leaders and members across the country to bolster
our organization's efforts to ensure a sustainable and equitable future
for family farmers and ranchers through education, cooperation, and
legislation.

Achieving Greater Regulatory Certainty, Clarity, and Fairness
As a farmer, to build a successful business over the long-term, I
need my operation to be profitable. Sometimes I worry that the wrong
rules could put me out of business, but I also know that having
reasonable regulations--practical rules of the road that everyone must
abide by--is very important. Properly designed and enforced regulations
help protect family farmers like me from bad actors who use harmful and
exploitative practices.
For me, sustainability is not only about profitability on our farm
but also being a good steward of our land, air, and water. Many farmers
are excellent stewards of our nation's natural resources. Reasonable
environmental regulations can leave everyone better off if they are
science-based, size- and risk-appropriate, clear, and reasonably easy
to follow. Unfortunately, sometimes regulators make compliance too
challenging. I know this all too well because I am an accountant, so it
my job to help my customers comply with our complicated Tax Code.
As EPA works to protect the environment, it should also seek to
limit the impact of its regulations on family farmers and ranchers by
making sure those regulations are not overly burdensome. EPA should be
commended for its efforts to improve engagement with agricultural
communities, but there is much more EPA could do to improve that
partnership. I know Farmers Union looks forward to working with EPA and
this Committee to ensure the voices of family farmers and ranchers are
heard clearly by the Agency.

WOTUS
Clean, safe water is an essential resource that family farmers,
ranchers, and their communities depend on. Farmers and ranchers strive
to be good stewards of our nation's natural resources, including by
protecting water quality through sound land management practices.
Unfortunately, ambiguous or confusing regulations regarding the
definition of Waters of the United States (WOTUS) under the Clean Water
Act (CWA) have made compliance difficult and costly.
The regulatory uncertainty created by frequently changing
definitions of WOTUS has troubled farmers for many years. NFU
repeatedly provided input to the EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers on
its rulemakings, and we asked the agencies to promulgate rules that
will provide a clear definition of WOTUS.\1\ NFU also urged the
agencies to consult farmers and ranchers regularly, extensively, and
equitably and consider the legitimate concerns of family farmers and
ranchers and others who are regulated by the CWA.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Farmers Union, ``NFU WOTUS Comments Urge Inclusive
Rulemaking Process,'' Feb. 8, 2022. https://nfu.org/2022/02/08/nfu-
wotus-comments-urge-inclusive-rulemaking-process/.
\2\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NFU appreciates the agencies' stated efforts to establish durable
rules that define the scope of waters protected under the CWA. But the
regulatory game of ping pong continues. Last year EPA finalized a new
WOTUS rule, only to have the Supreme Court strike down important
aspects of the rule, which further contributes to ongoing uncertainty
with the WOTUS statutory and regulatory regime.
3, 4

Ultimately, Farmers Union members wish for the courts and agencies to
balance the important goal of protecting water quality with rules that
are clear, simple, and not burdensome for farmers and ranchers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Revised Definition of ``Waters of the United States,'' 33 CFR 
328, 40 CFR  120 (2023). https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/
2023/01/18/2022-28595/revised-definition-of-waters-of-the-united-
states.
\4\ Sackett v. EPA, 598 U.S. ____ (2023). https://
www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/22pdf/21-454_4g15.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

FIFRA and PRIA
For decades, farmers have relied on EPA to make informed crop
protection decisions regarding pesticide use. The Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA), as enforced by EPA, has long
been a trusted Federal resource, having originally been administered by
USDA and then transferred over to EPA during its formation in 1970.
Rules surrounding FIFRA are intended to protect farmers by requiring
accurate labeling of pesticide contents. As the Federal statute that
governs registration, distribution, sale, and use of pesticides, FIFRA
provides farmers and consumers certainty and stability.
The primary objective of FIFRA is to ensure that, when applied as
instructed, pesticides will not cause unreasonable risk to human health
or the environment. Backed by science, the use of registered products
gives farmers the assurance that they are doing their part to ensure
the safety of their farm, their neighbors, and the environment. Any
additional requirements outside of FIFRA, whether it be permitting,
training, education or any other new requirements not posted by FIFRA
makes it difficult and confusing for farmers to keep track of and
potentially raises human safety and environmental concerns.
The Agricultural Labeling Uniformity Act (H.R. 4288), introduced in
the House by Representative Dusty Johnson (R-SD), reinforces EPA's
existing Federal authority to regulate pesticides through FIFRA.\5\
This would also ensure uniformity of labeling standards for various
crop protection products, which helps farmers stay informed and
compliant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Agricultural Labeling Uniformity Act, H.R.4288, 118th Cong.
(2023). https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/house-bill/4288.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Funding for EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs and the continued
authorization of the Pesticide Registration Improvement Act (PRIA) is
also important for the future of pesticide use, pest management, and
overall crop protection. First passed in 2004, PRIA is a fee-for-
service program that funds part of the EPA's pesticide registration
program. Fees collected from pesticide manufacturers provide EPA with
the necessary resources to register new pesticide products. In turn,
the rules support business predictability within the pesticide
registration process, giving companies established timelines for
bringing new products and uses to the marketplace. PRIA was last
reauthorized by Congress in 2022 and is set to expire on September 30,
2027.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ ``The Pesticide Registration Improvement Act of 2022 (PRIA 5;
Division HH, Title VI of P.L. 117-328): Authority to Collect Fees,''
Congressional Research Service. 2024. https://crsreports.congress.gov/
product/pdf/IF/IF10424.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dicamba
Farmers need to know what rules will be in place when planning for
future seasons, but judicial decisions and regulatory actions can
sometimes present challenges. Recent activity on Dicamba is a prime
example of this. On February 14, 2024, EPA issued an Existing Stocks
Order to allow for the sale and distribution of Dicamba products that
were previously registered for over-the-top (OTT) use on Dicamba-
tolerant cotton and soybeans.\7\ The order allowed for limited sale and
distribution of these products for the 2024 growing season but did not
offer any clarity for 2025 or beyond. This decision was based on a
District of Arizona court order that determined Dicamba products were
no longer registered or lawful under FIFRA.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Revision to
February 14, 2024 Existing Stocks Order for Dicamba Products Previously
Registered for Over-the-Top Use on Dicamba-Tolerant Cotton and Soybean,
Mar. 12, 2024. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2024-03/
revised-dicamba-notice-existing-stocks-order.pdf.
\8\ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (2024, February 6). Center
for Biological Diversity, et al., Plaintiffs, v. United States
Environmental Protection Agency, et al., Defendants, and Bayer
Cropscience LP, et al. Nationalaglawcenter.org. https://
nationalaglawcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/FILE_3676.pdf..
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NFU joined a group letter asking EPA Administrator Michael Regan to
intervene with the recent court ruling to vacate the registrations for
over-the-top Dicamba.\9\ These products are vital to current production
systems, and the court decision threatens to create chaos in
distribution chains, especially during harvest season. As EPA continues
to work with USDA, Congress also needs to prioritize EPA's Office of
Pesticide Programs' budget. In an annual report to Congress on the
agency's user-fee system, EPA reported that the $132 million
appropriated for pesticide programs is about $34 million short of an
annual target set out in FIFRA, and is $6 million below what was
appropriated in Fiscal Year 2023.\10\ Prioritizing EPA's budget will
allow the agency to continue to move forward with Dicamba-related
decisions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ National Farmers Union, Vacatur of registrations for Over the
Top (OTT) applications of Dicamba herbicide Center for Biological
Diversity v. EPA, No. CV-20-00555-TUC-DCB, Feb. 14, 2024. https://
nfu.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/02/02-14-24-Ag-Organizations-Dicamba-
Letter-FINAL.pdf.
\10\ EPA, FY 2023 Pesticide Registration Improvement Act (PRIA)
Annual Report. EPA.gov. https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/
2024-05/fy23-pria-annual-report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Clean Air Act and Right to Repair
EPA's role in enforcing laws also means that it ought to clarify
how regulations apply--or do not apply--to major issues within the
agency's purview. One example is EPA's recent actions ensuring there is
greater Fairness for Farmers in the farm equipment marketplace through
Clean Air Act (CAA) regulations that support farmers' Right to Repair.
Farmers Union believes that farmers should have the Right to Repair
their own equipment or to bring that equipment to the mechanic of their
choosing. However, it seems some farm equipment manufacturers believe
that farmers cannot be trusted to repair their own equipment. Equipment
manufacturers and dealers use software locks to keep farmers and
independent mechanics from completing repairs. This can cost farmers
their crop when dealer-authorized repair is difficult to access or
unavailable, and the monopolization of repair costs farmers billions of
dollars each year.
Some farm equipment manufacturers and dealers have invoked CAA
regulations--specifically, the need to lock down emissions control
systems--as a reason they must restrict farmers' repair access. When
NFU researched this claim, it seemed to be false and misleading, so we
wrote EPA Administrator Regan last year asking him to clarify the CAA
with respect to the Right to Repair.\11\ In August 2023, Administrator
Regan responded to NFU's letter, clarifying that EPA supports farmers'
Right to Repair and disagrees with the assertions being made by some
equipment manufacturers and dealers, writing:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ National Farmers Union, Request for clarification from the EPA
that agricultural equipment manufacturer-imposed restrictions on
independent repair are not required by the Clean Air Act, June 13,
2023. https://files.constantcontact.com/63400020701/e2cf116e-c8dc-427b-
a9bb-474b7f4206af.pdf?rdr=true.

``Your letter . . . discusses the important anti-tampering
provisions of the Act, and your concern that certain
manufacturers may be mischaracterizing the implications of
those provisions for independent repair . . . The Act,
implementing regulations, and EPA's policy and practice are
aligned in preventing tampering not by limiting access to
independent repair, but rather by enforcing the prohibition
against tampering against any party that does so . . . Like NFU
and its members, EPA believes barriers to the proper repair and
maintenance of non-road equipment is harmful to the environment
. . . We support efforts by anyone to enact legislation
clarifying that independent repair is allowable, provided such
efforts continue to clearly prohibit illegal tampering of
emissions control systems.'' \12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ National Farmers Union, ``EPA Affirms Farmers' Right to
Repair,'' Aug. 8, 2023. https://nfu.org/2023/08/08/epa-affirms-farmers-
right-to-repair/.

The message is clear: independent repair does not facilitate
emissions tampering. We have greatly appreciated EPA's engagement and
responsiveness on this important issue and will continue to work with
EPA to ensure all farmers have the Right to Repair.

The Renewable Fuel Standard and Biofuels
Reasonable legislative and regulatory actions can create economic
development opportunities for rural communities and family farmers and
ranchers. A prime example of this is the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS)
program, authorized in 2005 and expanded in 2007, which is intended to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and expand the biofuels sector. It has
been the most successful clean fuels policy in the U.S. and makes
renewable fuel more affordable for millions of Americans, helps to
generate jobs, revives rural economies and communities, reduces oil
imports, and protects the environment by reducing air pollution. Future
regulatory actions by the EPA related to the RFS should be in support
of the program's continued growth and success. The EPA can continue
diversifying low carbon fuels through the upcoming RFS SET 2
rulemaking. NFU looks forward to working with EPA and the Committee to
support growth of the RFS and increased usage of renewable fuels in
America.
NFU is supportive of the EPA's efforts to move to year-round sales
of E15 as a step in the right direction toward usage of higher-level
blends of ethanol. We do feel there is room for continued growth of
higher blends of ethanol, such as E30. The use of higher levels of
ethanol blends could replace a larger share of petroleum gasoline with
high-octane, low-carbon, cleaner and lower-cost fuel today. And it is
domestically produced, providing an immediate solution that delivers
simultaneous economic, environmental, and national and energy security
benefits.
Furthermore, NFU is supportive of the Administration's Sustainable
Aviation Fuel (SAF) grand challenge. Using farm-based crops for SAF
presents tremendous opportunities to diversify the jet fuel industry.
We urge the Committee to support the adoption of agricultural
feedstocks for SAF production.

Voluntary Climate Solutions
Climate change is one of the greatest challenges facing family
farmers, ranchers, our communities, and global food security. Farmers
and ranchers have been feeling the effects of climate change for many
years through shifting precipitation patterns, historic droughts, and
extreme weather events. Farmers Union members have long recognized that
the climate is changing and that those changes are affecting all
aspects of their operations. If we are given the right tools and
adequate resources, we can continue to be a key part of the solution by
sequestering carbon in the soil, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and
building a more resilient and sustainable agricultural system.
EPA plays an important role in supporting farmers with voluntary
climate solutions. In addition to the biofuels opportunities supported
by EPA, the Agency also provides opportunities through its Greenhouse
Gas Reduction Fund (GGRF) National Clean Investment Fund (NCIF)

13, 14
and the Climate Pollution Reduction Grants (CPRG)
program.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ EPA, Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund. https://www.epa.gov/
greenhouse-gas-reduction-fund.
\14\ EPA, ``Biden-Harris Administration Announces $20 Billion in
Grants to Mobilize Private Capital and Deliver Clean Energy and Climate
Solutions to Communities Across America,'' Apr. 4, 2024. https://
www.epa.gov/newsreleases/biden-harris-administration-announces-20-
billion-grants-mobilize-private-capital-and.
\15\ EPA, Climate Pollution Reduction Grants. https://www.epa.gov/
inflation-reduction-act/climate-pollution-reduction-grants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For example, earlier this year through the GGRF NCIF, EPA awarded
funding to an alliance of agriculture, environmental, and financial
organizations to help finance agricultural climate solutions such as
renewable energy technologies and farm energy efficiency upgrades, and
to support farming practices that reduce emissions and use fertilizer
more efficiently.\16\ We are also aware of farm organizations and their
partners applying to secure funding under the CPRG program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Environmental Defense Fund, ``New Agriculture Finance
Sustainability Coalition partners with multi-billion dollar awardee of
the EPA's National Clean Investment Fund,'' Apr. 4, 2024. https://
www.edf.org/media/new-agriculture-finance-sustainability-coalition-
partners-multi-billion-dollar-awardee-epas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Now more than ever, leadership on climate change and agriculture is
essential, which is why NFU is a proud founding member and co-chair--
along with the American Farm Bureau Federation, the National Council of
Farmer Cooperatives, and the Environmental Defense Fund--of the Food
and Agriculture Climate Alliance (FACA). FACA members represent
farmers, ranchers, forest owners, manufacturers, the food industry,
state governments, higher education associations, sportsmen and
sportswomen, and environmental organizations. These organizations are
dedicated to advancing climate solutions across food and agriculture
supply chains--and EPA, along with USDA and other Federal agencies,
plays an important role in helping farmers take voluntary approaches to
climate change that work for their operations.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Who We Are. Food and Agriculture Climate Alliance (FACA).
https://agclimatealliance.com/members/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Improving EPA Engagement with Family Farmers and Ranchers
Earlier this year, EPA established the Office of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, EPA's first office focused solely on issues impacting
farmers, ranchers, and rural communities.\18\ This new office, which
will expand the work of EPA's Agriculture Advisor, provides formal
recognition that farmers and ranchers are important partners of EPA,
and that they have a seat at the table in discussions about how EPA
regulations impact their livelihoods.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ EPA, ``EPA launches new office to strengthen engagement with
agricultural and rural communities,'' Mar. 1, 2024. https://
www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-launches-new-office-strengthen-engagement-
agricultural-and-rural-communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The office will also facilitate closer coordination with relevant
Federal and state partners, such as USDA, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, and state departments of agriculture. The office also
will house EPA's existing Farm, Ranch, and Rural Communities Federal
Advisory Committee (FRRCC), which includes a Farmers Union
representative. Taken together, I am hopeful that this new office will
improve cooperation between EPA and farmers and Farmers Union looks
forward to working with this new office.

Overturning the Chevron Doctrine
On June 28, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the longstanding
Chevron decision in Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo. The decision
overturns 40 years of precedent and has major implications for the
independence of Federal Government agencies. While there are certainly
situations where regulation is excessive or the interpretation of
statute by Federal agencies misses the mark, the Court has
significantly altered its role in interpreting statute. We are
concerned this decision may make it too difficult for agencies like
USDA and EPA to protect family farmers, our communities, and the
environment. Federal agencies should be accountable to the public and
unreasonable regulation should always be a concern. The overturning of
Chevron, however, may shift the balance of power too far toward the
courts and hamper the ability of Federal agencies to effectively
address problems.

PFAS and CERCLA
NFU's grassroots policy expresses deep concern about the ``forever
chemicals'' known as per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) and
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA). Our policy supports ``requiring
companies that historically or currently produce PFAS to contribute to
an indemnity fund to compensate farmers and homeowners impacted by PFAS
contamination,'' and we support additional ``research into the health
and environmental impacts of PFAS.'' We know EPA is leading the Federal
regulatory response to PFAS, and earlier this year designated these
substances as ``hazardous'' under the nation's Superfund law, the
Comprehensive Environment Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
(CERCLA).
Farmers need a strong regulatory response to PFAS and related
substances. At the same time, it is important that we hold the correct
parties accountable for contamination: manufacturers and other
industrial actors involved in the production of PFAS, as well as
government agencies that approved the use of products containing these
substances. We appreciated that EPA released an enforcement discretion
policy earlier this year to clarify that it will focus its enforcement
actions on the most serious polluters and does not intend to pursue
passive receivers of these substances, such as farms where biosolids
were applied to the land.\19\ PFAS contamination is a unique problem
for family farmers and ranchers, so we appreciate that EPA is working
closely with USDA, FDA, and state partners to find science-based
solutions to address contamination on farms caused by upstream
polluters. We also believe Congress needs to take additional action and
provide significant resources to address this immense challenge. That
is why NFU supports the bipartisan Relief for Farmers Hit with PFAS Act
(H.R. 1517), which we hope to see in the next farm bill.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://www.epa.gov/enforcement/pfas-enforcement-discretion-
and-settlement-policy-under-cercla.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Conclusion
I appreciate the Committee's diligent oversight of EPA and for the
opportunity to testify. Thank you for holding this hearing. I look
forward to answering any questions you may have.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Kippley. I appreciate your
testimony.
Mrs. Chinn, please begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS  CHINN, DIRECTOR,  MISSOURI
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE; MIDWESTERN REGION
PRESIDENT,  NATIONAL  ASSOCIATION  OF  STATE
DEPARTMENTS  OF  AGRICULTURE;  CHAIR,  PLANT
AGRICULTURE AND PESTICIDE  REGULATION POLICY
COMMITTEE, NASDA, JEFFERSON CITY, MO

Mrs. Chinn. Good afternoon, and thank you, Chairman
Thompson and Ranking Member Scott for the opportunity to
testify today on such an important and timely topic.
As you heard earlier, my name is Chris Chinn. My husband
and I farm in Missouri, a fifth-generation family farm. We have
raised corn, soybeans, hogs, cattle, but most importantly, two
children on our family farm.
For more than 15 years, I have held leadership positions at
the local, state, and national level, and I have been working
to move my state's agriculture industry forward. I also serve
on the Board of Directors for the National Association of State
Departments of Agriculture. NASDA is a nonpartisan, nonprofit
trade association representing the commissioners, secretaries,
and directors of the 50 state departments of agriculture, and
the four U.S. territories. NASDA grows and enhances American
agriculture through policy, partnerships, and public engagement
that is beneficial for all regions, people, and environments.
Across the country, America's farmers and ranchers are
facing growing economic and environmental pressures. As
agriculturalists prepare for the important task of feeding more
than nine billion people by 2050, it is more critical than ever
that Federal regulations protect human health and our natural
resources, while also enabling the food and agriculture
industry to flourish. State departments of agriculture stand at
a unique nexus, because while we advocate for agriculture, we
are also responsible for regulating programs within our states.
This nexus allows NASDA to share an important perspective on
the impact of Federal regulations throughout the entire food
supply chain.
Regulations must be based on validated science and science-
based risk assessments. To achieve this goal, the Federal
Government must embrace states' co-regulatory role, lifting
them up as true partners in the regulatory process, not simply
stakeholders.
Because of this, NASDA calls on EPA to uphold a renewed
commitment to cooperative federalism. As the EPA issues new
regulations, states are responsible for translating and
educating producers on new obligations, while at the same time,
implementing, administrating, and enforcing these new
provisions. The issue is compounded when the new regulations
are overly burdensome and costly, threatening our nation's food
security.
To ensure that rules are feasible, state co-regulators must
be involved early and thoroughly throughout the entire
regulatory process. Unfortunately, we have seen the EPA fail to
include cooperative federalism as it promulgates regulations.
Recently, EPA released frameworks for pesticide regulatory
decisions to come into compliance with the Endangered Species
Act. The Agency's failure to engage with co-regulators that are
closest to producers is a major factor in those frameworks
being unworkable for both pesticide applicators and state
enforcement agencies.
Another example of EPA's failure to include cooperative
federalism is the broken cycle of rulemakings and legal
challenges over the longstanding issue of Waters of the United
States. EPA's 2023 WOTUS rule significantly expanded the
jurisdiction of the Federal Government over wetlands and
private property. It has been over a year since the Supreme
Court's decision in Sackett v. EPA and state departments of
agriculture, farmers, ranchers, and landowners are still
waiting on the agency to implement the decision into their
WOTUS rule, and most importantly, recognize the critical role
of states in regulating non-navigable waters.
The livestock sector has also seen an increased regulatory
burden over the past few years, most recently with EPA's
proposed rule amending effluent limitation guidelines in small-
and midsize meat and poultry processing facilities. At a time
when significant state and Federal resources have been
allocated to expand meat processing capacity, EPA has a
proposed rule that could have a devastating impact on the
sector and increased costs to the tune of hundreds of millions
of dollars.
Despite these challenges, NASDA applauds the Agency for the
steps that it has taken to improve its relationship with
agriculture stakeholders, including the recent formation of the
Office of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, and for taking action
in response to court decisions, such as issuing an existing
stocks order for Dicamba, which gave state regulators and
growers the assurance they needed for the 2024 growing season.
However, NASDA calls on EPA to fully embrace cooperative
federalism throughout its rulemaking process and to prioritize
a forward-thinking approach that enables growers to make
thoughtful decisions for future growing seasons. When it comes
to protecting the environment, agricultural producers and
communities of every size rely on decisions from EPA that are
based on sound-science, collaboration, and transparency
throughout each step of the process. It is time for EPA to
invite agriculture generally and state departments of
agriculture specifically into discussions early and often to
find solutions that can elevate environmental protections and
production agriculture.
Agriculture is the backbone of our country, and we look
forward to improved cooperation and relationships between EPA
and state departments of agriculture, and I thank you for the
opportunity to provide testimony today. I look forward to
answering your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Chinn follows:]

Prepared Statement of Chris Chinn, Director, Missouri Department of
Agriculture; Midwestern Region President, National Association of State
Departments of Agriculture; Chair, Plant Agriculture and Pesticide
Regulation Policy Committee, NASDA, Jefferson City, MO
Good afternoon and thank you Chairman Thompson and Ranking Member
Scott for the opportunity to testify today on such an important and
timely topic.

I. Introduction
My name is Chris Chinn and I have served as the Director of the
Missouri Department of Agriculture (MDA) since 2017. I am a fifth-
generation farmer, managing my family's farrow-to-finish hog operation,
our feed mill, operating a small cow-calf herd, and raising corn,
soybean, and hay. For more than 15 years, I have held leadership
positions on the local, state, and national level, working to move my
state's agriculture industry forward.
In addition to my role as Director of MDA, I also serve on the
Board of Directors for the National Association of State Departments of
Agriculture (NASDA). NASDA is a nonpartisan, nonprofit association
representing the elected and appointed commissioners, secretaries, and
directors of the departments of agriculture in all fifty states and
four U.S. territories. Speaking on behalf of this unified voice, NASDA
grows and enhances American agriculture through policy, partnerships,
and public engagement that is beneficial for all regions, people, and
environments.
As state regulators and co-regulators alongside Federal agencies,
NASDA members work to ensure the safety of an abundant food supply;
protect animal and plant health; implement a variety of conservation
programs; and promote the vitality of both rural and urban communities
who rely on our nation's feed, fuel, and fiber supply.

Missouri Agriculture
I take great pride in representing Missouri agriculture and the
critical role our producers play in the strength of our nation's
agriculture industry. Agriculture runs deep within our state's history;
the top of our state capitol building features a statue of Ceres, the
goddess of grain, watching over our land. Today, farms cover nearly \2/
3\ of this land. We are home to the second largest number of farms in
the nation, with over 87,000 farms--90% of which are family owned.
Missouri farmers and ranchers produce a wide range of high-quality
crops and livestock products--from soybeans, corn, poultry, cattle, and
hog products, reaching the tables of local families, our schools, and
numerous markets overseas. From our lush forests in the Ozarks to the
fertile soil producing cotton and rice in the Bootheel region,
``Missouri Grown'' truly means strength derived from the diversity of
our farms. Through the dedication and resilience of our farm and ranch
families, Missouri's number one industry remains strong, contributing
94 billion dollars to our state's economy and supporting the jobs of
460,000 Missourians. In a dynamic and changing food system, Missouri
agriculture looks to the future by preserving and protecting our
agricultural community of the present. Through new initiatives, such as
our ``MORE'' strategic initiative to protect Missouri agriculture for
both farmers and consumers, we hope to ensure that our farm families
thrive for generations to come.
Across the country, America's farmers and ranchers are facing
growing economic and environmental pressures, including threats from
pests, military conflicts, rising input costs, land loss, and global
supply chain inefficiencies. As agriculturalists prepare for the
important task of feeding more than nine billion people by 2050, it is
more critical than ever that the Federal regulatory environment
protects human health and our natural resources, while enabling the
food and agriculture industry to flourish.

II. Co-Regulatory Challenges
State departments of agriculture stand at a unique nexus because
while they advocate for agriculture, they are also responsible for
regulating programs within their states. This nexus allows NASDA as the
unified voice of the state departments of agriculture to share an
important perspective on the impact of Federal regulations throughout
the entire food supply chain.
Regulations must be based on the best available, sound, validated,
and peer-reviewed science and rely on science-based risk assessment.
Moreover, regulatory agencies must ensure that in situations where the
science is not fully formed or understood, that policymakers not misuse
or inappropriately apply science that is not validated or related. To
achieve this goal, the Federal Government must embrace states' co-
regulatory role--lifting them up as true partners in the regulatory
process, not simply stakeholders. Often states have a wealth of data,
experience, and expertise that would help Federal agencies better
implement regulatory programs. As such, NASDA calls on EPA to uphold a
renewed commitment to Cooperative Federalism.
As the EPA issues new regulations, states are responsible for
translating and educating producers on new obligations, while at the
same time implementing, administering, and enforcing these new
regulations. The issue is compounded when the new regulations are
overly burdensome and costly and threaten our nations' food security.
Consistent with the objectives of cooperative federalism, and to ensure
that rules are feasible, state co-regulators must be involved early and
thoroughly throughout the regulatory process.
NASDA wants to see the EPA reprioritize their co-regulatory
partners and acknowledge that it is only through meaningful cooperation
that we can come together to secure positive outcomes for agriculture,
public health, and the environment.

III. Pesticides

a. Endangered Species Act
One of NASDA's top policy priorities for 2024 is pesticide
regulation. In 43 states and Puerto Rico, the state department of
agriculture is a co-regulatory partner with EPA. States are tasked with
the administration, implementation, and enforcement of rules governing
the production, labeling, distribution, sale, use, and disposal of
pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act (FIFRA).
It is because of this co-regulatory relationship, and the
importance of pesticide products for agricultural, residential,
commercial, and public health uses that our membership has prioritized
this critical topic.
A recent study by the University of Arkansas found that without the
use of pesticides, the yields of corn, cotton, and soybeans show
declines of up to 70%; the cultivation of these commodities without
pesticides would also result in three times more land, water, energy
use, and greenhouse gas emissions. This study shows that the
availability and responsible use of crop protection inputs can play a
major role in positive environmental outcomes.
The importance of these products necessitates a scientifically
sound development, review, registration, and re-registration process
that allows for transparent, meaningful collaboration amongst co-
regulators and impacted communities. Unfortunately, in part due to
substantial legal challenges, NASDA members are concerned that the EPA
Office of Pesticide Programs has produced regulations and frameworks
that will have substantial negative impacts on our nation's farmers and
ranchers.
Beginning in 2021, prompted by the escalating legal challenges of
fulfilling their obligations under the Endangered Species Act for
pesticide decisions, the EPA began developing a comprehensive, long-
term plan to ensure compliance. This plan was further outlined in the
November 2022 ESA Workplan Update, through which the Agency attempted
to take a holistic approach to protecting species and regulating
pesticides. To date, the Agency has released two strategies under this
workplan--the Vulnerable Species Pilot Project (VSPP) and the Herbicide
Strategy.
Throughout this workplan, the programmatic frameworks that have
been released, and the updates that the Agency has provided since its
initial draft, NASDA remains deeply concerned that the proposed
strategies are overly burdensome and unworkable for both pesticide
applicators and state enforcement agencies. Even more concerning is
that both VSPP and the Herbicide Strategy were developed and announced
with no consultation or co-regulatory process with the state lead
agencies. In response to this concern, the Agency has stated that these
draft documents were intended to serve as a starting place for broad
stakeholder conversation thereby ignoring the unique role and
responsibilities states play as co-regulators.
At a time when general farm input costs are elevated, failure on
EPA's part to fully consider costs and benefits of their proposed
actions is likely to result in mandates that are likely to drive many
farms out of business. NASDA appreciates the EPA taking initial steps
to try and address the substantial concerns the Agency received from
the agriculture community. However, this work should have been
completed far before the strategy was released, and state agencies,
agricultural and non-agricultural organizations have been left
scrambling to compile data, suggest alternate solutions to achieve
species protection, and find a workable path forward before the looming
finalization deadline.

b. Dicamba
This February, both agriculture and the EPA were faced with a court
decision to vacate over-the-top Dicamba registrations. This decision
came after producers had already made purchasing decisions for the
year, and caused an immediate flurry of uncertainty that could have
rocked our nation's supply chain. In a reaction to this court decision,
NASDA members immediately called for the EPA to issue an existing
stocks order for the 2024 growing season, and to work expeditiously
with registrants to secure a registration for the 2025 growing season.
NASDA applauded the EPA for issuing an existing stocks order, which
gave state regulators and growers alike needed assurances for their
upcoming season. However, our membership is concerned that at their
current pace, the Agency will not successfully complete a robust review
and registration in time for the 2025 growing season.
In response to stakeholders calling for the Agency to prioritize
this registration, the EPA made the point that its ability to meet
statutory deadlines for pesticide actions is limited by its budget.
Representing state agencies who rely on both Federal and state funding
for regulatory activities, NASDA empathizes with the challenges brought
by budgetary constraints, and calls for additional funding from
Congress to meet the minimum appropriation level specified in PRIA 5.
However, just as states are not exempt from meeting their statutory
requirements for implementation, enforcement, and inspection activities
when funding is tight, the EPA should also be held accountable to
continue its work.

IV. Waters of the United States (WOTUS)

There is perhaps no better example of co-regulatory challenges than
the broken cycle of rulemakings and legal challenges over the
longstanding issue of Waters of the United States, or WOTUS. In 2023,
the EPA and the Army Corps of Engineers rescinded the Navigable Waters
Protection Rule, which narrowed the scope of the definition of WOTUS
and provided clear, certain rules to the regulated community--including
farmers and ranchers. In its place, the EPA and Army Corps of Engineers
promulgated new, overly burdensome regulations which have been
subsequently enjoined in more than half the country. The Clean Water
Act is built on the concept of cooperative federalism. By acknowledging
states' role in providing clean water and using Federal regulations as
a framework, the Clean Water Act should be a prime example of
cooperative federalism. Through the cooperative efforts of states and
our Federal partners, we can continue to secure a healthy environment,
including clean air and water, which is necessary for the agriculture
industry. Unfortunately, EPA and the Army Corps have continually missed
the mark and either disregarded, or in some cases undermined state
authority and jurisdiction over these issues.
EPA's 2023 WOTUS rule significantly expanded the jurisdiction of
the Federal Government over wetlands and private property--and marked
the third time in 8 years that the Federal Government attempted to
define WOTUS. Then, last spring, the Supreme Court issued its decision
in Sackett v. EPA, which confirmed limits on Federal jurisdiction and
affirmatively recognized the role of states in regulating non-navigable
waters and was seen by most observers as a clear victory for farmers,
ranchers, and landowners who have long sought clarity and certainty.
Following the Sackett decision, EPA and the Army Corps issued a revised
rule, making ``surgical changes'' to their 2023 WOTUS rule, attempting
to comply with the Supreme Court's decision. Not only did the agencies
not accept public comment or input in this revision process, but the
revised WOTUS rule also failed to acknowledge and uphold state
authority in regulating waterways.
The regulated community, now 1 year post-Sackett, is still waiting
for the agencies to fully implement the court's decision into their
WOTUS rule. As a result of ongoing litigation, more than half of the
states are currently adhering to the pre-2015 WOTUS regulatory regime,
while 23 states have implemented the final conforming rule that went
into effect last fall. The agencies' inaction and inability to clearly
and transparently define WOTUS is deeply troubling for all stakeholders
and holds states in limbo with a patchwork of litigation and
regulation. This makes it incredibly difficult for state departments of
agriculture, their state agency counterparts, and ultimately, farmers
to move forward with confidence and ensure they comply with the law.
Earlier this year, EPA and the Army Corps held listening sessions
for stakeholders in a multitude of communities. While NASDA appreciated
the opportunity to participate in those sessions, the agencies lacked
the transparency and clarity normally associated with meaningful
stakeholder engagement. The sessions were held virtually, questions
were to be submitted in advance, and each speaker was given 3 minutes
to pose their questions. No answers were provided during the listening
sessions, nor were any of the stakeholder concerns addressed.
Agricultural stakeholders were, once again, held in limbo with no
meaningful progress or clarity.
NASDA remains concerned that EPA and the Army Corps, despite public
assertions by the agencies that they would adequately and fairly
address WOTUS, have failed to do so. As state regulators, NASDA members
serve as a resource to farmers, ranchers, and landowners who have been
facing WOTUS challenges for decades, and yet today, have no greater
clarity or certainty that they can adequately comply with the law.

V. Animal Agriculture

NASDA represents the interests of all sectors of agriculture and is
keenly focused on the success of the livestock sector in states--
supporting state programs that safeguard animal and human health while
implementing a fair balance between production agriculture and
environmental health. NASDA members work hand in hand with producers,
state natural resource and environmental counterparts, and industry to
ensure that all parties are successful in protecting resources and
agriculture in a complementary fashion.
Reducing nutrient loss in waterways is a top priority for state
departments of agriculture and their livestock producers. One example
of a successful partnership in this space is the Hypoxia Task Force, a
Federal-state partnership of states. This collaborative relationship,
from NASDA's perspective, should be replicated and provide a forum for
solution-driven discussion. It is an example of co-regulators working
at the state and Federal levels toward a common goal.
In my home State of Missouri, processing capacity is a limiting
factor for the success of our livestock sector. Increased processing
capacity provides jobs and offers a safe and local food option for our
rural communities. There has been increased local and national
attention and focus on small- and mid-sized meat and poultry processing
capacity to spur competition in the marketplace, including interest
from Members of the House and Senate Agriculture Committees. The EPA's
proposed rule amending effluent limitation guidelines could have
devastating impacts on the success of those efforts, and ultimately, an
increased cost to processors, producers, and consumers. NASDA urges EPA
to carefully consider the stakeholder input and the demonstrated
commitment of both the producer and processor communities to
significantly reduce their nutrient loss and protect the natural
resources that they too depend on.
NASDA is encouraged by the EPA's formation of the Animal
Agriculture and Water Quality Federal Advisory Committee Subcommittee,
which includes representation from state departments of agriculture and
state resource agencies. We hope the subcommittee can find meaningful
solutions to support the efforts of farmers and ranchers to protect
water quality and serve as a model for collaboration that EPA relies on
in the future. Maintaining a good co-regulatory dialogue is key to
meeting our changing needs and opportunities at the intersection of
animal agriculture and the environment.
In addition to this specific subcommittee, NASDA commends the EPA
for its recent formation of the Office of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
(OARA) to expand its ability to meaningfully engage with rural and
agricultural stakeholders. This provides the Agency the opportunity to
seriously consider the feedback, concerns, and opportunities from
agricultural stakeholders who provide a vibrant and productive
agricultural system.

VI. Conclusion
Our nation's agricultural producers, environment, and communities
of every size rely on regulatory decisions from the Environmental
Protection Agency that are based on science, collaboration, and
transparency at each step of the process. It is not enough to only
consider one piece of the elaborate landscape that makes up a healthy
environment and make unilateral decisions from the Federal Government.
Instead, it is time to invite agriculture generally, and state
departments of agriculture specifically into discussions early and
often to find solutions that can lift up both environmental protections
and production agriculture.
We look forward to improved cooperative relationships between the
EPA and state departments of agriculture.

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Chinn. Your testimony is
greatly appreciated.
Mr. Cooper, please begin whenever you are ready.

STATEMENT  OF  GARY  A. COOPER,  CHIEF   OPERATING
OFFICER, COOPER FARMS, OAKWOOD, OH; ON BEHALF OF
NATIONAL PORK PRODUCERS COUNCIL

Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Chairman Thompson and the Committee
Members. Of course, my name is Gary Cooper.
Together with my brother, Jim, and sister, Dianne, we own
and operate Cooper Farms. It is a diversified family livestock
and poultry company, and we are in our 86th year of business.
We are from Oakwood, Ohio, and in addition to pork, Cooper
Farms also produces turkeys and eggs. I am proud of our long
farming heritage, and our commitment to our local community.
I am here testifying today on behalf of the National Pork
Producers Council, the trade association for the U.S. pork
industry. I am also a past Chairman of the National Turkey
Federation, as is my brother, Jim, as well as the past Chairman
of the U.S. Poultry and Egg Association, and a former American
Feed Industry Association Board Member. Perhaps most fitting,
considering the topic of today's hearing, I am also a former
member of EPA's Farm, Ranch, and Rural Communities Advisory
Committee.
Today is a challenging time in the U.S. pork industry. Last
year, hog farmers lost an average of $30 per head due to lower
hog prices and very high production costs. We have had some
relief in 2024, though we remain deep in the red, and many
farmers continue to struggle financially. This is all happening
while farmers nationwide continue with the ever-present threat
of all kinds of animal diseases.
As a poultry farmer, I am also aware of the devastation
that has been caused by avian influenza, and as a hog farmer, I
worry about the massive economic harm that will occur if
African swine fever manages to make its way into the U.S.
Our industry continues to face activists and regulatory
distractions on environmental performance. While activists are
unavoidable, government agencies like EPA shouldn't be putting
unnecessary burdens on struggling farmers like us.
At Cooper Farms, like many other pig farming businesses, we
take compliance and environmental performance seriously. We
always go above and beyond. Every farm in our system,
regardless of the size, are required to meet the most stringent
requirements set forth by the EPA and the State of Ohio. We are
thankful for the strong working relationship that the industry
has developed with the EPA over the years.
I want to especially call out the creation of the EPA's new
Office of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, which is serving to
bring the EPA and the nation's rural communities and farm
businesses together. First, we are very concerned about EPA's
ELGs for meat and poultry processors. Even if EPA admits this
rule will cause many processors to close, it is frustrating
that the government would propose regulations putting large
numbers of meat processors out of business. This does create
real economic hardships for those communities and the farmers
who rely on them. Their closure means the loss of marketing
opportunities for farmers, undermining both Congress and USDA's
efforts to expand the number of small and medium local meat
processors.
It is unclear why, in the face of all this, EPA is rushing
to complete the rulemaking and refusing to provide adequate
opportunities for farmers to understand its impacts on the
farms and the communities that provide meaningful comments to
us.
Second, EPA continues to face activist pressure to upend
the longstanding regulatory rules that have governed both how
farmers raise livestock, and how we utilize the valuable manure
nutrients on our farms and on our cropland.
In the face of this pressure, we are thankful to the EPA
for its commitment to working with farmers to develop
commonsense approaches to address water quality challenges. In
particular, we have high hopes for the recently formed Animal
Ag Water Quality Committee.
Beyond these two issues, we remain very concerned about
WOTUS. After the Supreme Court decision limiting EPA's
authority over WOTUS, farmers were frustrated. The government
seemed to be making jurisdictional determinations using a
secret internal guidance that they refused to release to the
public.
EPA's continued efforts on trying to develop air emissions
estimating tools seems to prove the point of farmers many years
ago. There is no easy way to calculate emissions coming from
our farms. Every farmer and every farm is different. Fourteen
years after receiving data from the main study, EPA still can't
tell farmers how to reliably measure emissions. Perhaps it is
time for Congress to step in once again and clarify that those
reporting requirements are impossible to implement,
unnecessary, and very burdensome.
Finally, as the nation continues to face real challenges
protecting our herds from all kinds of animal diseases, it
makes little sense for the EPA to be working to eliminate two
of the essential tools we have in that fight, and that are
rodenticides and formaldehyde.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, and I welcome
all your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cooper follows:]

Prepared Statement of Gary A. Cooper, Chief Operating Officer, Cooper
Farms, Oakwood, OH; on Behalf of National Pork Producers Council

Introduction
I am Gary Cooper, and with my brother Jim and sister Dianne, we are
the 4th generation to operate Cooper Farms, a family-owned, diversified
livestock and poultry company in its 86th year of business.
Headquartered in Oakwood, Ohio, Cooper Farms is the 7th largest turkey
producer, 16th largest egg producer, and the 29th largest pork producer
in the United States. Over the past 9 decades, and with the help of our
2,500 team members, we've become a leading food supplier, selling a
variety of fully cooked and ready-to-cook turkey, ham, and chicken egg
products to customers throughout North America. Our company takes
compliance and environmental performance seriously, striving to always
go above and beyond. On our hog operations, for instance, regardless of
size, we require all our farms to meet the most stringent regulatory
requirements set forth by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
the state of Ohio.
I am testifying today on behalf of the National Pork Producers
Council (NPPC), which represents 42 affiliated state pork associations,
working to ensure the U.S. pork industry remains a consistent and
responsible supplier of high-quality pork to domestic and international
markets. Through public policy outreach, NPPC fights for reasonable
legislation and regulations, develops revenue and market opportunities,
and protects the livelihoods of America's more than 66,000 pork
producers, such as myself, my family, and many neighbors and friends.
The U.S. pork industry is a significant contributor to the economic
activity of U.S. agriculture and the broader U.S. economy, marketing
nearly 150 million hogs annually. Those animals provided farm-level
gross cash receipts of more than $27 billion in 2023.
To produce those hogs, pork producers used roughly 1.7 billion
bushels of corn and soybean meal from 462 million bushels of soybeans
in 2023. The industry also purchases more than $1.6 billion in other
feed ingredients.
Economists at the NPPC and Iowa State University estimated that in
2023 the U.S. pork industry was directly responsible for creating more
than 36,000 full-time-equivalent jobs on hog farms and generated
roughly 112,000 jobs throughout all of agriculture. In addition, the
pork sector was responsible for 145,000 jobs in meatpacking and
processing and 38,000 jobs in professional services such as financial
services, insurance and real estate. In total, the U.S. pork industry
supports 573,000 mostly rural jobs in the United States and adds more
than $62 billion to the country's GDP.
Most importantly, U.S. pork producers provided more than 27 billion
pounds of safe, wholesome, and nutritious meat protein to consumers
worldwide in 2022.
Today is a challenging time in the U.S. pork industry. Last year,
hog producers lost an average of $30 per head on each hog marketed due
to lower hog prices and significantly higher production costs that
increased more than 50 percent over 3 years. Lower feed costs have
brought some relief for producers in 2024, though the roughly $4
billion in cumulative industry losses incurred in 2023 continue to put
a pinch on the pork industry, and this economic reality may force
producers to exit the industry and drive consolidation at the farm
level. This only adds to the uncertainty that already exists with the
credit market and the presence of African swine fever (ASF) in the
Western Hemisphere.
Environmental regulations are important. However, when poorly
conceived or implemented, that can add significant burdens to the other
headwinds that pork producers currently face. NPPC and its members
welcome the opportunity to provide this Committee with our views on
matters involving pork producers and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA). These comments will focus on the EPA's current ongoing
work on the following matters:

The pending rulemaking under the Clean Water Act (CWA) on
Effluent Limitation Guidelines (ELGs) applicable to the Meat
and Poultry Processing (MPP) sectors, which we believe carries
a risk of significantly disrupting packing capacity in the
U.S., especially for smaller- and mid-size packers and
processors such as ourselves, and carries with it the risk of
both forcing further concentration in the industry and causing
producers to lose access to local markets to harvest and
process their animals;

The ongoing status of EPA's implementation of its definition
of the CWA's Waters of the U.S. (WOTUS).

Implementation of the CWA Concentrated Animal Feeding
Operations (CAFO) rulemaking and the associated National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
requirements, where applicable.

The continuous legal challenges regarding the Lake Erie
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) in Ohio.

The crafting of air emissions estimation methodologies
(EEMs) and emissions factors for swine and other animal species
from data collected by the National Air Emissions Monitoring
Study (NAEMS) and other sources, and the related steps taken on
a new Emergency Planning Community Right to Know Act (EPCRA)
reporting requirement.

EPA's registration review under the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) of the rodenticide
products commonly used on swine and poultry operations to
control rat and mouse populations.

EPA's registration review of formaldehyde under FIFRA is
being done at the same time as the agency is also doing an
extensive review within its Office of Pollution Prevention and
Toxics (OPPT) under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
risk evaluation process.

General Working Relationship with the EPA
Before going into these details, it is helpful to discuss our
general working relationship we have had with the EPA. NPPC represents
pork producers that are regulated by the EPA.
As a producer-led organization, when regulations are necessary,
NPPC advocates practical and affordable measures that solve real and
important problems. To the extent that the EPA has, in our view, shared
that objective in concretely observable ways, our working relationship
has been generally quite constructive.
A recent example of this has been the EPA's formation of the Office
of Agricultural and Rural Affairs (OARA). This office, which reports
directly to the EPA Administrator, was formed to serve as the primary
liaison between rural and agricultural stakeholders and the EPA. The
OARA maintains close contact with the EPA's other program offices and
regions for the purpose of (in EPA's wording) ``to forge practical,
science-based solutions that protect the environment while ensuring a
vibrant and productive agricultural system.'' OARA's Director will be
the person formerly serving as Senior Agricultural Advisor to the
Administrator, but that Director will now have a staff of ten or so
people.
We look forward to working with OARA and this commitment by the EPA
to science-based solutions that will work for American agriculture and
rural America. The initial efforts of OARA's Director and Deputy
Director are promising in this regard.
We also note, with appreciation, the EPA's Office of Enforcement
taking the common-sense step of establishing in 2016 an extensive set
of detailed, required procedures and guidelines to minimize the risk of
EPA personnel transmitting animal diseases from livestock or poultry
farms, ranches, dairies, feedyards, sale yards, slaughterhouses, and
other facilities where animals are housed or processed to other such
facilities.\1\ Unfortunately, endemic outbreaks of swine, poultry, and
cattle diseases still occur in the U.S., as evidenced by the ongoing
highly pathogenic avian influenza outbreak affecting both the poultry
and dairy sectors. For livestock farmers, maintaining rigorous
biosecurity protocols to protect the health of their herds and flocks
is our highest priority. We greatly appreciate the EPA's help in
finding an effective solution to keeping the biosecurity of our
facilities while the agency conducts its import inspection and
oversight roles.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-05/documents/
biosecuritysop.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

EPA's ELGs Applicable to the MPP Sectors
Unfortunately, we have significant concerns regarding the EPA's
development of revisions to the ELG applicable to the MPP sectors.
While NPPC's membership is generally not the meat and poultry
processors whose CWA water discharge permits will be shaped by the MPP
ELG, this regulatory effort could have direct and enormous consequences
for the stability and reliability of the marketplace for the animals
NPPC's producer members raise and market. NPPC's sole charge is to
protect the livelihood of pork producers in the U.S., and its analysis
of the MPP ELG leads to the conclusion that this rulemaking will
significantly disrupt packing capacity and inflict additional severe
financial harm on producers. The industry fears that this MPP ELG, if
finalized without the changes that the livestock industry has proposed,
will lead to further industry concentration and the loss of independent
producers and small- and medium-sized processors.
NPPC fully supports the CWA goal of reducing pollutants in the
country's surface waters to restore and maintain water quality. The ELG
program, including any changes to the MPP ELG, is one of the critical
elements under the CWA that will drive the Federal and state regulatory
agencies and the regulated communities' efforts to achieve the CWA's
goals. As I've noted, NPPC firmly believes that updates and revisions
to the MPP ELG can be crafted to further the MPP sector's achievement
of those goals without sacrificing the stability, reliability, and
economic soundness of the pork products' marketplace.
Our concerns began with the unreasonable 60 day period set for
public comments on what is a highly complex and technical proposal and
the EPA's denial of industry's request for an extension to that comment
period. This was the case despite the obvious need for more time for
the animal agriculture community to properly review the rule and
respond constructively and thoughtfully to the questions the EPA posed
and topics requested to be considered. It is also consistent with past
EPA precedent for such complex rulemakings, such as the EPA's previous
MPP ELG in 2004. It merits noting that animal agriculture and the meat
processors were not alone in calling for an extension of the comment
period. Indeed, the EPA accomplished something uncommon. At a public
hearing on this rulemaking, both environmentalists and livestock
farmers agreed with each other--that the EPA needed to provide
significantly more opportunity for public review and understanding of
what was proposed.
EPA's proposed changes and supporting docket, published in the
Federal Register in January 2024, was extensive and highly technical.
It included the following, in relevant part:

A 64 page Federal Register notice (89 Fed. Reg. 4474;
January 23, 2024);

A 174 page Technical Development Document for Proposed
Effluent Limitations Guidelines and Standards for the Meat and
Poultry Products Point Source Category (TDD);

A 147 page Environmental Assessment for Revisions to the
Effluent Limitations Guidelines and Standards for the Meat and
Poultry Products Point Source Category (EA);

A 142 page Benefit-Cost Analysis for Revisions to the
Effluent Limitations Guidelines and Standards for the Meat and
Poultry Products Point Source Category (BCA);

A 107 page Regulatory Impact Analysis for Revisions to the
Effluent Limitations Guidelines and Standards for the Meat and
Poultry Products Point Source Category (RIA);

A docket containing 660 documents, including 657 additional
support documents that were only added on January 23, 2024; and

A request for specific comments on at least 43 different
major topics, including variations on all of the options that
the EPA is proposing; confirmation from industry sources that
the EPA's assumptions or analyses are consistent with how the
various industries operate; requests for data that the EPA
needs to assess various options or considerations; impacts on
small businesses and how they should be assessed and
considered; and other technical information that may vary by
sub-industries within the MPP umbrella.

From our perspective, the future financial health of pork producers
and the pork processing sector is at stake here. We remain concerned
that no time extension was provided to allow for thoughtful responses
to be submitted. We had a mere 60 days to review, understand, and
comment on these materials. In denying our request for more time, the
EPA's Office of Water indicated that it is now their policy not to
grant any extensions of time on rulemakings. This is despite the clear
requirements of the Administrative Procedures Act and the relevant
executive orders to ensure an adequate time is provided for meaningful
comments to be submitted. The EPA also indicated that because this
rulemaking resulted from their settlement of a lawsuit filed by
environmentalists, the need to expedite the completion of the
rulemaking process was of paramount importance. Yet, under that
settlement, the rulemaking doesn't need to be completed until August of
2025. By comparison, the last time MPP ELG revisions were proposed, the
EPA provided 120 days for comment, followed by an additional ``Notice
of Data Availability'' with its own comment period. The result was a
final revised ELG issued 29 months after the initial proposal. While
this is admittedly a considerable amount of time, that regulation has
been in place for 20 years. It is our view that the size, scope, and
economic importance to agriculture, our food system, and the economy of
this rulemaking merits providing an adequate amount of time for proper
and thorough analysis and understanding of the proposal's implications.
Beyond these obvious procedural deficiencies, on the substance the
proposed ELG has significant problems that led us, along with several
others in animal agriculture and the MPP sector, to call on the EPA to
do the following:

1.  Provide additional information and conduct adequate research to
confirm the validity of the assumptions made by the EPA and
to correct errors that were discovered; and

2.  To either:

a.  Focus specifically on direct discharging facilities (dropping
all standards
for indirect dischargers), and then publish a ``Notice
of Data Availability''
in the Federal Register with an additional 90 day
comment period; or

b.  Withdraw the proposed rule completely and reissue a new,
corrected pro-
posed rule in the future regarding appropriate
revisions, if any, to the
2004 MPP ELGs nationally appropriate technology-based
standards ap-
plicable to direct discharging facilities.

The reasons we called on the EPA to take these steps were because
our analysis led us to conclude the following:

The EPA had seriously underestimated the number of MPP
facilities that would likely see closures under proposed Option
1--it would jump from 16 facilities that the EPA estimates to
74 facilities.

The projected number of near-term job losses associated with
these facility closures would increase from 17,000 to nearly
80,000 direct job losses.

The projected closures and job losses for the more stringent
regulatory Options were similarly underestimated (Option 2
would increase to 139, and 340 closures for Option 3).

The proposed rule harms the unique relationship between MPPs
and local publicly owned treatment works (POTWs), whose
national association, the National Association of Clean Water
Agencies, has argued to the EPA that the rule itself is
unnecessary and not an environmental priority for its members.

The EPA's analyses of pollutant loadings are inconsistent
with its cost analyses.

NPPC has concluded that if the EPA's proposed rule goes forward, it
could once again drive considerable consolidation in the livestock and
poultry community. Not only would small meat processors suffer
significant harm due to the inability to afford the changes the EPA is
calling for, but the farmers that rely on those markets would once
again be faced with losing additional markets to sell their products.
We believe this rule is wholly inconsistent with the Biden
Administration's commitment through USDA to help finance the launch and
expansion of meat and poultry processing facilities in the U.S. and to
provide more markets for meat and poultry products.

WOTUS
Implementation of the EPA's WOTUS changes continues to be a source
of confusion and angst for pig and other farmers across the country.
NPPC continues to be engaged in a large, diverse coalition focused on
the legal, legislative and regulatory aspects of this issue. The
biggest concern at this moment is the EPA and U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (Corps) ongoing implementation of the rule and the lack of
publicly available information being shared by them during that
process.
On March 29, 2024, NPPC joined almost thirty other national trade
associations in a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) letter to the EPA
and the Corps, sharing specific concerns and questions regarding the
agencies' implementation of the revised rules regarding the definition
of WOTUS. Specifically, the coalition asked several questions regarding
the public availability and details of guidance documents being
utilized by agency staff. In particular, the coalition sought details
on the interagency coordination and elevation process of certain draft
Approved Jurisdictional Determinations and ``Headquarters Field Memos
Implementing the 2023 Rule as Amended.'' Now it's the beginning of
July--over 3 months after that letter--and we still have received
copies of the guidance documents that the Federal Government is using
to make jurisdiction determinations, even though we know they exist.
Why do these Federal agencies continue to hide public records and keep
this information out of the hands of individuals seeking to ensure
their compliance with the law and the ability to make decisions on the
use of their land across our country?

Lake Erie TMDL Legal Challenges
In my home state of Ohio, we are now seeing the fourth lawsuit
filed by Lucas County, Toledo, and Environmental Law and Policy Center
seeking to compel the EPA to do more with respect to Lake Erie. This
latest lawsuit is claiming that both Ohio EPA and the U.S. EPA have
failed to fulfill their responsibilities under the CWA to address
nutrient pollution.
The agency's action in this most recent lawsuit is the EPA's
approval of the Maumee Watershed nutrient Total Maximum Daily Load
(TMDL). The EPA issued its approval decision in September 2023. The
plaintiffs are asking the Court to invalidate the EPA's approval of the
TMDL plan. In doing all this, the plaintiffs take aim at livestock
operations in the watershed.
This lawsuit paints pig farmers and our fellow agricultural
operations in an unfavorable and inaccurate light, and it does nothing
to respect the years of significant work done by all stakeholders
involved. These stakeholders include local officials, the U.S. EPA,
Ohio EPA, and the state of Ohio, which has made significant
investments, as well as agricultural stakeholders and individual
livestock and row crop farmers taking steps to protect water quality. I
highlight this issue because it is important for the EPA--through the
Department of Justice--to defend its work--independently and with its
partners--in this most recent lawsuit.

Implementation of the CAFO Rulemaking
Last fall, in denying a request from environmentalists to reopen
the CAFO rule and fundamentally change how livestock farms are
regulated in the country, the EPA pledged to study the impact of
livestock production on water quality and included in that process the
formation of a new advisory committee focused on Animal Agriculture.
This new effort, the Animal Agriculture and Water Quality (AAWQ)
Committee is being housed under the EPA's longstanding Farm, Ranch and
Rural Communities Advisory Committee (FRRCC), a committee I was once a
member of.
As articulated by the EPA, the AAWQ is to provide recommendations
to the Administrator that will inform the agency's decisions regarding
how to improve the implementation of the CWA's CAFO NPDES permitting
program to more effectively reduce nutrients and other types of water
pollutants from Animal Feeding Operations, including determining
whether any revisions to the regulations are warranted, and whether the
EPA can otherwise support the efforts of AFO operators to protect water
quality.
Earlier this spring, the EPA announced the appointees to the AAWQ
Subcommittee. Nominated agricultural representatives bring a variety of
perspectives and experiences and include farmers, engineers,
agronomists, former state environmental regulators, and experts on
renewable energy. On the other hand, representatives of animal rights
and environmental activist groups include--lawyers. Some of these same
lawyers have also sued the EPA over the existence of this committee in
litigation that is currently underway in California before the 9th
Circuit Court of Appeals.
Throughout all this, the EPA has remained steadfast in its
commitment and defense of its strong CAFO program and has shown great
leadership in doing so. Those of us in animal agriculture remain
committed to working constructively with the EPA's staff and anyone
else to find effective solutions to protect water quality while
creating opportunities for the next generation of our rural
communities.

Air Emissions Estimation Methodologies, Air Consent Agreements, and
EPCRA Rulemaking
Since the early 2000s, the EPA has been working to develop
scientifically credible Emissions Estimation Methodologies (EEMs) for
animal feeding operations. This process included extensive emissions
monitoring and research designed by the EPA, paid for by producers, and
undertaken by university researchers under the EPA guidance at multiple
poultry and livestock farms across a number of states over 2 years.
In 2024, the EPA continues to work on the development of these long
delayed EEMs and has noted their imminent release for public comment.
That date continues to slip month by month. The EPA's own website on
this issue shows that the public comment was expected to occur in
``Early 2024'' with the finalized EEMs done in ``Summer 2024.'' See
https://www.epa.gov/afos-air/national-air-emissions-monitoring-study.
While NPPC recognizes the Herculean task before the EPA, the
continued delays are causing confusion and angst among the pork
industry and preventing individual farms from preparing for next steps.
When the EEMs are eventually finalized, compliance will be triggered
under the ACA for many farms, and several logistical and substantive
questions continue to remain for producers across the country. NPPC has
appreciated the EPA's willingness to take our questions and is awaiting
answers to the same.
Despite this ongoing work, environmental activists continue to use
litigation and sue-and-settle tactics to seek to impact the EPA's
implementation of reporting requirements for manure emissions at farms
under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA).
That lawsuit was filed in response to the EPA's implementation of the
strongly bipartisan 2017 FARM Act, which was designed to clarify
reporting requirements for livestock farmers.
At the end of 2023, the EPA issued an Advanced Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking to solicit comment and information about reinstating the
reporting requirement. NPPC believes that the EPA has considered the
significant challenges such a requirement would have on livestock
producers, first responders, and local communities, as well as
Congressional intent, and has so far held off on moving forward with
such a proposed rule. We appreciate the EPA's efforts to consider this
requirement in the context of the other regulatory burdens on livestock
producers and the continued development of the EEMs that will be
released and mentioned above.

Rodenticides
The EPA is currently undertaking a registration review under FIFRA
of the rodenticide products commonly used in swine operations to
control rat and mouse populations. The agency is also looking at this
issue through the lens of the Endangered Species Act (ESA). In a recent
public comment period regarding the Biological Evaluation of the
products, the EPA received approximately 2,500 public comments. In many
of its proposals, the EPA has considered making rodenticide products
restricted use pesticides (RUPs) and adding significant mitigation
measures that would essentially take the products out of the hands of
livestock producers.
Livestock farmers are constantly focused on managing and
controlling rodent populations in and around their barns while
simultaneously taking all biosecurity measures to protect against food
safety risks. Farmers need effective rodenticide products to which they
can have affordable and reliable access. NPPC has appreciated the EPA's
willingness to continue to meet with the livestock community on this
issue and their willingness to accept ideas for alternative approaches
that would work to protect non-target species and keep the rodenticide
products in the hands of livestock producers.

Formaldehyde
Finally, EPA is also undertaking a FIFRA registration review of
formaldehyde, which is concurrently undergoing extensive review by
EPA's Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics (OPPT) under TSCA's
risk evaluation process.
On several occasions, NPPC and other livestock groups have
communicated to EPA during its TSCA review process and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's Office of Policy and Pest Management on the
important uses of formaldehyde in key agriculture operations. As the
agency is aware in its general overview of the industry uses in the
April 10, 2024 Draft Risk Assessment and elsewhere, formaldehyde is
utilized as an essential tool for the industry in a range of areas
including, among others, as:

Pathogen control in animal feed production;

Disinfection for live production operations on poultry farms
and swine operations; and

To prevent infections such as coryza, a serious bacterial
disease in poultry that affects the respiratory system and is
manifested by inflammation of the area below the eye, nasal
discharge, and sneezing.

Formaldehyde-based products can be used to inactivate highly
contagious viruses, such as African swine fever (ASF). Credible
estimates indicate that an ASF event in the U.S. could result in an
economic loss of nearly $50 billion and would be catastrophic to the
nation's swine industry. The current EPA proposal includes data
deficiencies, concerns regarding risk and exposure, incident reporting,
and existing mitigation measures. NPPC encourages EPA to continue
working with the livestock community to understand the impact of their
parallel decisions on formaldehyde on livestock production across the
country.
Conclusion
NPPC and our members are thankful to this Committee for its
leadership and consideration of these important issues and for giving
us the opportunity to describe our experience and perspective on our
engagement with the Environmental Protection Agency on these important
issues for agriculture.

The Chairman. Mr. Cooper, thank you so much for your
testimony.
Dr. Larson, please begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF REBECCA L. LARSON, Ph.D., VICE PRESIDENT,
CHIEF SCIENTIST,  AND GOVERNMENT  AFFAIRS,  WESTERN
SUGAR COOPERATIVE, DENVER, CO

Dr. Larson. Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Scott, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me. I am Chief
Scientist for Western Sugar Cooperative, owned by farm families
growing sugarbeets in Colorado, Nebraska, Wyoming, and Montana.
I have spent 24 years working alongside farmers and have a
doctorate in plant science; therefore, I understand pesticides
are essential to climate-smart farming and farm resiliency.
Pesticides minimize food waste. Forty percent of food waste
is due to crop losses from pests and diseases. Climate change
is driving new and worsening epidemics, which will further
increase food waste. Pesticides are key for climate-smart
farming and maximizing crop productivity. Maximizing
productivity prevents native land conversion, which is the most
significant driver of biodiversity loss from agriculture.
Plants comprise 80 percent of the food we eat; therefore,
protecting plant health and productivity protects human health.
These are the reasons why actions of EPA that eliminate or
fundamentally change the way pesticides can be used by American
farmers causes significant concerns.
I will illustrate my point with specific sugarbeet
examples.
Sugarbeets are six times more sensitive to pathogen losses
and 40 percent more sensitive to weed pressure than other major
crops. To deal with this disproportionate sensitivity,
sugarbeet farmers use integrative pest management to prevent
crop losses. For example, seed planted by our farmers contains
tolerance to seven different pests and diseases. However, that
tolerance is often incomplete, such that judicious use of
pesticides is required to augment that tolerance and completely
protect the crop.
For example, even with a genetic tolerance to beet curly
top virus, crop losses average 20 percent annually in Wyoming
until the introduction of seed-applied insecticides.
Unfortunately, in other regions of the world activist pressure
has resulted in bans of these insecticides with devastating
outcomes for their sugarbeet farmers. EPA's own data shows how
effective and critical these products are for our industry.
Therefore, EPA was correct in denying the Center for Food
Safety's treated article exemption petition and protecting
streamlined access to treated seeds for American farmers.
However, concerningly, EPA left the door open for other
restrictions by announcing a treated seed rulemaking. This
Committee must insist that EPA not ignore their own data during
this process, as done when revoking chlorpyrifos tolerances for
sugarbeets. EPA is a science-based organization which must let
data dictate the process, especially their own.
The impact of weeds on crop losses are well-documented.
With glyphosate, sugarbeet farmers could finally control
broadleaf weeds in a broadleaf crop. Better weed control allows
our growers to implement climate-smart tillage practices,
increasing our soil health and function by six-fold and
sugarbeet yield by 35 percent. These sustainability advances
were at risk with the emergence of a new pest, Palmer amaranth.
This aggressive, prolific weed species exploded exponentially
in 2022, causing significant sugarbeet losses in both Colorado
and Nebraska. I am grateful the EPA approved an emergency
exemption for a highly effective herbicide; however, the
process took 18 months and cost Colorado and Nebraska sugarbeet
growers over $8 million in lost revenue.
Climate change is making issues like these more frequent
and severe; therefore, EPA must fully utilize all of its clear
authority under FIFRA to deliver timely solutions to farmers.
American farmers are in desperate need of new pesticides,
yet EPA is imposing new regulations limiting the use of
existing pesticides and delaying approval of new products,
though most impactful EPA actions relate to strategies set
forth for compliance of EPA's Endangered Species Act
obligations. Hailed as the most significant imposition of new
regulations on the agricultural sector in generations, the
EPA's draft Herbicide Strategy was completely unworkable for
American farmers, especially small producers. The draft
strategy overestimated exposure, species sensitivity, and
critical habitat size, while it underestimated benefits of
climate-smart practices and failed to include appropriate
offset options. Much of this could have been avoided if EPA's
Office of Pesticide Programs had better farmer engagement prior
to the rollout. EPA's Agriculture Advisor, I know, is always
ready to assist with engagement.
Our industry submitted extensive constructive comments to
EPA. Subsequently, EPA increased its engagement with USDA and
producer groups, including ours. In their recent revised
proposals, EPA is addressing some unworkable portions of the
strategy, like erosion mitigation, but excessive spray buffer
distances remain problematic. Without change, significant
productive cropland will be lost to overly conservative spray
buffers. For small production fields, including those used to
produce sugarbeet seed, spray buffers make this production
impossible. This threatens entire industries, including ours.
This Committee must ensure the EPA includes reasonable,
science-based adjustments to spray buffer requirements in its
Herbicide Strategy prior to finalization in August.
Farmers across the U.S. have shown their willingness to
engage with EPA, as evidenced by extensive public comments. EPA
must seek greater farmer engagement earlier in the process to
ensure the U.S. remains a global leader in sustainable
agriculture.
Again, thank you for inviting me here today, and I look
forward to taking questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Larson follows:]

Prepared Statement  of Rebecca L. Larson, Ph.D.,  Vice  President,  Chief
Scientist, and Governmental Affairs, Western Sugar Cooperative, Denver,
CO

Chairman Thompson, Ranking Member Scott, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me. I am the Chief Scientist for
Western Sugar Cooperative owned by farm families growing sugarbeets in
Colorado, Nebraska, Wyoming, and Montana. I've spent over twenty-four
years working alongside farmers and have a doctorate in Plant Science,
therefore I understand pesticides are essential to climate-smart
farming and farm resiliency.
Pesticides minimize food waste. Forty percent of food waste is due
to crop losses from pests and diseases.\1\ Climate change is driving
new and worsening epidemics,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
which will
further increase food waste. Pesticides are key for climate-smart
farming \8\ and maximizing crop productivity.
9, 10

Maximizing productivity prevents native land conversion,\11\ the most
significant driver of biodiversity loss in agriculture.\12\ Plants
comprise 80% of the food we eat.\13\ Therefore, protecting plant health
and productivity, protects human health. These are reasons why actions
of EPA that eliminate or fundamentally change the way pesticides can be
used by American farmers causes significant concern.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fao.org/plant-health-2020/home/en/.
\2\ Garrett, K.A. et al., (2006) Climate change effects on plant
disease: genomes to ecosystems. Annual Review of Phytopathology. 44:
489-509.
\3\ Kawasaki, K. (2023) Impact of climate change on crop pests and
diseases: ensemble modeling of time-varying weather effects. Journal of
the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists. 10(6):
https://doi.org/10.1086/725323.
\4\ Ibrahim, H.Z. (2014) Climate change impacts on pests and
pesticide use. A review article. Alexandria Research Center for
Adaptation to Climate Change. 3: 1-31.
\5\ Elad, Y., I. Pertot (2014) Climate change impacts on plant
pathogens and plant diseases. Journal of Crop Improvement. 28(1): 99-
139.
\6\ Gautam, H.R., M.L. Bhardwaj, R. Kumar. (2013) Climate change
and its impact on plant diseases. Current Science. 105(12): 1685.
\7\ Charkraborty, S., A.C. Newton. (2011) Climate change, plant
diseases and food security: an overview. Plant Pathology. 60: 2-14.
\8\ Cooper, J., H. Dobson. (2007) The benefits of pesticides to
mankind and the environment. Crop Protection. 26: 1337-1348.
\9\ Korav, S. et al., (2018) A study on crop weed competition in
field crops. Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. 7(4): 3235-
3240.
\10\ Horvath, D.P. et al., (2023) Weed-induced crop yield loss: a
new paradigm and new challenges. Trends in Plant Science. 28(5): 567-
582.
\11\ The Lancet Commission determined global yield must increase
75% by 2050 to feed the global population without the need for native
land conversion. See Willet, W. et al., (2019) Food in the
Anthropocene: the EAT-Lancet Commission on healthy diets from
sustainable food systems. Lancet. 393(10170): 447-492.
\12\ Willet, W. et al., (2019) Food in the Anthropocene: the EAT-
Lancet Commission on healthy diets from sustainable food systems.
Lancet. 393(10170): 447-492.
\13\ https://www.fao.org/plant-health-2020/home/en/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I will illustrate my point with specific, sugarbeet examples.
Sugarbeets are six-times more sensitive to pathogen losses \14\ and
forty percent more sensitive to weed pressure than other major
crops.\15\ To deal with this disproportionate sensitivity, sugarbeet
farmers use integrated pest management to prevent crop losses. For
example, seed planted by our farmers contains tolerances to seven
different pests and diseases.\16\ However, that tolerance is often
incomplete such that judicious use of pesticides is required to augment
tolerance and completely protect the crop. For example, even with
genetic tolerance to Beet Curly Top virus, crop losses averaged twenty
percent annually in Wyoming until the introduction of seed-applied
insecticides.
17, 18, 19
Unfortunately, in other regions of
the world, activist pressure has resulted in bans of these insecticides
with devastating outcomes for their sugarbeet farmers.\20\ EPA's own
data shows how effective and critical these products are for our
industry.\21\ Therefore, EPA was correct in denying the Center for Food
Safety's treated article exemption petition and protecting streamlined
access to treated seeds for American farmers.\22\ However,
concerningly, EPA left the door open for other restrictions by
announcing a treated seed rulemaking.\23\ This Committee must insist
that EPA not ignore their own data during this process as done when
revoking Chlorpyrifos tolerances for sugarbeet.
24, 25
EPA is
a science-based organization which must let data dictate the process,
especially their own.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Rasche, L. (2021) Estimating pesticide inputs and yield
outputs of conventional and organic agricultural systems in Europe
under climate change. Agronomy. 11: 1300-1317.
\15\ Beiermann, C.W. et al., (2021) Response of Palmer amaranth
(Amaranthus palmeri S. Watson) and sugarbeet to desmedipham and
phenmedipham. Weed Technology. 35: 440-448.
\16\ Western Sugar Cooperative requires tolerance to Beet Necrotic
Yellow Vein Virus, Cercospora beticola, Aphanomyces cochliodes,
Fusarium oxysporum, Beet curly top virus, Rhizoctonia solani, and Root
aphid.
\17\ Beet curly top virus is a disease of sugarbeet vectored by an
insect (Beet leafhopper). Host tolerance within the sugarbeet does not
provide complete control.
\18\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0420-0228.
\19\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2021-0575-0334.
\20\ https://www.ragus.co.uk/ongoing-neonicotinoid-ban-to-drive-
future-sugar-beet-yield-down-and-prices-up/.
\21\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0420-
0010.
\22\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2018-0805-
0104.
\23\ https://www.epa.gov/pesticides/epa-issues-advanced-notice-
proposed-rulemaking-public-comment-seek-additional.
\24\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/08/30/2021-
18091/chlorpyrifos-tolerance-revocations.
\25\ https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/02/05/2024-
02153/chlorpyrifos-reinstatement-of-tolerances.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impact of weeds on crop loss are well
documented.
26, 27
With glyphosate, sugarbeet farmers could
finally control broadleaf weeds in a broadleaf crop. Better weed
control allows our growers to implement climate-smart tillage
practices, increasing soil health and function by six-fold,\28\ and
sugarbeet yield by thirty-five percent. These sustainability advances
were at risk with the emergence of a new pest: Palmer amaranth. This
aggressive, prolific weed species,\29\ exploded exponentially in 2022,
causing significant sugarbeet losses in Colorado and Nebraska. I am
grateful EPA approved an emergency exemption for a highly effective
herbicide.\30\ However, the process took eighteen months and cost
Colorado and Nebraska sugarbeet growers over $8 million in lost
revenue. Climate change is making issues like these more frequent and
severe. Therefore, EPA must fully utilize all its clear authorities
under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) to
deliver timely solutions to farmers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Korav, S. et al., (2018) A study on crop weed competition in
field crops. Journal of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. 7(4): 3235-
3240.
\27\ Horvath, D.P. et al., (2023) Weed-induced crop yield loss: a
new paradigm and new challenges. Trends in Plant Science. 28(5): 567-
582.
\28\ https://agriculture.house.gov/uploadedfiles/
larson_testimony_package.pdf.
\29\ Oliveira, M.C. et al., (2022) Palmer amaranth (Amaranthus
palmeri) adaptation to US Midwest agroecosystems. Frontiers in
Agronomy. 4: doi.org/10/3389/fagro.2022.887629.
\30\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0463-
0002.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
American farmers are in desperate need of new pesticides, yet EPA
is imposing new regulations limiting use of existing pesticides and
delaying approval of new products. The most impactful EPA actions
relate to Strategies set forth for compliance with EPA's Endangered
Species Act obligations. Hailed as the ``most significant imposition of
new regulation on the agricultural sector in generations'',\31\ the
EPA's Draft Herbicide Strategy was completely unworkable for American
farmers, especially small producers. The Draft Strategy overestimated
exposure, species sensitivity and critical habitat size, while it
underestimated the benefit of climate-smart practices and failed to
include appropriate offset options. Much of this could have been
avoided if EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs had better farmer
engagement prior to the rollout. EPA's Agriculture Advisor I know is
always ready to assist with such engagement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ https://www.ndda.nd.gov/news/goehring-opposed-epa-draft-
herbicide-strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our industry submitted extensive, constructive comments to EPA.\32\
Subsequently, EPA increased its engagement with USDA and producer
groups, including ours. In their recent, revised proposals, EPA is
addressing some unworkable portions of the Strategy, like erosion
mitigation, but excessive spray buffer distances remain problematic.
Without change, significant productive cropland will be lost to overly
conservative spray buffers. For small production fields, including
those used to produce sugarbeet seed, spray buffers make production
impossible. This threatens entire industries, including ours. This
Committee must ensure the EPA includes reasonable, science-based
adjustments to spray buffer requirements in its Herbicide Strategy
prior to finalization in August.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EPA used the AgDrift model to estimate spray drift by application
method in the Draft Herbicide Strategy.\33\ EPA states the model is
purposefully overly precautionary in its estimates. Although I oppose
the hyper-conservatism of the AgDrift model, it is used for all EPA
risk assessment,\34\ therefore the model itself cannot be readily
adjusted to address unworkable spray buffer maximums in the Draft
Herbicide Strategy. Fortunately, standardizing how the AgDrift model is
applied in the Draft Herbicide Strategy could provide a simple,
scientifically defensible fix for unreasonable spray buffer distance
maximums. Currently, EPA requires 25-fold higher drift control for more
drift resistant application methods than those methods more prone to
drift. This Committee should insist EPA standardize the allowable
depositional fraction (or amount of allowable drift) for all
application methods. If EPA were to standardize to 99.95% drift
control,\35\ spray buffer distances would be reduced 50-90%. With this
approach, the lowest spray buffer distance maximum would be 10, a
level that is still conservative, but more workable for farmers. It is
still protective of critical habitats and listed species. Details of
this approach were submitted by our industry during the public comment
period last fall.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-
0007.
\34\ https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessing-pesticide-
risks/models-pesticide-risk-assessment.
\35\ This is the current allowable rate for aerial application with
fine to medium droplet size in the Draft Herbicide Strategy, therefore
acceptable control by EPA standards.
\36\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The issues stemming from EPA actions that I highlight today are
further compounded by local and state activity. The lack of uniform
labeling of pesticides creates confusion in the marketplace and drives
litigation that threatens access to pesticides that are critical to
climate-smart farming. None more evident than the litigation around
glyphosate and carcinogenicity.\37\ I applaud the development of the
Agricultural Labeling Uniformity Act. Passage of the bipartisan H.R.
4288 will provide much needed certainty for farmers and consumers
alike. Further, in Colorado, there are continued attempts each year to
overturn state preemption,\38\ which keeps many up at night. Sadly, in
Minnesota, farmers, commercial applicators, and other stakeholders are
attempting to grapple with a recent partial state preemption rollback
for just a handful of cities.\39\ Fortunately, though for farmers in
New York and California, Governors Hochul \40\ and Newsom \41\ recently
vetoed similar state preemption rollback attempts, as they recognize
state-level regulation is necessary for robust public health and
environmental protections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ https://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2023/11/07/20-
16758.pdf.
\38\ https://leg.colorado.gov/bills/hb24-1178.
\39\ https://www.house.mn.gov/SessionDaily/Story/17787.
\40\ https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/bills/2023/S5957.
\41\ https://www.gov.ca.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/AB-2146-
VETO.pdf?emrc=da09cc.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I support this Committee codifying state preemption, which is
already the status quo in an overwhelming majority of U.S. states.\42\
The state officials who currently work collaboratively with EPA have
extensive scientific training and are best situated to prevent adverse
effects on the environment from pesticide use. Turning over this
control to local politicians would create a patchwork of regulations
that are not only difficult to understand and implement but are likely
to have significant negative and unintended consequences. Notably,
under the Committee's proposals for uniform labeling and state
preemption, local governments can still regulate pesticide applications
on public property.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ https://www.mypmp.net/2024/02/07/push-for-state-level-
pesticide-preemption-continues/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Farmers across the United States have shown their willingness to
engage with EPA, as evidenced by extensive public comments. EPA must
seek greater farmer engagement, earlier in the process to ensure the
U.S. remains the global leader in sustainable agriculture.
Again, thank you for inviting me to be here today. I look forward
to taking questions.

The Chairman. Dr. Larson, thank you so much for your
testimony today. It is greatly appreciated.
At this time, Members will be recognized for questions in
order of seniority, alternating between Majority and Minority
Members, and in order of arrival for those who joined us after
the hearing convened. You will be recognized for 5 minutes each
in order to allow us to get to as many questions as possible. I
am going to hold a pretty tight gavel on that 5 minutes, just
because we have so many Members that are engaged in this
hearing. I know we will have a vote series coming up here in
the future sometime.
So, I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
In the 2018 Farm Bill, Congress created the FIFRA
Interagency Working Group to improve the consultation process
under the Endangered Species Act for pesticide registration and
registration review. Now, despite this direction, the Biden
Administration failed to utilize the FIFRA IWG in the
development of the Endangered Species Act work plan and
subsequent strategies.
As a result of this failure, I joined Ranking Member Scott,
Chairwoman Stabenow, and Ranking Member Boozman earlier this
year in sending a letter to the EPA requesting a special
meeting between FIFRA IWG and stakeholders directly impacted by
these actions.
Without objection, I would like to insert that letter into
the record.
[The letter referred to is located on p. 75.]
The Chairman. I would also like to thank Ranking Member
Scott for recognizing the serious concerns surrounding these
proposals and joining that effort.
Director Chinn, Dr. Larson, and Mr. Kippley, how can the
EPA better utilize this working group moving forward so that
the impacts to agriculture are minimized?
Dr. Larson. Mr. Chairman, if I may, I think one prime
example is with the draft Herbicide Strategy. The EPA staff
tried in a fairly good attempt to be able to understand whether
growers could comply with the new draft Herbicide Strategy by
creating what they called a case study, which was looking at
what types of conservation practices are standard in an area,
over what extent of acreage.
However, if USDA would have been involved in that process
earlier on, they have the internal expertise from the direct
contact with growers to know which of those practices are
duplicative and therefore would never be implemented by the
same farmer on the same land, and which ones are truly
additive. They also bring to the table the fact that it is not
just one crop scenario that growers are looking at to manage
their farm, it is the entire rotation, which was completely
absent from the EPA strategy.
So, in terms of that IWG, I think it is very critical to
get USDA at the table much faster.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mrs. Chinn?
Mrs. Chinn. In my opinion, I feel like the only solution is
to bring everybody together in the agriculture community to the
table to be involved in the process with EPA every step of the
way. Cooperative federalism works. We have seen it in the past,
and we think that is a great starting point to make sure that
all voices and concerns are heard moving forward.
At the heart of every farmer and rancher, they want to
protect that farm and that legacy to pass on to the next
generation, but they need to be able to do it in a timely
manner that is affordable for their family and their farm and
their operation, because no two family farms are alike.
The Chairman. Very good. Mr. Cooper, any thoughts?
Mr. Cooper. So, I just know from being in the farming
business out in western Ohio that any kind of regulations and
whatever they come at us, if it is not discussed with us out on
the farm, sometimes it is very confusing for us. And so, the
collaboration is very important all the way around, for sure.
The Chairman. Absolutely. Bring everybody to the table.
Great.
The Biden Administration is proposing a new rule to expand
meat and poultry product effluent limitation guidelines. This
flawed proposal would have significant compliance costs, and
close multiple processing facilities. Any government regulation
that closes a single facility is one too many.
Mr. Cooper, are you are concerned that EPA's new proposal
will add more red tape to an already heavily regulated
industry, making it difficult for smaller processors to comply.
Are you concerned with that?
Mr. Cooper. I have a couple of examples. So, we have two
plants in Ohio. One is a turkey harvest plant and one is a
cooked meats plant, and they both have separate types of sewage
systems. Our turkey harvest plant in St. Henry, Ohio, it is a
pretreatment plant that we work very closely with the City of
St. Henry. We have been there since May of 1988, and it is an
indirect setup that we work with them, and then they take it on
through their system. So, for all those years, we have had a
true partnership with them. They have invested money. We have
invested money, and so, in that situation, having the ELGs come
in and tell us to do something different would completely
disrupt that system, and then our other plant that we have has
a self-contained wastewater treatment plant, and we just got
done renovating that with the proper permits, EPA Clean Water
Act and everything, and that is totally all in-house. We don't
even go through the city.
So, having ELGs come at us at different levels would be
very confusing, and not helpful to us.
The Chairman. So, very quickly, do you believe that this
would lead to a concentration within the industry?
Mr. Cooper. Well, sir, so you know, at least in our scope
of scale of our company, we have the wherewithal and we have
the departments and we have an environmental manager, and we
can handle all that. And so that works, but there are many
small companies, many small processors that wouldn't have that
ability, nor maybe the financial backing to be able to handle
this coming at them.
The Chairman. Very good, thank you so much.
Now, I am pleased to recognize the Ranking Member for 5
minutes of questions.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kippley, you made an important statement in your
testimony, and I quote. You said: ``Sometimes I worry that the
wrong rules could put me out of business, but I also know that
having reasonable regulation, practical rules of the road that
everyone must abide by, is very important. Properly designed
and enforced regulations help protect family farmers like me
from bad actors who use harmful and exploitative practices.''
Very good statement, and I would like for the others to comment
on this as well. How do you relate your statement here as it
relates to the WOTUS rule where the regulators come in and
regulate the so-called navigable waters on farmland?
I am very concerned about that. I grew up on a farm.
Farmers must always have water. They have droughts. They got
animals to water and keep alive. I grew up on a tobacco farm.
You got to have water when you plant the plant. It is the only
plant here where you got to put the water in with the plant.
Tell me how this is working. We have had a lot of debate on
this, and I want to know from you all what you all think about
that rule.
Yes, you first, Mr. Kippley.
Mr. Kippley. Me first?
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes, please.
Mr. Kippley. Okay.
Yes, I think it is important that we protect our waters.
Obviously, clean water is important to all of us. Our families
are drinking the same water that we are--your neighbors are.
So, it is important to us that we protect our water.
However, when we overreach and start to hold back water
from the livestock, it truly can end your business. If you
can't get access to water for your cattle, bad things happen.
We just had a neighbor recently had a water tank malfunction in
his pasture, and I think he lost nine head.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Are you supportive of this
Federal water program, regulators coming in? Some of them are
fining our farmers, costing them money.
Mr. Kippley. Yes. I think that it is a very touchy issue,
but no, I don't want them. I am like anybody else. You don't
like somebody to come in and tell you that you can't do it this
way or that way, but there is a need to protect the water.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes. The others, please, what
is your opinion, ma'am? Miss, I will go down the line. Yes, I
am sorry.
Mrs. Chinn. Well, we at the State Department of
Agriculture, we feel like we need to have a voice in that
conversation on a state level. Non-navigable waters, which is
what you normally find on farms and ranches across the United
States, should be left to the jurisdiction of the states
because they are the people who are closest to the farming and
ranching community.
Every state has different challenges and obstacles to
overcome when it comes to farming and ranching, and we feel
like state regulators have the opportunity to cater to the
needs of the agriculture industry to make sure that while we
are protecting and making sure that we have safe and clean
water, we are making sure that agriculture's needs are met at
the same time. So, we feel like the states' voice has been left
out of this decision, and we encourage more cooperative
federalism to make sure that states are involved when it comes
to non-navigable waters like you find on our farms and ranches.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes, good to know.
Mr. Cooper?
Mr. Cooper. So, actually, some of our farmer operations,
about \1/3\ of them are in the western Lake Erie water basin
area, and we do all kinds of things, filter grass strips, and
we don't apply manure on frozen ground. So, we do all kinds of
things that part of it is permitting, part of it is just good
common sense to protect not only our ground, put the right
amount of manure on with a soil test, but also to protect the
water.
But also, what we would like is we have an issue that we
are short of water in two of our facilities, and we would
rather have the government come in and help us with that.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes. Ma'am, your thoughts on
this?
Dr. Larson. Yes. Waters of the U.S. is definitely outside
my area of expertise, but I would like to take a moment to talk
about this bad actors' idea. I just want to clarify for this
Committee that farmers use pesticides in a very responsible
manner, primarily because they are extremely costly. So,
growers are not going to go around and spray products that
don't need to be sprayed. Fertilizers as well are incredibly
costly, even more so with inflationary effects.
So, growers are taking the responsibility and leading with
integrated pest management to try and protect not only the
waters on their ground, but also their land.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Well, thank you very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Lucas for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My constituents have made it abundantly clear to me that
compliance with the Endangered Species Act, or ESA, continues
to be a nearly impossible task. Oklahoma farmers and ranchers
are more than willing to work with regulators to find solutions
that make sense for everyone. After all, everyone in this room
knows that farmers are the original environmentalists.
However, the EPA's recent Herbicide Strategy creates buffer
zone requirements that have caused some unease back home, and
the excessive buffer zone distance requirements remain
unworkable for many producers and could lead to a significant
loss of usable acres.
So, Dr. Larson, in your written testimony, you touched on a
possible solution you proposed to the EPA. Could you elaborate
on this and share if the EPA seems--and this is a big phrase--
seems receptive to your approach?
Dr. Larson. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
I can't gauge how receptive EPA is to the approach that we
put forward because we haven't gotten much feedback. At times,
I have likened it to screaming into a void trying to expect to
get a response, although that engagement has become better when
it comes to erosion mitigation.
We haven't gotten any feedback yet, but have a meeting
scheduled on the spray buffer modifications. So, right now, the
EPA has set a different standard for the amount of what they
call a depositional fraction, or how much of a product they are
willing to tolerate moves off the farm. Using a model that
already overestimates what that drift is going to be, if they
were to apply an equal standard across the board, it could
reduce spray buffers 50 to 90 percent, and still be incredibly
protective.
So, for example, right now there is a 100 requirement for
any ground application. If they apply the same standard to
ground application as they do to aerial application, that would
take that 100 down to 10, which we know is still very
protective of critical environments, because farmers across my
area routinely split fields between sugarbeets and corn. They
will spray things on the corn that should kill the beets and
spray things on the beets that should kill the corn. Yet, they
can control that drift over 22", which is how far apart those
two crops are planted. So, even 10 would be way more than
would be necessary to protect critical species and habitats.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Cooper, I want to pivot briefly and touch on
the EPA effluent guidelines that are affecting your industry
and my producers back home.
Many people in Oklahoma and around the U.S. fear that their
operations would close if this rule went into effect, and you
stated in your written testimony that EPA's estimated number of
plant closures is far below the NPPC's estimation. Can you
expand on the discrepancy between the NPPC's findings and the
EPA's, and where you believe the EPA is missing the mark, if
they are?
Mr. Cooper. I actually have no knowledge about that
discrepancy on that. I just do know that I would be in
agreement, that it is going to affect a lot of small processors
all across America, and just like in the example when I was
talking about in my own plant situation, having this direct
relationship with our local city that has been going on for 36
years working perfectly. The other situation, we have our own
in-house treatment system. So, we can afford and can do that
kind of stuff and it has worked out really well, but I just
believe that when you think about a lot of small processors and
these grants are going to try to get more companies to start
up, this is going to cause less facilities for our swine
industry to be able to take their hogs to for getting
processed.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you.
Before I yield back, Mr. Chairman, I would like to offer a
note, a thought that the farm bill process has been, always
will be, a challenging process, and that the patience of the
leadership of the Committee, sometimes is required to a degree
that is almost biblical in nature. And I appreciate your
patience, and I would note for the historic record that many
times, the challenges in my 30 years on this Committee have not
come within the Committee, but dealing with leadership and the
outside groups. If we can't pull together, as we have in the
past, then I am very concerned about where we go. But I do have
complete faith in your sincerity and your intensity and your
focus to accomplish the mission for the common good, and I
thank you for that.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman yields
back.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Costa,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and the
Ranking Member, for holding this important hearing. I think we
all pray that we can come together on a farm bill before the
end of the year.
Having said that, I was speaking to a group of farm leaders
earlier today, and I represent one of the larger agricultural
areas not only in California, but therefore in the country. I
think that farmers, ranchers, dairymen and -women are critical
in so many different ways, but they are also stewards of the
environment. I think many of us feel that way.
The challenges of coming together with local, state, and
Federal policy to ensure that agriculture remains what it is,
which is a national security issue, it is an international
security issue, and with four percent of the nation's
population directly involved, we don't often think of it in
that way, but it is. And so, what I would like to do is ask a
few questions related to our witnesses.
Obviously, climate change and other factors are impacting
our producers throughout the country. Mr. Kippley, in your
earlier--it is Kippley, right?
Mr. Kippley. Yes.
Mr. Costa. You talked about WOTUS and the challenges of the
ping-pong, as you described it. I would call it a political
football, but where do you think we ultimately find the
commonsense solution so that we avoid the ping-pong effect that
you described?
Mr. Kippley. I think it is going to take scientific, we got
to trust the science. We got to work together at all levels.
Like my colleague to the left here said, the state needs to be
involved in this process. We need farmer input, and we need to
come up with a commonsense solution. I think that is where we
are going to ultimately land.
Unfortunately, the hardest part about the WOTUS has been
the back and forth that we have experienced over the last
number of Administrations. We go from one extreme to the other,
it seems like, and we don't really land anywhere in the middle.
I think that is where it is going to have to be, get all the
parties together and come up with a good plan that----
Mr. Costa. Put them in a room and apply common sense, and
don't let them leave until we have gotten there, huh?
Mr. Kippley. Yes.
Mr. Costa. Dr. Larson, in your testimony you talked about
the importance of avoiding the patchwork of regulations. In
California, we have had some of the strictest pesticide
regulations and herbicide regulations in the country.
We tried in the past to create an effective harmonization
between our efforts at the state and Federal level. Could you
further explain the critical importance on how we try to avoid
that patchwork and try to--I know one size doesn't fit all,
clearly, but--and certain states take different directions, but
could you comment?
Dr. Larson. Thank you, Congressman.
I have lived that firsthand in Boulder County, Colorado.
The county owns a lot of public open space that is used for
agriculture production, so several years ago they took it upon
themselves, the county commissioners, to ban the use of GMOs,
primarily because of their reliance on glyphosate, and ban the
use of neonicotinoids, based off of some activists' promises
that there would be a better way to farm.
And so, that really put a shock to the system. They spent
millions of dollars in taxpayer dollars trying to find a
different method that would make it work, and then all of a
sudden pivoted towards focusing on soil health and recognizing
that some of these pesticides and technologies from a breeding
perspective were important for that.
My city in which I live in has given up using pesticides
for controlling weeds and replaced it with 200 goats. That has
not been really effective at managing the weeds along the
waterways, and what they don't understand is that the weeds
don't respect boundaries. So, even though there are ag
exemptions where people can use pesticides on their own
privately owned ground, all of the river banks along the bike
trails are overridden by kochia. That seed drops into the
waterways. It goes into the irrigation canals, and it goes into
the farms.
Mr. Costa. My time is ending here, but I think common sense
and trying to use or get a concurrence on best science is
always a challenge when you are trying to harmonize regulations
and maintaining food safety and worker safety clearly are the
goals. More to be said, but not enough time.
Mr. Cooper, your description of your rendering operations
and process sounds similar to some of the things we are dealing
with in California. Do you use a rendering operation?
Mr. Cooper. Yes, we do. We have had a long-term
relationship with Wintzer and Sons, which is a local renderer,
and it is, I would call it a symbiotic----
Mr. Costa. What percentage of the wastes would you guess
are able to be recycled? I mean, give me a ballpark.
Mr. Cooper. Through our live turkey harvesting plant, I
think it is about 15 to 20 percent runs through them, and then
they render it and we purchase some of that back from them. And
so, it has been a great relationship and we would have a really
tough time if we didn't have that renderer right next to us,
which is literally about 45 minutes away.
Mr. Costa. Yes, we have done some similar things. Keep up
the good work.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, but obviously more work
needs to be done.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize Congressman Austin Scott for 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I ask unanimous consent to submit a letter for the record
from 21 ag organizations, including the American Soybean
Association and Cotton and U.S. Peanut Federation requesting
the EPA extend the comment period for the proposed interim
decision to cancel all uses of Acephate except for tree
injections by 30 days.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The letter referred to is located on p. 76.]
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Dr. Larson, I am going to come
back to you in a second, but I do want to thank you for making
the statements that you made. I mean, farmers don't just wake
up in the morning and decide that they want to spray a
pesticide or an herbicide and spend the money on those
chemicals or on the diesel that it takes to spray them, unless
it is going to lead to crop yield increases, which are
necessary for our food supply in this country. I think that
gets lost sometimes in the discussion when you are dealing with
activists and environmentalists. They think that the farmer
just wakes up in the morning and wants to go spend money on
diesel and spend money on chemicals, and it is just false. If
it is not going to lead to higher yields for our farmers, then
they are not going to go waste the money. They don't have the
money to waste. You made a statement similar to that, and I
appreciate you stating that. These liberal activists I
personally believe are funded by the Chinese Communist
Government who has been very smart in the way they have dipped
into the seed supply and the chemical supply that it takes to
grow the crops that we all depend on for our food supply.
With that said, Director Chinn, many specialty crop growers
in my district rely on a variety of crop protection tools to
protect their fruits and vegetables from damaging pests and
diseases. The use of many of these tools is possible through
the work of the IR-4 project, which develops the data needed to
add additional uses to labels and establish tolerances.
Can you talk about the importance of registering additional
tools for specialty crops and other minor uses?
Mrs. Chinn. Sure. We share your concern. We need to make
sure that we have tools in the toolbox that fit every size
farmer, whether they are a specialty farmer or a large farmer.
We need to make sure that there is the ability to change a
label when necessary to meet the needs that, say, a specialty
farmer is experiencing at that time. We also need to make sure
that the burdensome regulations that are coming down from the
government are not so burdensome that they force farmers to
stop using practices that are good for the environment and
protecting their family operation.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Let me say this, because I
know you are at the state level. I have served for 14 years in
the state legislature in Georgia, and I served under multiple
governors, both Democrat and Republican. I found that whether I
had a Democratic or a Republican Administration at the state
level, the people that were operating the state agencies were
fact-based decision-makers that were solution oriented, and
recognized the needs of the citizens. I don't feel that same
way about the people in the Federal agencies, and so, I
appreciate you and the role that the states play in making sure
that we have the balance. I think that the states do a much
better job of it than bureaucratic overlords in the Federal
agencies.
Dr. Larson, many farmers in my district rely on herbicides
like glyphosate. In fact, I probably used some this weekend
around my house, even though I am not farming, Dicamba and
atrazine, when implementing voluntary, incentive-based
conservation practices like cover cropping and reduced or no-
till that helps sequester carbon in the soil. Can you elaborate
on the importance of using herbicides to implement conservation
practices, and how the reduction of these chemicals is going to
hurt conservation?
Dr. Larson. Yes, thank you, Congressman. This is one of my
favorite talking points.
For sugarbeets, the introduction of glyphosate tolerance
has been a quantum leap change for our growers. They are
finally able to control the weeds. It increased yields by 35
percent, cut fuel consumption 50 percent, cut greenhouse gas
emissions by 40 percent, and has cut water consumption by 30
percent. I mean, that is true sustainable intensification.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Good for the environment.
Dr. Larson. If we were to lose that tool, it would be
devastating for our growers. It takes decades to sequester
carbon in the soil, but it takes minutes to lose it. And so, if
we lose those tools and have to go back to intensive tillage to
maintain weed control, all of that carbon is lost back to the
atmosphere.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. You answered my next question,
which was, what is the impact on conservation if we lose those
chemicals?
But, most of the farmers that I know want to use a system
that is good for the environment. They don't just wake up in
the morning--none of the farmers I know wake up in the
morning--and try to find a way to use more diesel, more
chemicals.
I appreciate all of you being here.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Ms. Adams for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the Ranking Member
as well for holding the hearing today, and to our witnesses,
thank you for your testimony.
It is probably not surprising that I want to talk about the
farm bill and the context of today's conversation, not only
because we still have not passed one, but because it would, as
reported out of the Committee, undermine many of the important
protections to human and environmental health that are up for
discussion today. I find it a bit funny that we always hear
about crop protection so much in our ag meetings, when we ought
to be talking about protecting human health.
It is one thing to have a serious conversation about
equipping our farmers with the tools they need to grow, but it
is another thing to undo regulations that are already on the
books, which is what the preemption style language tucked into
Title X of the Farm, Food, and National Security Act would do.
As a former state legislator of 20\1/2\ years, and the
Ranking Member of the Workforce Protection Subcommittee on
Education and the Workforce, I have grave concerns about what
it would mean for the farm bill to undo state and local level
pesticide regulations, especially as those regulations serve to
protect all kinds of people, but especially farm workers and
other applicators.
If the goal is to, is truly uniformity in pesticide
regulations, then setting a higher floor would be one way to do
that. The farm bill, as it is written, stacked the deck against
food and farm workers, none of whom are represented on the
panel today. But I have to say that the term regulated
community was new to me. I do feel that it is unfortunate that
we did not hear from any members of communities, often low-
income communities of color, who endure the cumulative impacts
of the products and the practices under scrutiny today.
So, while I do appreciate the witnesses' testimony saying
that we need to pay greater attention to the regulatory system
governing pesticides, I don't agree with the idea that this
attention should devolve into further weakening regulations and
further exposing residents of my district and state to levels
of chemical inputs not tolerated in many other nations.
Agriculture has many unique exemptions to environmental
laws and regulations that other industries don't face. For
example, we heard how air reporting requirements for animal
waste are exempt under CERCLA and EPCRA for certain farms. But
I want to ask a few questions that acknowledge such carve-outs.
So, if we want the EPA to do a better job, which I think we
should all want that, I am more than a little puzzled as to how
a 20 percent cut to their funding would allow for that, and
that is what we went through yesterday's markup in
appropriations.
So, Mr. Kippley, thanks for your testimony. I do want to
hone in on the PFAS. One significant issue with PFAS is that
they are persistent in the environment, which is an issue in my
State of North Carolina, no stranger to that. But how is this
impacting farmers, and what can we do to remediate these
issues, and how is the NFU engaging in this conversation?
Mr. Kippley. So, personally, in South Dakota, we haven't
dealt a lot with PFAS, whether it is just because we haven't
done the studies to find that it is there, or it is not there.
But NFU, I guess our belief there is that we need to make sure
the farmers are held harmless the best we can in this process.
This is done to them, done by companies creating the stuff and
not by the farmers themselves, so as far as that goes, we just
want to make sure the farmers are held harmless and help them
out.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, sir.
Mrs. Chinn, you raised the EPA's proposed rule on effluent
limitation guidelines, and their potential effects on market
competition. The Biden Administration has worked to increase
competition in the processing sector, including by increasing
the number of plants.
So, is NASDA supportive of those pro-competition efforts,
and do you feel that it is important to balance the need for
safe and affordable drinking water for local communities in the
discussion about effluent guidelines?
Mrs. Chinn. Thank you for that question.
We are very supportive in expanding the small- and mid-size
meat processing facilities. Our state legislature actually put
$20 million into that effort for a grant program, so we feel
that it is very important to give our farming community a
choice of where they send their animals to go be processed.
We know that these small, local businesses are doing
everything within their means to make sure that they protect
the water supply, but we really feel like the local and state
governments need to be involved in that decision-making
process, because we are the people closest to those processors
and we want to do everything that we can to help them,
including rendering and things like that that help us recycle
those resources.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, ma'am.
I have a question for Dr. Larson, but Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back and I will just submit that in writing.
Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. LaMalfa,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
I want to direct this to Director Chinn and Dr. Larson on
the use of the controlled materials we use in agriculture. I am
a farmer in my real life as well, and so, we certainly
understand how, as Mr. Scott was mentioning, we don't just use
these materials for kicks. They are expensive and you have hold
periods. You have things you have to do to accommodate it. We
are glad to have the materials, but I don't want to use them
any more than necessary either. The organic market is an
important one. It is one I support, but it is also limited,
too. So, when you find that the vast majority of our crops
grown in this country do use some level of weed control or
insect control in order to be viable, then we have to
acknowledge that, or we are not going to be the breadbasket for
the country and the world that we have been. So, it is really
not debatable.
So, a piece of info that I have here is that a study out of
the University of Arkansas says that the production of corn and
other commodities could decline as much as 70 percent without
the use of these materials, without having them available. So,
when they are highly regulated, well, I should say not highly.
Over-regulated. Yes, they are well-regulated and there are
reasons for that. We all get that as long as we can still work
through the maze. But farmers' yields will suffer if they are
regulated to the point that they cannot use these materials or
new ones cannot be developed.
So, you would end up using more land to grow the same
amount of crop at less profit per acre, I know profit is a
dirty word in some places around here, but if you are not
making a living, if you are not in the black, then you are not
going to be there very long no matter who you are. So, you are
going to use more land. You are going to have--perhaps use more
water in order to grow the same amount of crop, and then so the
market has to get more expensive for the crops as well.
So, at the same time we are having to use more land and
more water assets, and this goes against what the environmental
groups tell us they want. They want to save more water for fish
or for environmental purposes. They want more land to be
conserved for wildland or heaven knows, covering up with solar
panels like in the San Joaquin Valley, which seems to be their
idea of solar farms. So, and then the harming the breadbasket
that we have in this country.
So, getting to the question, Director Chinn and Dr. Larson,
are you just putting the bottom line here. Have you been seeing
farmers go out of business because they can't keep up with the
costs of these regulations, and the price of the materials
themselves, since they have a narrower window of market?
Mrs. Chinn. Absolutely, that is a huge concern, especially
for our Missouri farmers. Our smaller farmers, our new,
beginning farmers do not have the equity and taking away one of
the tools they have in their toolbox is going to have a
detrimental impact on their bottom line and their ability to
meet their debt service that they need to with their local
lending institution. Our fear is that the local lending
institution is going to call their notes due, and it is going
to put them out of business. We need to make sure that they
have many choices when it comes to crop protection tools, and
we need to make sure that the rules and regulations in place
are things that are workable. That is why we encourage the
state departments of ag being able to be a part of these
decisions with EPA so we can represent what that small farmer
and that the boots on the ground are seeing when they try to
implement those regulations as written.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. So, they will be gone.
Dr. Larson?
Dr. Larson. When Palmer amaranth exploded into our markets
in Colorado and Nebraska, I had a farmer tell me that his yield
went from 32 tons per acre for sugarbeets to 11 tons overnight.
That weed grows from a seed to setting seed in under 2 weeks.
It grows 2" a day. If we lost access to herbicides, not only
that are important to our sugarbeet crop, but for the crops
that we grow in rotation, our guys will go out of business. And
it took a year too long to get the emergency exemption that we
needed for getting that weed back under control.
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes. Well, what we face--I am a rice grower in
real life, and we face some materials that have been just
outright banned, or other ones that are not approved soon
enough like you are talking about where we have certain weed
materials that they are working, but the weeds develop a
resistance. And so, we have to rotate amongst maybe five or six
different materials, these one or two this year, and move them
around for the next year use something else, and we are still
not getting 100 percent, but we are at least keeping at it.
So, it really is difficult to keep the materials alive when
the EPA is trying to stop them. So, with these mandates, I am
not sure how we continue to produce the way American farmers
and American consumers are expecting to.
So, thank you for that, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentlelady from Ohio,
Congresswoman Brown, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
expert panel for being here. Your perspectives are very
helpful.
Every day, millions of Americans rely on our aviation
industry to travel, recreate, and move goods, but historically,
flying has ranked as one of the highest producers of carbon
emissions. Thankfully, Americans and American farmers are
innovators, and the sustainable aviation fuel industry
continues to grow and develop. And as my home State of Ohio has
long been called the birthplace of aviation, I am thrilled to
see it emerging once again as a leader in producing the
feedstocks needed for sustainable aviation fuel.
Ohio ranks in the top ten national producers of corn and
ethanol, proving that our farmers can deliver what we need to
build a strong, clean fuel industry. I am proud to have
supported the historic climate innovations in the Inflation
Reduction Act (Pub. L. 117-169), including the creation of a
$1.25 per gallon tax credit for producers of qualifying
aviation fuels. And I have been glad to see the interagency
collaboration to get this right and make sure that farmers,
industry, and consumers are all benefitting.
So, Mr. Kippley, you shared your organization's support for
the Administration's Sustainable Aviation Fuel Grand Challenge.
How is this emerging industry impacting the livelihood of the
National Farmers Union membership?
Mr. Kippley. Yes. I think it is going to be the next level
of ethanol. If we look back prior to ethanol plants coming on
board, we see our small towns dwindling at a very rapid rate.
There wasn't a lot of industry moving into rural South Dakota
to start new businesses up. And within 50 miles of my hometown,
we have four ethanol plants, which all employ probably 20, 30
people a piece, not to mention the increased profits to
producers of corn. And then we also have an AGP soybean
processing plant there as well, again, employing another 20, 30
people and increased profits. I just see this as continuation
for us in this product.
One thing I will always say is if you think something can't
be done, tell an American farmer. They will figure out how to
get it done, and will do it well. So, we are up for the
challenge.
Ms. Brown. Thank you for that.
In the lead up to our farm bill markup, we heard time and
time again in this Committee how important strong conservation
incentives and practices are, and Democrats on this Committee
fought hard and will continue to fight to protect conservation
programming and dollars.
I know many of you on the panel today have engaged with
these conservation programs firsthand. So, I would like to ask
you all how do you see the role of agriculture in the
production of sustainable aviation fuels, and what conservation
practices are you implementing on your farm to support this
industry while ensuring environmental sustainability?
Mr. Kippley. So, on our farm we have been no-till for
years; however, some of the current regulations will not allow
us to meet everything that is there. We need to open it up so
that farms in the northern part of the U.S. can easily or more
easily access these benefits. Cover crops just don't work in
our part of the world. I am 26 miles from the North Dakota
border, and by the time we get corn out, normally there is snow
on the ground. We are always hopeful we have the beans out
before the snow hits.
So, we are limited in some aspects of the current rules,
but there are a lot of other things that we can do. CSP Program
is widely used in our area. We have a lot of no-till in the
area due to lack of water in our area. So, we will continue to
do environmentally friendly farming.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
Mrs. Chinn. Thank you for that question. I think it is
important that we remember that our farmers are price-takers
and they are not price-makers. And so, they want to do what is
right for their farming community and their farms and ranches
to pass it onto that next generation, but meeting unfunded
mandates that are passed on from the Federal Government make it
very challenging for them. They need to be able to implement
those practices in a way that is feasible for their family and
their operation, and I think sometimes that gets forgotten
about. I also think it is important that they have every tool
available for them.
In the State of Missouri, our agriculture in the very
southern Bootheel is very different than the northwest corner.
There is over a month to 6 weeks difference in planting seasons
because of that, and so as Mr. Kippley said, it might work in
the Bootheel area of our state to use cover crops, but when the
northwest portion of our state is late harvesting, they don't
have that opportunity to sow that cover crop, and they should
not be punished for that because many times, they have
implemented terraces and other practices that are conservation-
minded to make sure they protect their farm.
Ms. Brown. Thank you.
All right. Well, it looks like my time has expired, and I
just want to close with this if I may, Mr. Chairman.
I am committed to working with my colleagues and alongside
the Biden-Harris Administration to take real steps to lead in
the clean energy transition, support American farmers, and to
combat the threats of climate change.
And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
I now recognize Mr. Bost for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
being here and coming before the Committee to discuss all the
EPA's issues that are out there right now, and how it impacts
American agriculture. It is really disappointing that
Administrator Regan wouldn't give Congress the same respect.
So, going into my first question, many of you have talked
about the EPA's handling of the Waters of the United States,
and if we say it has been sloppy at best is the way we can
describe it. There have been so many back-and-forth ways that
all of a sudden, they are implementing WOTUS this way, then
they are implementing this way. Then they create a lot of
confusion. And to tell you the truth, my constituents from deep
southern Illinois, they are pretty well fed up.
Farmers in southern Illinois have tried to get the Federal
Government to give an answer, which they don't give, or when
they do give, it is one side and then they flip back. So, I
don't know what this Administration is trying to do now that
they have a court ruling, why they don't go ahead and move
forward and realize that they are not for their green agenda.
They are for the law, the way the law is supposed to be
handled.
So, that being said, now a year after the Supreme Court
ruling, nothing has really changed thanks in large part nobody
but the EPA. American farmers and many others are still in a
state of limbo and confused as they continue to wait for what
new WOTUS rules will be fully implemented.
So, Director Chinn, let me ask, from a state perspective,
and I was a state legislator for 20 years in the State of
Illinois, on the Agriculture Committee for 20 years, how are
farmers expected to know how to comply with the law when the
definition is still so unclear, and what resources are
available to assist them in that process?
Mrs. Chinn. Thank you for that question. That is one of the
biggest challenges our farming community faces is how do they
comply with WOTUS? They reach out to us and the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources, and we don't have good answers
for them because we as state regulators can't find the answers
either. We have reached out to EPA. They, too, do not know how
to help us in advising the agriculture community to move
forward.
In Missouri, we are still going under the pre-2015 WOTUS
definition because we don't have that clarity, and that is what
our farming community needs. They need clarity and they need
something that is easy to understand and easy to implement. And
we cannot forget the state's role in making sure we protect the
non-navigable waters. The farming community would much rather
deal with someone from the state than they would from the
Federal Government.
Mr. Bost. Thank you.
It is really no secret that the EPA pesticide review
process is broken, and it has gotten worse in recent years.
Currently, EPA meets next to none of the statutory PRIA
regulation deadlines. In turn, this delays new, innovative
products from reaching the farm when they need it the most.
Now, to make the solution worse, EPA has recently insisted
on doing their draft Endangered Species Act assessment. This
has only added to these delays, and consumes limited staff
resources, adding months or years to the regulation process.
For any of the witnesses at the table, can you speak to the
importance of streamlining EPA's pesticide review process,
focusing staff and resources on the issuing area and actually
getting the rules out?
Dr. Larson. Congressman, if I may, I can address that
question.
Mr. Bost. Please.
Dr. Larson. So, when we had Palmer amaranth come onto the
scene in Colorado and Nebraska, we needed an urgent solution,
and the EPA has an emergency exemption option under the Section
18 where they had full statutory authority to approve an
unregulated product for our growers to use. Yet, it took them
18 months to get that approval, and I can tell you that climate
change is worsening the disease and pest epidemics. This
situation is going to get much more urgent for farmers. They
need to get tools in a timely fashion in order to address these
worsening diseases and pest problems if we have any chance of
maintaining the supply that we need of food.
Mr. Cooper. Congressman, I would like to add to that. We
totally agree with everything you said there. Along with that,
back in March 28, trade organizations sent a letter to the EPA
on this whole WOTUS question, asking questions and everything,
and in the past 3 months, there has been absolutely no response
to that. Like how hard is that? So many organizations in the
letter, you got a few questions. It would probably take, what,
an hour for somebody to answer them and they don't even do
that. So, it just goes along with what all the witnesses are
saying.
Mr. Bost. Well, my time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I do
want to close with one statement here.
I do wish that the EPA themselves were here, and the reason
being is because there is, like all government agencies, they
are supposed to be here to help, not to hinder. And
unfortunately, this is an agency that has continued to grow,
like all bureaucratic agencies do, and unfortunately, to be an
agency that punishes people and doesn't really help them.
So, thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman, and I assure him that
we will extend another invitation to Administrator Regan. This
one may be a little firmer to have him before the Committee.
I am pleased to recognize Ms. Caraveo for 5 minutes.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Chairman Thompson and Ranking
Member Scott. Thank you for hosting this hearing this morning,
and to our witnesses, thank you for being here to provide your
testimony. Dr. Larson, I especially appreciate you joining us
from Colorado. I represent leading producers of sugarbeets in
Colorado, and last year, I expressed concern to Administrator
Regan about the lack of effective U.S.-approved crop protection
tools to address the aggressive invasive weed, Palmer amaranth,
which was causing serious economic losses to our sugarbeet
growers, as you have said, Dr. Larson, and I was glad to hear
when the EPA did eventually grant Colorado counties approval
for a tool for the 2024 growing season.
You have touched on the issue of Palmer amaranth and what
the process has been like with the EPA a couple of times. Is
there anything else that you want the Committee to know or that
needs to be expanded upon?
Dr. Larson. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I would be remiss if I didn't take the time to recognize
you in this moment for all the support that you give to your
constituents. It does not go unnoticed back home that you have
stood up for us when we have needed a Section 18. You have
stood up for us when we need improved safety nets. That makes a
difference for the survivability of our industry that runs deep
within these family farms.
For me, it is very challenging for our growers. Once you
work with farmers, they integrate themselves within your soul.
I had farmers calling me with life-and-death situations in
terms of trying to get this weed under control. Farmers operate
on net revenues about two percent or under two percent, so they
are one natural disaster away from bankruptcy, and it is not
the same when you lose your job versus lose your farm. Because
these farmers have looked back over the generations and seen
their fathers, their grandfathers, their great-grandfathers
struggle and make it through. If they lose that farm, that is a
very heavy burden on these individuals.
We have seen the impacts of getting that Section 18. Our
acreage grew 3,000 acres this year. Because without access to
an herbicide that would allow them to control this weed, 60
percent of our growers rent land from other people. They don't
get granted access to that land if they don't have tools to
control the weeds during that rotation into sugarbeets.
Sugarbeet cooperatives have both a right and a responsibility
to have to grow those sugarbeets year in and year out. So, it
forced growers to shorten rotations on the ground that they
own, and that just creates other epidemic issues for them when
they have diseases and pests that they can't manage through
longer rotation. So, it has been very impactful to have this
product available to us this year.
Ms. Caraveo. Well, I certainly appreciate the work that you
do on behalf of our sugarbeet growers, and look forward to
continuing to work together to make sure that we continue to
expand their crop yields, and make sure that they can keep
their farms.
Something else that Colorado has led on is around the
agricultural right to repair. I believe we passed either the
first or second law of its kind in the country right after I
left the state legislature or actually while I was in the state
legislature, and I know, Mr. Kippley, that you have expressed
concerns, particularly around whether it is compatible with
Clean Air Act provisions.
How would you respond to the concern that right to repair
would undermine emissions compliance?
Mr. Kippley. Yes, absolutely. It does not, number one.
Nowhere does it say that if you have the right to repair that
you have the right to take your emissions off your tractor, so
it is no different than the current rules.
What it does allow is it allows you to work on your
equipment on weekends and evenings when you can't get a
mechanic. It does allow you to call an independent guy if you
feel like the dealer is a little bit high. We have all used
independent dealers on our cars because of that reason. And so,
to take that tool away from a farmer, not allowing you to work
on your own equipment just because they are trying to hide
behind a rule that didn't exist was really frustrating. And so,
we are glad to see the EPA came out boldly and said not only do
we not agree with John Deere's assessment, but we also are in
favor of right to repair. So, thank you for the question.
Ms. Caraveo. Of course. Thank you for your testimony, and I
look forward to continuing to work with you all to make sure
that when we are looking how to preserve the environmental
cause around agriculture that we recognize that farmers are our
first environmentalists, as has been said, and that we need to
be reasonable around the pressures that we sometimes place on
them.
Thank you, and with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Baird for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. I was sitting here
listening to the testimony and I should have been paying
attention.
The Chairman. That is not a bad thing.
Mr. Baird. Thank you for having this hearing, and I really
appreciate the witnesses being here.
My question deals--and I want to bring this up not because
of me, but to kind of set the stage a little. I am concerned
about this weaponizing the pesticide registration and
registration review process, and that has a problem because it
takes away from being able to have some of these important
tools, which many of us have made comments about.
But in 2022, I introduced the Farmers Deserve Notification
Act (H.R. 9035, 117th Congress), and that required 270 day
advanced notice in the Federal Register, should they think
about, or the EPA think about canceling, suspending, or
enacting any new restrictions on pesticides.
So, my question is for any of the witnesses. Do you care to
elaborate on that, or since you have all come such a long way,
because this is a topic of real interest to me because it is
such a concern to farmers and producers. I am using that just
as a way to set the stage, so if you have anything that you
haven't mentioned already, then feel free to do that.
I am going to start in reverse order. Dr. Larson, start
with you. Does that work out?
Dr. Larson. Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman.
I am very concerned about how slow the regulation already
is for pesticides, but you overlay on top of that the new
restrictions with the draft Herbicide Strategy and all of the
Strategies that would be coming to get EPA into compliance with
its Endangered Species Act obligations, it is just going to
slow that process down even further, and probably limit the way
that those tools can be used without the data and the science
to back it up.
Mr. Cooper. Congressman, I am really happy you asked that
question because in our toolbox in the livestock and poultry
side, we have two very key tools that we use, which are
formaldehyde and rodenticides. Of course, formaldehyde is not
under the pesticide situation, but in both cases, they are
extremely important to us. I remember all the way back to my
younger days with my dad, and he used formaldehyde in the
hatchery and the breeder farms, killed off viruses and
bacteria, and we, my brother and I, have used it throughout our
operation. Of course, we use MSDS safety sheets, and we do
everything that needs to be done. We got high-path AI last fall
in one of our turkey farms, and after we did all the ODA, USDA
cleaned out and composted the turkeys and everything, dirt
floors in these barns. About the only thing that is going to
really kill that high-path AI virus really well is
formaldehyde, and if we didn't have that, I am not sure that we
would have been cleared to put turkeys back in that as soon as
we did, which was about 72 days, which was really good.
On the rodenticide thing, again, kind of a quick story, but
when I was a kid, we had cats in the barns and that was the
mousers, right? Probably some of you had cats around your house
for the same reason. Well, now we have to have rodenticides. We
can't have cats in our barns these days. So, anyway,
rodenticides are very important. In our own particular company,
we use a rotating three different ones that we buy wholesale.
They are all commercially approved and everything, and then our
425 family farmers each 3 or 4 months, we will tell them which
one that they can come pick up, and they put them in pet-proof
boxes, put them all around the barns, and rodents as we all
know are big carriers of diseases, and all that kind of stuff.
So, if we didn't have the rodenticides to stop that, high-path
AI, PERS, PED through the swine industry, we would have an
absolute mess. So, those two are critical to us.
Mr. Baird. It is interesting you mentioned the cats,
because that is an all-natural process. Anyway, sorry.
Mrs. Chinn. Yes. For us, we want to make sure that any
decisions that EPA makes moving forward are based on sound-
science. That is what the agriculture community needs, and
really is yearning for.
In the State of Missouri, our motto is: ``Education over
Regulation'', and we would encourage EPA to do that as well.
Unannounced surprise visits to family farms, that is not only
their place of business, that is their home. That is where they
are raising their family. Nothing that they have done that is
in violation can be fixed within 48 hours. So, just having that
common courtesy and reaching out to that state and local agency
to go with them, because they have a working relationship with
the state, it is going to end up having that overall goal
achieved in protecting the environment while protecting
agriculture at the same time.
So, education over regulation, and decisions based on
sound-science.
Mr. Baird. We have about 16 seconds, so can you answer that
in 16 seconds?
Mr. Kippley. I will do my best.
I would agree a lot with what you just said there. Sound-
science is very important, and the tools need to be in the
toolbox. So, when you pull them away from us without the proper
timing, it is a real issue, not only for sugarbeets, but it is
the same for corn and soybeans.
Mr. Baird. And I suppose, Mr. Chairman, I don't have time
to go into Dicamba? Do I have those questions?
The Chairman. I suppose you are correct.
Mr. Baird. Okay.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Baird.
I now recognize Mrs. Hayes for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you.
Mr. Kippley, were you done with your answer? Mr. Baird is
my friend. Thank you.
Thank you, and thank you to our witnesses for your
testimony today.
The EPA plays an important role in ensuring every American
has clean water to drink, clean air to breathe, and preserving
the health of our environment for future generations. EPA
oversight of water quality is crucial to farming, in particular
as it relates to PFAS or forever chemicals, which can enter the
environment through pesticides or contaminated biosolids, and
persist in the water and soil indefinitely.
In April, I visited the Litchfield Water Pollution Control
Authority in my district to tour their treatment facility and
learn how they will use Federal funds to reduce phosphorus
contamination. These facilities perform critical, but often
unrecognized, work to keep our communities healthy.
Mr. Kippley, in your testimony you pointed out the need to
hold those who violate the law accountable for PFAS
contamination. I have heard similar concerns from water
utilities.
Earlier this year, EPA finalized a rule on PFAS
communication. I am sorry, on PFAS contamination, and clarified
that the intent of the Agency was not to pursue certain
parties, such as water utilities, fire departments, and
farmers.
My question is, how does this final rule help farmers in
dealing with PFAS contamination, and what role can farmers play
in keeping drinking water clean?
Mr. Kippley. I am going to have to get back to you on that.
In South Dakota, we haven't dealt with a lot of PFAS issues.
The Farmers Union, we are definitely in support of
continued research into this problem, so we will get back to
you with some specifics.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. I appreciate it, and in all honesty,
I haven't had a lot of background information on PFAS until we
had a huge contamination in one of our most precious rivers.
So, in my district and in my state, we are hyper-aware of the
damages of PFAS. So, I am really interested, so I will follow
up on that.
Starting on October 1, 2024, Connecticut will prohibit the
sale and use of PFAS containing biosolids or wastewater sludge
as part of a larger phase-out into law last month. Biosolids
have a number of uses in agriculture, including as low-cost
fertilizer. Unfortunately, they contain PFAS and lead, and lead
to wider contamination of soil, water, and crops. Limited
resources can be a barrier for small farms and rural utilities
in conducting proper testing to prevent contamination. Though
the use of biosolids as fertilizer by farmers in Connecticut is
not extensive, there must be efforts to spread awareness about
this change as we look towards a cleaner, safer future.
Mrs. Chinn, from your perspective, how can state
departments of agriculture help eliminate things like PFAS
contamination, and additionally, what can Congress do to foster
greater outreach to small family farms that are not typically
able to engage with Federal regulators and stakeholders? And I
can tell you, I absolutely loved your answer to the last
question about education over regulation, and I am sure that is
probably going to bleed into this answer as well.
Mrs. Chinn. Absolutely. It is our motto, but NASDA supports
funding Federal research for mitigation strategies on the risk
of PFAS contaminations in the food supply, clean-up efforts,
and avoiding unintended consequences. I think we work together
as a partnership with the states and the Federal Government and
the agriculture community to try and make sure that we can
mitigate, do the research that is necessary, and make sure that
the farmer is not the one who is left to blame. Because many
times, they did not create the PFAS; they were the recipient of
it on their land. So, I think it is going to be very important
that we do the education over regulation, and that we make sure
that the farmers are held harmless.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper. Could I offer a little bit there on?
Mrs. Hayes. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Cooper. So, we don't have any in our area in Ohio that
I am aware of about the PFAS, but you talked about fertilizer.
So, if you think about it, sometimes the EPA and manure,
you talk about toxic chemicals and all this, and what more
natural way to fertilize your crops than with manure, right? It
is all-natural.
Just to give you an example, when we started promoting this
to our local farmers some 30 years ago, we were paying them to
take the manure from our barns. Now, they pay us $25 a ton for
our dry turkey manure and $65 an acre for our liquid swine
manure, and they all tell us that their worm population in
their soil increases like three and four times because the
worms love the all-natural product. So, it is kind of a
different way to go at it, but you could reduce it by using
more manure and less commercial fertilizer.
Mrs. Hayes. Sir, since joining this Committee 5 years ago,
I have learned more about manure than any one person. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Lucas [presiding.] The gentlelady is very lucky, and
the gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from the Dakotas for
5 minutes, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. I would start by noting Mrs. Hayes is right,
the PFAS is just nasty, nasty, evil stuff, and we want to keep
the water as clean as we can in the most reasonable way
possible.
But I want to turn my attention to Dr. Larson and Mr.
Kippley, who is just a great South Dakotan, and he and his
wife, Rachel, are fantastic, fantastic members of the broader
agricultural community for sure.
But the Constitution talks about interstate commerce in a
particular way with a strong Federal role there because they
didn't want a lot of barriers to a national marketplace, a
robust marketplace. I was grateful that both of you called out
the Agricultural Labeling Uniformity Act that I did with my
friend, Mr. Costa from California, on the other side of the
aisle. I just wanted to give you an opportunity to talk a
little bit about why you think that is the right approach, and
maybe starting by the weaknesses of having a more fractured,
balkanized approach to our labeling.
Dr. Larson?
Dr. Larson. Yes, thank you, Congressman. It is very
difficult to understand the impacts on human health and the
environment from various pesticides. You need formal training
and education to understand how to evaluate that. So, thinking
that we can push it down to the local level and have county
commissioners or state legislators try and decide what the risk
of a pesticide is, is very complicated. It should reside within
the EPA with the Ph.D. level scientists that are doing those
critical and well thought out experiments.
Mr. Johnson. Because at some point, we want rigorous and
robust evidence to be driving these science-based decisions.
Dr. Larson. One hundred percent, and that can be backed up
with the trained and educated scientists that work for the
state as well. But beyond that, it should not be fractured down
to the more local level.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Kippley?
Mr. Kippley. So, as you know, Mr. Johnson, we live in the
northeast part of South Dakota, and our local co-op expands
over two other states. If you allow states to make their own
rules, you are going to have issues with the co-op sending out
a sprayer and not knowing which side of the border he is
spraying that day, and possibly spraying on the field by
accident across the border. Because we do have a lot of farmers
that cross across state lines right in our area, and I just
think that is an issue that we want to avoid.
So, getting uniform across the U.S. is the only way that we
should be proceeding.
Mr. Johnson. So, shifting.
Mrs. Chinn, I loved you talking about cooperative
federalism, because of course, that is the way it should be.
There is a role, I would think, for states in this space. Talk
to us about the appropriate role for states when it comes to
labeling, or the management of pesticides, herbicides,
fungicides, others.
Mrs. Chinn. So, we are operating with EPA under a
cooperative agreement to be their co-regulator, and when it
comes to pesticide uniformity, we really think it is important
to trust the EPA's science on the human health aspect of it. We
want to make sure that science decisions--sound-science
decisions are being made.
We also know how important it is when EPA is making a
decision that they include the state in those decisions,
because we are the ones going out, doing those investigations
and those inspections on the farms, and when they passed, for
example, the Endangered Species Act and they were trying to
make those decisions last year, they made some decisions that
had they reached out to us at the state, we could have helped
them and prevented a lot of extra work for them. An example of
that is the Enlist. Last January, they came out saying that
there were going to be some counties in the State of Missouri
that were not going to be able to use that because of an
endangered species, the American burying beetle. But had they
reached out to us at the state, we would have told them about a
study the Missouri Department of Conservation had done in
conjunction with U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services that showed
that agriculture practices actually enhanced the habitat for
the American burying beetle.
So, as a result, we spent 3 months arguing back and forth
with them, trying to make sure that they understood we were not
harming, but we needed to allow these producers to use the
products they had already purchased and were sitting in their
shed.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I think that is well said, and I would
just observe, Mr. Chairman, that although we had some hyper-
partisan comments at the front end of today's hearing, which I
think were sort of out of character for the Ranking Member, it
made this committee room seem more partisan than we are
accustomed to being. So, I just want to get us back to the
culture of the Agriculture Committee, which is to observe that
here we have Majority and Minority witnesses alike coming
together to note the strengths of the approach that Mr. Costa
and I had, again, on a bipartisan basis, trying to embrace this
strong, science-based role for the EPA, honoring interstate
commerce, and making sure our producers have an opportunity
both to earn a living and keep the environment safe.
With that, I would yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois for 5
minutes.
Ms. Budzinski. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate it, and thank you to the panelists for being here
today. I appreciate that as well.
My home State of Illinois is the number one producer of
soybeans in the nation, and it is the number two producer of
corn. I am extremely grateful for the hard worker--hard work
our farmers of all commodities do to ensure that we are fed,
fueled, and clothed, but I have heard from so many of my
constituents that this task comes with unique challenges, from
rising input costs to uncertainty with weather, to learning to
navigate the regulatory landscape on the farm.
My first question is for Mr. Cooper. In your statement, you
touched on the positive aspects of your working relationship
with the EPA, including the establishment of EPA's Office of
Agriculture and Rural Affairs. Can you describe this
relationship further, as well as touch on what else can be done
to improve EPA's understanding of the agricultural sector?
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Congresswoman.
So, yes, in our particular situation in the State of Ohio,
starting with the State ODA, the Ohio EPA, we have a really,
really good relationship with them. It is a partnering
situation where there are no unannounced visits. They are
calling us up, ``Hey, we are going to come out and do the
annual audit and all that kind of stuff.'' And, there is
nothing we can change in our system in 24 hours or whatever, 36
hours is going to make any difference. So, we just appreciate
that they collaborate with us. And we have a biosecurity
problem in the livestock and poultry industry area, right, so
it is also very key that when we are working with the state or
Federal groups that they respect the fact that we have extreme
biosecurity needs from that situation.
So, I mostly can just say along with what everybody else
has talked about, collaboration and all that, that that is so
key. Just come and talk to us. The old line about, ``Hey, I am
the tax agent. I am here to help you.'' That is not what we are
after here, so, thanks.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay, thank you.
My next question actually now is for Mr. Kippley. You
mentioned the importance of the RFS for growers as well as your
support for year-round E15. One thing that growers in my
district have expressed concern about is the fact that
renewable volume obligations are not keeping up with the
increasing rates of production, disincentivizing new and
continued production of biofuels.
Can you speak on what EPA can do to improve this disparity,
and how EPA can improve the landscape of biofuels?
Mr. Kippley. Yes. I think there is an opportunity for E30
in this country. A local ethanol plant up in Watertown, South
Dakota did a study on it and put in, I can't remember the
number of cars, but put the chips into a lot of cars that drove
hundreds of thousands of miles on these vehicles, found no
issues with the regular engines, as long as it is a 2006 and
newer vehicle.
And so, they sell E30 at a lot of places up in our part of
the world, and we have a lot of people using it on all kinds of
engines and having no problems. So, I think that is the number
one way we can really loosen this up is E30. It is a cleaner
fuel. The gas mileage doesn't change. It is not like E85 where
you lose your mileage, and you do get a little better
horsepower out of your vehicle.
Ms. Budzinski. Yes. Anything more specific that you think
that EPA can do, though, to get us to E30?
Mr. Kippley. Well, they can change the rules.
Ms. Budzinski. Yes, just----
Mr. Kippley. Yes.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay.
My next question is also for you. On the topic of biofuels,
one thing that is heavy on our minds across the Midwest and
Plains is the 40B tax credit for sustainable aviation fuel,
especially in states where bundling is not only economically
difficult, but also agronomically untenable.
What, in your opinion, can EPA do to advocate for a better
outcome for the upcoming 45Z tax credit for biofuels?
Mr. Kippley. Yes, I think they need to include more ways
that all farmers can participate in this program. Feedstocks
are going to be a very important part of this, and they need to
make sure that it is available for, it is an incentive program.
It is a choice program. You are not telling anybody they have
to change their operations, but it should be things that are
feasible for the farmers to do.
Like I said earlier, I live 26 miles from the North Dakota
border. A lot of times, we have snow on the ground before the
corn comes out, and sometimes we even have snow on the ground
before the beans are harvested. There is not a lot of time to
try to plant a cover crop in that situation, so we just need to
look at other options that we can do to qualify.
Ms. Budzinski. Okay, thank you.
Thank you very much. I will yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Mann, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mann. Good seeing you back in the chair. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. It should scare the heck out of some of you.
Mr. Mann. Understood. I appreciate Chairman Thompson doing
this today. I share his disappointment in Administrator Regan
not being here in person with us today.
I represent the big 1st District of Kansas, which is the
western \2/3\ of Kansas, except for the Wichita area. Farm
country has made it loud and clear that they cannot survive
when the government burdens them with nonsensical regulations
and red tape. My view is that the Federal Government should
support producers or get out of their way.
As Chairman of this Committee's Subcommittee on Livestock,
Dairy, and Poultry, I am especially concerned with the
nonsensical and costly regulations on livestock producers in my
district and across the country, including EPA's proposed rule
that would impact the effluent limitation guidelines for meat
and poultry processing facilities. By EPA's own estimates, this
rule could permanently close between 16 and 53 meat, poultry,
and rendering facilities. Understand the same Administration
has provided grants and funds to increase our number of
processing facilities, and meanwhile this regulation would
close between 16 and 53 of them. It makes no sense.
Question for you, Mr. Cooper. What impact would the revised
effluent limitation guidelines and standards have on your
operation and on the animal protein industry as a whole?
Mr. Cooper. Thank you, Congressman.
So, yes, it would have a large impact on us. I was actually
talking about this a little bit earlier. We have two main food
processing plants, and both of them are different and many of
our peers in our industry and through the National Pork
Producers Council, many of the packers, they all have different
relationships with the local cities and towns, or they might
have their own wastewater treatment plant. And that is what we
have in our St. Henry turkey harvest plant. We have been
working with the local town for 36 years, and we have a
pretreatment plant, and they take it from there and then go
directly discharge from that. We worked out between us
investments. They have done investments. We have done
investments. In our other plant, we have our own self-
sustaining plant, a sewage plant that we have had for many
decades, and we just enhanced and upgraded it.
So, those two are completely different animals, if you
will, and the ELG would only just confuse it between us and the
city or between our own system there. So, it could cause even
us a lot of problems, and many of our peers. And then you move
down to these smaller processors. It would have a big impact on
them because they don't have the wherewithal to handle all the
regulations that would come with the ELG.
Mr. Mann. Disaster. In my mind, you would say hammer
looking for a nail, and it makes no sense. Thank you.
I not only represent a district with meat processing
facilities, but I also recognize these facilities' essential
role within our communities and the larger food supply chain. I
have urged and will continue to urge the EPA to withdraw this
very shortsighted rule.
Quick question for you, Dr. Larson. It is good to see you
again.
Protecting state pesticide preemption has been a longtime
priority for me. I know it has been discussed a little bit
already. It is a huge priority for Kansas farmers and ranchers
who appreciate the certainty of having one state regulatory
agency for pesticides versus several.
Describe your experience on this issue. What is at stake if
pesticide preemption is rolled back, and do you think Congress
should codify protections to state pesticide preemption under
EPA's FIFRA as the farm bill proposes?
Dr. Larson. Thank you, Congressman.
Yes, I do believe that preemption should be codified
through this Committee. They have experienced it in Colorado
for the last several years. They have been trying to overturn
statewide preemption. They promise us don't worry, because
there is going to be an ag exemption, but as I mentioned, weeds
don't understand county borders, ag borders. The seed travels,
so when municipalities decide that they are going to regulate
chemistries in a different way, they can lead to a blow up of
weed seed that travels and impacts, honestly, the smallest
farmers the worst within our communities, because it is
irrigated ground, which is most likely flood irrigated. So,
that seed travels right onto their farm and creates a bigger
issue for them, where they, in turn, may need to use more
pesticides to try and control those weeds.
Mr. Mann. And the notion of having one agency the state is
regulating----
Dr. Larson. Yes, the states have to be the co-regulators
here. They have the expertise, just like the EPA does. The
local governments simply don't have that level of expertise.
Mr. Mann. I completely agree.
My time is quickly expiring. On year-round E15, I was going
to ask a question. I don't really have time. I would just say
it is way past time that we lock in year-round E15. We now have
both chambers, you have Republicans and Democrats, Republican
and Democratic Administrations that have all said they are okay
with year-round E15. It is way past time to get that done. I
know it would be huge for our ag producers in Missouri, South
Dakota, Kansas, and all over the Midwest.
So, thank you. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Feenstra, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member.
I want to thank each of you witnesses for coming today. There
are a lot of things we can talk about.
I am from Iowa. I have the second largest ag district in
the country. I have the largest biofuels district in the
country. I think if you put all the biofuels together, it would
still not be as big as what I have in Iowa.
But that is not what I want to talk about. I want to talk
about the EPA and the targeted attacks on our farmers. I hear
about this every time I do my 36 county tour. When I talk to
the ag community of EPA just absolutely going after our farming
community. And it really starts with Waters of the U.S. I mean,
when they tried to regulate every creek, every pond, every
stream, actually every puddle against the farmer. And this is
so wrong. It was great to see the U.S. Supreme Court last year
threw the rule out. But that didn't stop the EPA. The EPA
created another rule just as bad as the first rule that was
thrown out by the Supreme Court. So, now we have the decision
of the Supreme Court overturning Chevron, which I am hoping
will curb this Executive overreach, but I highly doubt that
unless we have a new Administration.
So, Mr. Cooper, I just want you to talk about the
uncertainty that occurs when we have this flip-flopping of EPA
regulations. I mean, we had Trump that relaxed it, then we had
Biden and his Administration come and dramatically change it.
We had the Supreme Court try to change it, and we still have
the rule, in essence, that existed a year ago. What are your
thoughts on this?
Mr. Cooper. Yes. So, as you can imagine, it is tough enough
to be in the farming business anyways, and we have a lot to
worry about out on the farm, diseases, biosecurity, commodity
prices. The list goes on and on as you well know, the weather
and everything. Then when you have this confusion coming from
one of the government agencies, for example, I could say the
EPA, it even just complicates it even more. So, and sometimes I
kind of liken it to, if you are a basketball player and you
didn't have a scoreboard to tell if you were winning or losing,
and you didn't have any rules, I am not sure that game would be
very fair to play.
So, in this case, with WOTUS and so on, we have sent in--
organizations have sent in letters with a bunch of questions--
and in 3 months they can't even answer those questions for us.
Mr. Feenstra. Well, I have tried to talk to the EPA.
Obviously, it is too bad that Michael Regan is not here,
because I would love to have that answer from him also.
What people don't understand and these agencies don't
understand is the immense amount of paperwork that has to be
done to follow these criteria, follow these rules. And then
they get penalized if for some reason somehow--just like in
Iowa this past several weeks, we had immense floods, and all of
a sudden we have overstepped allegedly because we have had 20"
of rain creating a massive EPA opportunity for fines. So, I
extremely struggle with that. Thanks for your comments.
By the way, Mrs. Chinn, would you like to comment on that
at all? All right, thank you very much.
All right. I do want to ask you a question, though. So,
last week, Senator Crapo and I led a letter from 150 of our
colleagues talking about, again, EPA's overreach on the force
of 40 percent heavy duty mandate, which includes semis,
tractors, and trucks by 2032, meaning 40 percent of all
lightweight vehicles by 2032 have to be electric. I mean, this
is just bizarre, and no one--everybody understands that this
can never happen, and it just won't. Especially right now when
less than one percent, less than one percent of our sales are
electric vehicles. It is also noted that it is going to cost
over $1 trillion just to electrify and create the
infrastructure for these vehicles.
My question to you, Director Chinn, can you talk about how
the EV mandates will impact Americans, especially those in
rural America?
Mrs. Chinn. One of the biggest challenges that we have in
rural communities in Missouri is that we don't have great
infrastructure. We can't even get cell phone signal in many
areas. So, you might drive 25 to 45 miles to find a gas station
as well. So, not to mention we don't have electrical charging
stations either. So, I feel like anything that happens should
be a voluntary approach, and not a mandate. I think we should
allow the marketplace to work out itself, and if the markets
wants to have the electric vehicles, I think that will happen.
Mr. Feenstra. That sounds like capitalism, doesn't it? Let
the consumer decide, right, and yet, the Administration has
their thumb on the scale for electric vehicles like this in the
mandate. It is ridiculous.
We do have an alternative. Again, my district being the
largest biofuels district in the country, we have liquid fuels
that can do this, and we can have clean fuels. But it just
baffles me why the EPA would just want to go down this path.
Anyway, thank you for your comments, and I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Soto, and apologizes for not catching him in the corner of his
eye coming in earlier. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Soto. Oh, that is quite all right, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you for the recognition.
I just wanted to briefly mention, we have heard from our
local citrus producers in Florida and citrus greening is a
terrible scourge on citrus in Florida and Louisiana and
California, Texas, and other areas. They have actually had a
pretty good relationship, and of course, in dealings with the
EPA over the last couple years on several amendments. They are
going to be looking for their current labeling for several
pesticides that have shown promise with citrus greening. I am
happy to report that the state, the State of Florida, that is,
is submitting the request for the registrant this week, and the
EPA is expected to approve it. So, I know different states have
different interactions with the EPA, but in this really
critical crop for Florida with citrus greening, they have been
a valued partner and have been helpful to work with. So, I wish
you all the best of luck as you are working on your various
different applications, too.
I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Moore, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I certainly appreciate
all the witnesses being here today.
Ronald Reagan said that the government's idea on economy is
when it is moving, you tax it. If it keeps moving, you regulate
it. When it fails, you subsidize it. I have often thought that
that could be applicable to agriculture, because between taxes
and regulations, a lot of times we wouldn't have to subsidize
if we would just get the government out of the way. But I am
actually going to go to my prepared remarks now, but I thought
that was pretty apropos.
While the EPA plays a critical role in setting
environmental standards, it is essential that these regulators
are based on concrete science, and grounded in the realities
faced by our agricultural producers so that it continues to
hold a pivotal position in our regulatory framework. We must
strike a balance between effective management, which we are
lacking now, and our agriculture productivity. Many farmers,
ranchers, and foresters across Alabama's 2nd Congressional
District and in the country understand that their biggest
competitor right now is an agency that is supposed to be
protecting them and their land.
This is a harsh reality we shouldn't really have to be
dealing with or accept, but day after day in this
Administration we come face to face with these facts. Farming,
feeding, and providing for our nation and this world is a vital
livelihood that is still needed today, and a pillar of our
national security. I appreciate you all being here today, and
look forward to hearing more of your experiences.
Ms. Chinn, reading through your testimony I felt the same
issues in my district related to the recent Dicamba decision
that left many producers scrambling after the purchases for the
year had been made. Can you provide insight on how this last-
minute nature of this decision affected your producers?
Mrs. Chinn. Yes. We were really stressed out in the State
of Missouri, as were other producers in other states, because
we weren't--we didn't have the certainty. We had the products
sitting in the shed, but we weren't sure if we were going to be
able to use it. We were very satisfied that EPA made a quick
decision with the existing stocks order, and they helped us for
the 2024 growing season. But we still have uncertainty for
2025, and----
Mr. Moore. So, you don't know what to expect going forward?
They could change their mind again, right?
Mrs. Chinn. Right, and the biggest challenge is the seed
supply. Right now this year, the seed for 2025 is being grown
and so, if that Dicamba product is not going to be available,
we are going to have seed technology out there, but we are not
going to be able to have the crop protection technology to help
with that.
Mr. Moore. Can you couple others together, or is it like if
you got the seed, you got to couple this technology with it?
Mrs. Chinn. You can use a couple other products with it;
however, the rotation helps prevent the weed resistance and it
is very important to have that opportunity to have that
rotation in play. We are very concerned about taking those
tools away, because farmers need to have choices, and if we
lose the Dicamba technology, the amount of choices that farmers
have are going to be narrower than what they are today.
Mr. Moore. And weed resistance is a good thing. I pulled a
lot of weeds in peanut fields growing up. I would like for us
to maintain some sort of resistance.
Mr. Cooper, could you elaborate on increased compliance
costs and administrative burdens due to the recent EPA mandates
that you have experienced?
Mr. Cooper. So, it is kind of generally it is just all the
paperwork and everything that comes with it. Again, I have said
this before, I know, today but in our organization, we actually
have an environmental manager that we have had to put a person
on with everything we have going on to just handle it properly.
Mr. Moore. Wow.
Mr. Cooper. And throughout all this, and we have talked
about climate change and a lot of different things, like
sustainability, without the EPA making a company like us do
it--and there are many others in our farming world that are
doing this throughout the NPPC and so on, we decided 10 years
ago, for example, to go landfill free. At the time, we were
doing about 50 percent was going to landfills of all our
discharges throughout all of our company, and 50 percent was
being recycled, repurposed. And here now 10 years later, we are
at 98 percent landfill free. Nobody made us do it, and I am
bragging here a little bit, obviously.
Mr. Moore. Sounds like it. That is okay.
Mr. Cooper. But last year in 2023, 4,000 semi-truck loads
of let's just say garbage and trash and different things from
our company did not go to the landfill. It went to repurposing
and recycling. I think that if companies, or groups like the
EPA could work more on incentives and more things to encourage
farmers like us to do that would literally not only help our
own company, but it would help the community and help the
government themselves. I think that would be better than all
the regulations and all the paperwork.
Mr. Moore. And I am concerned, just young producers, young
farmers trying to get a start, they can't hire an
environmentalist. I mean, they don't have those options, right,
and so, as much as we need young producers, people that will
actually take the risk and go into agriculture, we are making
it almost impossible. My cousin came back to our farm 4 years
ago, got out of the Marine Corps. He is trying to get started,
and it seems like one thing after another that our government
does to prevent him from actually being successful, and that is
a shame.
But anyway, with that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time--yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Rose, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, and I want to thank
Chairman Thompson and the Ranking Member for holding this
important hearing, and thank you to each of our witnesses. I
know it has been a long afternoon.
As a former Commissioner of Agriculture, I understand the
importance of healthy Federal and state relationships. While I
am appreciative of our witnesses and their expertise on
threatening Environmental Protection Agency initiatives, I
can't help but be disappointed, as many of my colleagues have
expressed, that the Agency, the EPA that is, has refused to
engage with this Committee and join us to discuss the issues
impacting this most important industry.
Farmers, landowners, and agricultural manufacturers are
among the individuals or the entities most affected by
overreaching regulatory changes at the EPA. Our farmers deserve
an Administration that works with them, not against them.
However, the Biden Administration has weaponized the EPA to
carry out its radical, progressive Democratic agenda.
Food security is national security, and several have said
that today, so it is imperative we do not hinder the production
of the U.S. agricultural industry through bureaucratic red
tape.
Director Chinn, in my view, under this Administration the
EPA has adopted the mindset of dictating rather than working
collaboratively with stakeholders. Can you further elaborate on
your idea of cooperative federalism, if you will, and how
proper coordination with the state departments of agriculture
will better the lives of farmers and landowners, while also
achieving the statutory purpose of the EPA?
Mrs. Chinn. Absolutely. Thank you for that question.
I think a good example of that was the recent court
decision that took Dicamba out of the toolbox of the farming
community. We in the agriculture community and the state
departments of agriculture worked with EPA to share our
concerns about that, and as a result, we had a workable
solution moving forward.
We need to continue examples like that. We need to be
working together as one team to protect not only the
environment, but the agriculture community. Too often, EPA gets
stuck in their little box and they do their work, but they
forget to reach out to the agriculture community and their co-
regulators at the state departments of agriculture. If we could
have more open communication and dialogue, I think we could
prevent a lot of the heartburn that the agriculture community
has been experiencing in the past with some of their decisions,
one of those being the Herbicide Strategy. We were not brought
to the table in a timely manner, and as a result, it has been a
really burdensome framework for us to try to implement and to
regulate.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I agree with everything you said.
Director Chinn also, how do you think the EPA should
reprioritize its agenda and resources to meet the needs of
pesticide developers who are awaiting registration approval and
farmers needing those important supplies?
Mrs. Chinn. Choice in the marketplace is very important for
the agriculture community. Right now, it takes 12.3 years to
bring a new product to market, and it costs over $300 million.
The farming community needs the EPA to be able to make quick
and swift actions on that. They have actually increased the
fees for pesticide registration to help cover the expense of
the registration process for these new products, and so, we
would encourage EPA to continue to prioritize and focus on
that, because we are going to continue to need new products out
there to help with the weed resistance, and to make sure that
farmers have a lot of choices when it comes to protecting their
growing crops.
Also, I just encourage them to continue to do education
over regulation. I think that is always a positive, and it will
help with the agriculture community in implementing those new
technologies.
Mr. Rose. Dr. Larson, EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs is
considering proposals to improve their pesticide registration
and review obligations under the Endangered Species Act. One of
these proposals would require applicators to utilize the online
dashboard Bulletins Live!Two to access extended pesticide
labels. Do you believe EPA is missing the mark and disregarding
the critical rural broadband improvements needed for many
farmers to access these types of online platforms?
Dr. Larson. Yes. We heard Director Chinn say just a few
minutes ago that there are a lot of rural communities that
don't have any access to cell phone connectivity. That holds
true for my production region as well. I do think that
Bulletins Live!Two is a very clunky platform, and the timeline
that farmers need to go and consult that platform to make any
kind of crop protection application decisions is unworkable.
Our growers are thinking about a 5 year plan for how they are
going to be implementing farming on their particular piece of
ground. To have to go in 6 months in advance and try to make
some decisions, that is far too difficult of a timeline.
Mr. Rose. Thank you. I see my time has expired. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California for
5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to all the witnesses here today.
Mr. Kippley, you mentioned in your testimony the deep
concern for forever chemicals known as PFAS. Can you elaborate
on the significant impact it can have on our farmers and
producers across the country?
Mr. Kippley. Well, I think if it is handled not properly it
could have a very costly situation there, and I think we need
to make sure that our farmers are not held accountable for
that, and that they are helped if they do have it on their
land.
Mr. Carbajal. Do you recognize that it is really a chemical
that is posing a lot of impact and challenges, no matter how
you use it?
Mr. Kippley. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
I know the EPA has been working to provide a better
understanding for the public of what PFAS is, and the impacts
it can have on air, water, soil, fish, and wildlife. In your
opinion, what can Congress do to help address PFAS
contamination in the farm bill?
Mr. Kippley. I think we need to do some more research on
it. I know we just invested a lot of money into that and I
think we need to continue to look into it and figure out the
problem, and get it solved.
Mr. Carbajal. Great, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Langworthy, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Cooper, as you mentioned in your testimony, EPA
published an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking titled,
Potential Future Regulation for Emergency Release Notification
Requirements for Animal Waste Air Emissions under the Emergency
Planning and Community Right to Know Act (EPCRA). This notice
was very concerning, since it could be the first step to
reverse the 2019 rule that exempts reporting of animal waste
air emissions. An exemption that received wide support
throughout the agricultural industry and first responders.
When EPA put out this advanced notice of proposed
rulemaking, I led a bipartisan letter with more than 40 of my
colleagues, many on this Committee, urging the agency to
refrain from considering this rule to require air emission
reporting of certain substances from the natural breakdown of
animal manure, which would add significant red tape for farmers
and ranchers in an industry that is already very heavily
regulated.
Mr. Chairman, I would also like to submit this letter for
the record.
Mr. Lucas. Without objection, so ordered.
[The letter referred to is located on p. 77.]
Mr. Langworthy. And with that, Mr. Cooper, if EPA were to
overturn the farm manure exemption, could you explain how
farmers would comply with this rule? Specifically, how would a
farmer or rancher calculate their average emissions that they
were producing?
Mr. Cooper. The answer to that question is I have no idea
how we would. I mean, it is barely, they are not able to do it
themselves, and every farm is different. Every barn is
different. We have turkeys, we have chickens, we have hogs.
They are all different and quite honestly, I don't see that our
barns--we have an air emission problem, and if you flip that
over to the nutrients coming out of all these barns, I know
some people use the word waste in place of manure, but for us,
it is a complete nutrient that we use in all the cropland
around us. We have a waiting list and I know many of our fellow
swine producers in the NPPC also have a big waiting list. So,
that kind of a regulation would just cause a big mess and more
paperwork for us, and I am not even sure how we would handle
that.
Mr. Langworthy. Very good, thank you.
I think we can all agree for extremely hazardous
substances, EPCRA is an important tool for local communities
and first responders. EPCRA provides necessary information on
hazardous chemicals stored locally, how those chemicals are
transported, and the consequences in case of potential release
of those chemicals into the environment. However, I am having a
very hard time figuring out why a first responder needs to know
how many emissions a small family farm is producing. Burdening
emergency responders like this is the equivalent of pulling a
fire alarm when there is no real emergency.
Mr. Cooper, do you believe it is dangerous for us to be
overwhelming local first responders with unnecessary reporting
requirements when there are actual real emergencies that need
to be addressed?
Mr. Cooper. Well, the obvious commonsense answer to that is
yes, that would not be good. In our type of an area, and
probably many of the people in this room with me, is that we
are a very rural area so these first responders, these fire
departments, most of them are volunteers and they are doing a
full-time job otherwise. This is just something they are doing
to help out. So, to tack on some additional paperwork, some
additional regulations when they should really just be focusing
on emergencies and everything that is going on locally, and
again, back to the whole manure thing. What is kind of
interesting is it is all-natural. So, here you got a situation
where we are talking about pesticides and herbicides and
chemicals, and when it gets down to why would they want to call
manure a toxic chemical when most people take that manure and
put it on their vegetable garden in the fall, and then the next
spring they plant their vegetable there and they eat those
vegetables in the summer and fall after they put the manure on.
So, I don't think it is very toxic.
Mr. Langworthy. Well, thank you very much for sharing that.
The bottom line is rural America should not have to roll
with the punches every time that the EPA constructs all sorts
of new and expensive rules and regulations. There are far too
many bureaucrats dreaming up solutions to problems that don't
exist, and we are going to end up running our farmers right out
of business and jeopardize food security for American families.
Our nation's agriculture producers should be able to focus
on doing what they do best, producing food for the American
people; the food that sustains us all without unnecessary
distractions.
I am very interested in finding a permanent solution here
so that our farmers and our local emergency planning
commissions can operate without constant uncertainty from
Washington bureaucrats looking to make their jobs more
difficult.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Miller of Illinois. Thank you.
Director Chinn, can you talk about how the uncertainty
about the availability of over-the-top Dicamba could affect the
2025 growing season if the EPA doesn't work to approve a new
label for Dicamba?
Mrs. Chinn. Thank you for that question.
We are very concerned about the uncertainty moving forward.
Our farming community all across the Midwest makes their
planning decisions at the end of August, beginning of
September. They are already looking to that next crop year.
Right now, we have seed being grown for the 2025 season with
Dicamba. There is not going to be enough seed technology to
replace the Dicamba seed. We need to make sure that the tools
in the toolbox are going to be available to the farmers when it
comes to crop protection tools.
We need to make sure also that moving forward past 2025, we
have certainty for that product as well. Having choice in the
marketplace is always good. The competition drives down the
prices and so, we want to make sure that the agriculture
community has that choice in the marketplace.
Mrs. Miller of Illinois. Thank you.
Director Chinn, could you also speak about the importance
of biofuels as a market for agricultural crops and how
regulatory certainty surrounding biofuels impacts a grower's
planting decisions?
Mrs. Chinn. Absolutely.
Again, I think it goes back to having that choice of where
you want to market your crop. Having many opportunities,
whether it is raising your crop for a biofuel or for animal
feed, whatever it might be, having that competition in the
marketplace is a good thing. And so, we want to make sure that
the farming community has many choices when it comes to
marketing their products, and making sure we know what the
rules are. When you plant that crop, you need to know what the
rules are going to be for that entire growing season moving
forward, and in the past with EPA, their decisions have been
last minute and have really caused a lot of undue stress on the
farming community.
Mrs. Miller of Illinois. Thank you.
Mr. Cooper, your testimony highlights how the EPA's pending
rule on effluent limitation guidelines would risk hurting
smaller packers and processors in the industry. I know you have
already talked about this, but can you talk more about how this
rule will affect markets for farms, and how it could lead to
more consolidation in the industry?
Mr. Cooper. They are adding on a lot of these small
processors from around the United States from some of the
grants and stuff like that, and for a small hog producer, that
works really well for them to be able to haul their hogs into a
local packing plant and not have to go 4, 5, 6 hours to a big
major one. And so, you start adding in all these different
regulations and this whole ELG thing that is going to probably
like kick a bunch of them out of the whole processing and
packing system, that is going to reduce that number of packing
options. And then when it gets right down to it, some of the
local hog producers are going to probably go out of business
maybe because of that. And so, then that does cause
consolidation towards the larger companies, yes.
Mrs. Miller of Illinois. Yes, we all know that when we have
extreme consolidation in industry, that we are not really free
people.
So, farmers in my district are concerned about the EPA's
overreach and how it impacts their ability to farm. It is
evident that the EPA's expansive and heavy-handed approach is
creating significant challenges for our agricultural community.
I appreciate your testimonies today on these issues and
thank you for being here. I yield back.
Mr. Alford [presiding.] The gentlewoman yields back.
The chair now recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
I want to thank you all for being here today on your own
time and your own dime. I know it can be a hardship coming
here, but the information that you are providing us today will
help us make wise decisions in the future. I thank the Chairman
and the Ranking Member for doing this today, because it is
important in a bipartisan manner that we do come together and
gain as much information as we can.
I am a little disappointed that Administrator Regan was not
here today. I thought we had a good hearing with him last year.
He did admit at that time that his mother loves cooking on gas
stoves, so I thought that was a big plus. But we have seen time
and time again how the EPA's actions have placed undue burdens
hindering American farmers and ranchers from doing their jobs
of feeding, fueling, and clothing the world. We need
guardrails, but we don't need roadblocks. And right now, we
have a lot of roadblocks that are hindering America's farmers,
ranchers, and producers from doing the best job they can for
the American people. With the overturn of the Chevron
deference, I hope we can stop Federal agencies like the EPA
from placing unnecessary governmental regulations on
hardworking Americans.
Director Chinn, thank you for being here today. In your
opening statement, you used two terms that I found interesting,
cooperative federalism and sound-science. What would the world
look like today if the EPA followed those concepts in the way
they do business?
Mrs. Chinn. That has been the base of the decisions that we
make at the State of Missouri. We work very closely with the
Missouri Department of Natural Resources as one team to make
sure that we are not hindering the agriculture community; that
we are allowing them to have economic development for our rural
communities. That is the only economic development in most of
our rural communities. I feel like if EPA would work more
closely with their sister agencies, USDA and state departments
of agriculture, we would start to see a lot of the similar
successes that we have seen in Missouri on that Federal level.
We want to be here to help, and the agriculture community
doesn't want to harm the environment. We want to protect it,
and so, if we could all work together in one direction, I think
it would really pay off in dividends for the future generations
who want to come back home to our family farms and be
successful as well.
Mr. Alford. In January of 2022, the EPA announced the
registration of the herbicides Enlist One and Enlist Duo;
however, the announcement also included restrictions of use of
these tools in more than 200 counties. This action came right
before the start of the 2022 growing season, but the agency
ultimately corrected course and lifted the restrictions in many
of these counties. Several of the counties that were previously
restricted from use were in Missouri, due to the presence of
the American burying beetle.
Director Chinn, what uncertainty did this cause in our
growers and producers with the EPA as a state co-regulator in
this process?
Mrs. Chinn. There was a lot of concern in the agriculture
community. Our department received several phone calls within 2
hours of that release going out saying, ``I have spent
thousands of dollars to purchase the seed and the crop
protection technology, now I can't use it. I can't even find
new seed to plant. What am I going to do?'' So, it was very
stressful for the farming community. We reached out to EPA. We
made them aware of a study that the Missouri Department of
Conservation had done in conjunction with the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Services, and it actually showed that agriculture
practices increased and supported those habitats. We did not
harm those. Had we been able to have those discussions with EPA
prior, we would have saved them a lot of time and paperwork,
because we had to make sure and then process this that our
farming community in Missouri was going to be able to use that
product. So, we started the application process for the 2024
seed that would give us a special local needs label to be able
to use those products in Missouri. The day we shipped our
packet off to EPA was the day that they changed their decision
and allowed us to use those products in Missouri, so we were
very appreciative of that. But we were a little bit upset about
the undue stress that it caused to the agriculture community at
a time when they really couldn't handle much more.
Mr. Alford. After the 8th Circuit reinstated chlorpyrifos
for growers, the lack of clarity and guidance from the EPA
caused a lot of confusion amongst growers who heavily rely on
this critical chemistry, as well as for the state departments.
How could the EPA have handled that better?
Mrs. Chinn. Sound-science is the answer, I believe. I think
we need to be looking at what that sound-science is, not
political science. We need to make sure that we are making
decisions based off the facts and that we are doing what is
best for the agriculture community. People need to remember
that agriculture is about food security and national security.
Mr. Alford. Director Chinn, thank you and thank you to our
witnesses once again.
The chair now recognized the Member from Ohio, Mr. Miller,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Miller of Ohio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Federal regulations have a direct impact on Ohio farmers
and livestock producers, as well as those throughout the
country. With a commitment to preservation of natural resources
for future generations, many overreach actions by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency have caused instability
to farms in my Congressional district, impacting our ability to
viably produce food for our nation.
I am heartened by efforts of the agriculture producers and
stewardship of our natural resources, as reflected in
recognition in my region by the Wayne County Ohio Soil and
Water Conservation District in its farm conservation award, as
well as the H2Ohio Comprehensive Water Quality Partnership.
Of significant importance to the United States agriculture,
EPA is working alongside other agencies to finalize the
guidance for tax credits that could unleash new opportunities
for biofuels to provide new markets for rural America. However,
if not modeled correctly or delayed, American agriculture could
be locked out of these crucial opportunities all together. I am
also looking forward to moving the farm bill ahead to ensure
access to sound conservation practices, as well as working more
broadly in Congress to address regulatory challenges in
agriculture in rural communities.
My first question is to Mr. Cooper. O-H--come on.
Mr. Cooper. I-O.
Mr. Miller of Ohio. There it is. All right.
Mr. Cooper, welcome, and congratulations on 85 years
serving not only our home State of Ohio, but as a significant
food supplier to our nation. Thank you.
Please comment on the reference you made in your testimony
to the continuous legal challenges regarding the Lake Erie
total maximum daily load in Ohio, particularly given the EPA's
approval decision on this matter in 2023. Also, you mentioned
stakeholders, including local officials, the U.S. EPA, Ohio
EPA, and the State of Ohio as well as the agriculture sector's
significant investments made to protect water quality.
Mr. Cooper. Thanks, Congressman. I appreciate that
question.
That hits really home because like I was saying earlier, we
have about \1/3\ of our total farms are located in the western
Lake Erie water basin, and that H2Ohio program that you
mentioned has been super popular. I think I heard that through
the state, about 46 percent, or through our area, anyways, 46
percent of the local farmers are using that, and from the
manure standpoint, we always had a lot of demand for it, but
the phone just started ringing as soon as that H2Ohio program
came out, and we have this long waiting list of local crop
farmers that want to use that.
On top of that, that is a really good program, but then
individually many of us farmers, whether they are CAFO farmers
or they are just our local farmers, we already do a lot of
sustainability type of things, because we live in those
communities. We raise our own kids and our grandkids and so on
and so forth. So, we do grass filter strips and we do soil
tests, manure tests, and when somebody buys our manure, they
have to have their soil tested. We get that analysis. We get
our manure analysis. We take it to a local commercial
fertilizer company, and we have them tell that farmer how much
manure goes on per acre. So, there are all kinds of inner
controls that we are doing, and I am sure that is all across
the nation. But in the Lake Erie watershed, I think there is a
misunderstanding--or I know there is, because the OSU and some
other research groups did some DNA testing at the mouth of the
Maumee River going into Lake Erie where the algae blooms are,
and they come up with something under 20 percent of it had to
do with animal manure. So, there is another 80 percent, and so
we are doing as much as we can and more. We are always looking
for ideas as livestock farmers. But there is 80 percent that
has to do with humans, has to do with commercial fertilizer,
has to do with septic tanks on old farmhouses that need to be
fixed and so on. Even hate to pick on the City of Toledo, but
they dumped 25 million gallons of raw sewage in a major
rainstorm into the river. We have never dumped even a gallon
in, and if we did there would be all kinds of problems.
So, we don't quite understand how they are blaming us
farmers for these algae blooms when somebody like the Toledo
municipality is able to do that and nobody says a thing. So,
thank you for asking that question.
Mr. Miller of Ohio. Thank you for your response.
If we could get regulatory agencies to be a little bit more
pragmatic in their assessment and not stifle the growth of
individuals who are producing vital needs for our country to
sustain ourselves throughout the long-term, as we currently are
meeting our metrics, I believe we all would be a lot better off
moving forward.
Mr. Chairman, I do have one more question. I see that I am
out of time. Mr. Kippley, you are off the hook. I am just
kidding. But I will submit it for the record.
Thank you very much, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentleman from Minnesota,
Mr. Finstad, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Finstad. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this important hearing today, and thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony.
I am a proud fourth generation farmer from southern
Minnesota, honored to be raising the fifth. I tell people that
I raise corn, soybeans, and kids. Proud father of seven kids. I
am a John Deere tractor driving, corn planting, soybean
planting farmer from southern Minnesota. And so, it is great to
have so many real farmers here testifying today. Welcome, and
thank you for what you do and your commitment to feeding and
fueling our country.
Director Chinn, in your testimony today you emphasized the
importance of EPA's cooperation with farmers and its regulatory
partners. In April of 2023, several organizations with a track
record of anti-ag environmental activism submitted a petition
to the EPA requesting a moratorium on the building of livestock
facilities in Minnesota, in southeast Minnesota specifically,
citing elevated nitrate levels. Within 6 months of that
petition, EPA inspectors arrived unannounced on the land of
family farmers in my district, interrogating them and
inspecting their farms over the course of several hours,
causing additional uncertainty in the midst of peak harvest
season. Hostile, unannounced inspections like this only
intensify mistrust of the EPA by farmers and producers.
So, my question to you is how can the EPA better
communicate with producers to improve transparency and rebuild
trust within farmers of this country?
Mrs. Chinn. Well, we had the same problem in Missouri when
I became Director of Agriculture, and we worked very closely
with our Department of Natural Resources to help them
understand that any problem that a farmer has was probably not
intentional, and that they want to do what is right, and that
nothing that has been done is going to be fixed in a 48 hour
notification period. So, we worked very closely with our
Department of Natural Resources to provide that 48 hour
notification process so that the farmer could prepare. Not only
are you going to their business, you are going to their home.
It is where their children are. It is where their parents are.
We need to be respectful of that as regulators. I think
education over regulation is always the best answer. The
farmers want to do what is right because they want to pass that
on to the next generation, and I think if we take a more
relaxed approach while we are trying to protect the environment
and protect agriculture, we are going to see better results
moving forward.
Mr. Finstad. Thank you for that.
I think I read this right in your bio; you are a fifth-
generation farmer? Awesome. So, as a fifth-generation farmer, I
could only then imagine your goal is to absolutely ruin your
farm and leave it in a horrible position so the sixth
generation never has a chance to farm that?
Mrs. Chinn. No, that is not.
Mr. Finstad. Okay.
Mrs. Chinn. We are actually bringing our son back home, who
is the sixth generation, and it has been a struggle for him
because it is really hard on the beginning farming community to
find their place and be able to add value. And the amount of
regulation that is out there is very burdensome, and it is
scary for them.
Mr. Finstad. So, on that note, I say this quite often, as a
fourth-generation farmer myself, I will tell anybody that
farmers are the best environmentalists that this country has,
and if I want this farm that is in my family for four
generations to make it to the fifth, I will do everything in my
being to make sure that I am leaving it better than I found it.
So, that means taking care of my fertility. That means taking
care of my erosion. That means taking care of the way I plant
and the way I harvest and the way I use compaction or not
compaction.
And so, could you give me a little bit of a flavor of what
you have maybe done on your farm or what you see happen in your
state in regards to what farmers are doing to improve their
farms without the Federal Government coming in and telling them
how to do it? I don't think we tell that story enough, so if
you could share something with us, that would be great.
Mrs. Chinn. Absolutely.
In the State of Missouri, we have an 8  sales tax that goes
to parks, soil, and water, and so, that is the first step that
we take in the State of Missouri to protect our environment and
our family farms. We are also implementing conservation
practices voluntarily to make sure that we are protecting our
land for that next generation. On our farm, we want to make
sure our son understands how important it is to protect that
environment, but also how important it is to protect our
livestock. So, we are doing things above and beyond. We have
concentrated nutrient management plans so that we are making
sure we don't over or under fertilize our soil with the natural
resources from our livestock. These are just a few of the
conservation practices that our farmers implement voluntarily,
and we look to do more as the markets continue to provide us
more income to be able to make those improvements to the farm,
because we don't want my son to be burdened when he receives
that farm. We want him to receive a gift.
Mr. Finstad. I appreciate that.
I am running out of time here, so I just want to close with
just again thanking all of you, the real farmers on this panel,
those that are giving blood, sweat, and tears to our community,
but also committed to your family and the generational
opportunities that you are creating for your kids. I see Gary
Worchester also who is a Minnesota farmer, and he drives a
different colored tractor than me, but we get along pretty good
nonetheless.
But thank you all. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman [presiding.] The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Congresswoman De
La Cruz, for 5 minutes.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for hosting this
important hearing, and thank you to the witnesses for being
here. The day is almost over.
For the Texas fruit and vegetable industry, the EPA's
inability to expedite the approval process has been a big, big
issue. This is an approval process for new products and for
chemical mixes, and it continues to be a huge problem for our
farmers and ranchers. For most crops, the EPA takes over 6
years and millions and millions of dollars for the review
process before approving a new product for use. When it comes
to using the product on fruits and vegetables, that timeline
could be longer, sometimes up to 11 years, and millions of
dollars more.
As a result, many companies simply avoid creating or
working on products for American fruits and vegetables. This is
a competitive disadvantage for American farmers who are
attempting to compete in the global market. So, not only does
it limit the tools that farmers in our country have to use on
their crops, but it also means that what few tools farmers do
have to use in America, that they are much more expensive
because of the limited range of options.
So, we need EPA to reduce these reviews to take place in
both fewer years, and cost less money. Both of these things
would bring products to the market faster and cheaper, which we
all need right now with inflation the way that it is.
My question is really to all of the witnesses. As I just
outlined, the EPA has a review process for new products which
will be used in crop production which spans many years and many
millions of dollars. In your opinion, how is this harming
American farmers and producers? And we will start over here.
Mr. Kippley. Any time that there are new products available
and you have to wait to get them, it is costing you money if it
is going to make your life better. And so, I think that if we
can speed that process up and get the tools in the toolbox,
that is what we are after.
Mrs. Chinn. I think this puts the American farmer at a
competitive disadvantage because there is no incentive for
these companies to stay in the United States and to do business
here. They can go to another country that will be more friendly
to their technologies and move that process along faster. But I
think the real loser here is the American consumer, because the
cost of food continues to increase and for our lower-income
families, that is a huge portion of their disposable income.
So, I think at the end of the day we need to remember what
agriculture's goal is, and it is food security and national
security.
Mr. Cooper. And I think my reply would be the next level
up, that when you think about just the entire government
situation and how slow everything is. I don't know if anybody
went through the whole passport process, but there was a time
where I think it took, I don't know, was it 6 months to get
your passport? Like how can that be, right? So, it just seems
like there is so much bureaucracy and so many regulations, and
I am not sure what is all going on, but this whole thing is
just dragging us all down at the farm level. We got to make
decisions, like we have all talked, like yesterday. We can't
wait until tomorrow, and so it is very frustrating all the way
around, as you well know.
Dr. Larson. We know that cost of delay all too well. It
caused our growers in Colorado and Nebraska $8 million because
of the delay of getting a new herbicide to market, and that was
in just 1 year. Prior to that, the year before our farmers lost
ten percent of their crop across the board to the weed pressure
that we had.
I find it curious that EPA is very slow to approve new
products, but very swift in imposing new regulations.
Ms. De La Cruz. [audio malfunction] real-world application
scenarios, or they are overly restrictive for the crop or
product scenario in question.
I only have a couple of seconds left, but can you give us
an example of what that might look like as far as an impact on
our farmers? I am afraid I just have a couple of seconds, but
you are welcome to write me back for answering this question.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
I am now pleased to recognize the gentleman from Iowa,
Congressman Nunn, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nunn. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Thompson, and
to the guests who are with us today.
I wish that Administrator Regan from the EPA could have
joined us. Unfortunately, he was otherwise unable to attend
this one, although he did attend other testimony earlier today
for other committees.
With that, it is a shame that we have to have this
conversation about what his agency's policies have impacted,
everything from rulings on ethanol and biofuel production,
WOTUS, Waters of the United States, vehicle emissions, and so
much more. Dr. Larson, I think you said it best. The EPA has
been very quick to regulate farmers, but very slow to actually
help farmers answer the questions that they are trying to do to
not only help family farms, but to be able to both feed and
fuel our country.
So, with that, I would like to begin with the work that
this Committee has done on biofuels for our country. From day
one, I have fought as the guy from Iowa for year-round sale of
E15. I think it is very important. My colleagues and I have
sent countless letters to the Administration urging them to
approve permanent, year-round sale of E15 fuel blends.
Additionally, the last time he actually showed up I questioned
Administrator Regan on hearings just before the biofuel
producers would have been forced to halt their production of
year-round ethanol. Fortunately, at the last minute, he
approved the sale with only 2 days to spare. In the summer of
2024, we were able to get the ethanol we needed.
Look, this Administration has overlooked the positive
impact that biofuels provide on reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, in reaching the nation's climate goals that they
espoused they are so proud of. Further, it ignores the
countless wins that we collectively have secured for our
country and biofuels when it comes to the sale of year-round
E15, the continuation of critical biofuels production tax
credits, the introduction of more than a dozen bills to advance
the production of biofuels, the reauthorization of the
Enhancement of Biofuels Development Program, the 2024 Farm Bill
that our Chairman is leading, and doubling the fund for Market
Access Program and Foreign Market Development Program. The list
goes on and on.
Look, this is part of America's arsenal for being able to
drive both America's ag and energy independence.
So, Mr. Kippley, I am going to turn to you here. Do you
believe the EPA's failure to extend the waiver yet again this
year, and its impacts are going to have uncertainty on family
farms like yours and mine, and on corn and soybean growers
across this country?
Mr. Kippley. Absolutely. We are always waiting for the
numbers to come out. It is not just a recent issue. It seems
like the EPA is always slow to get those renewable numbers out,
and as far as E15, absolutely. We want E15 year-round, and we
would like to see it go up to E30.
Mr. Nunn. Do you think the ability for biofuels in this
country is a net advantage for America's energy independence?
Mr. Kippley. Absolutely.
Mr. Nunn. I agree with you without question here. The
Administration has said as much as well, but they refuse to
make the basic level commitment. Is there a difference between
2024 year-round sales and 2025 year-round sales?
Mr. Kippley. To me, I don't see a difference. No.
Mr. Nunn. I don't see it at all, either. In fact, the
Secretary of Agriculture has said as much, and yet, still this
Administration refuses to implement it.
Ms. Chinn, I would like to talk with you briefly here on
WOTUS. You have been working on this in your state and mine
together. We have achieved some success. Unfortunately, it has
had to be in the court situation because the EPA has failed to
do its job.
Let me ask you, you have expressed similar sentiments in
your testimony today. Could you share with us on this Committee
the devastating effects that the WOTUS rule has already had on
farmers in the Midwest?
Mrs. Chinn. It's about having uncertainty of what they can
do with their ground moving forward. It is a challenge. They
are all trying to figure out how to bring that next generation
home, but they are afraid to make changes because while it
might be okay today, they don't know what the rule is going to
be in 2 or 3 years with an Administration change or a court
ruling.
And so, it has held agriculture back from making
improvements and from expanding. That is not good for your
small, local, rural economies. We are losing businesses all the
time in rural America, but agriculture is the one constant. And
so, we need clarity on WOTUS to make sure that we can protect
our family farms and our rural communities, and make sure that
the states remain involved in that conversation.
Mr. Nunn. I could not agree more, and I hope the EPA hears
all of us on this.
Last, I want to turn back to you, Mr. Kippley. Look, the
EPA has come out--I think every farmer in America is driving a
truck at this point, and God bless them for doing so. But the
reality is, the EPA has said that the rigid tail pipeline
emission regulation for light- and medium-duty vehicles is just
going to cripple us.
Last month, the National Farmers Union even filed a
petition in review of this. Has the Administration's push for
electric vehicle mandates impacted farmers you represent?
Mr. Kippley. We do have some impact there, yes.
Mr. Nunn. With that, I know my time has expired. I will do
a follow up with you offline.
Chairman Thompson, thank you so much for the time today.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman, and seeing no other
Members here to testify, I yield to the Ranking Member if he
wants to share any closing comments he might have.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
for putting this together. It has been very informative. Mr.
Kippley, thank you. Mrs. Chinn, thank you. Mr. Cooper, thank
you, and Dr. Larson, thank you.
There is no profession that is more relied on and dependent
on the environment than farming. This has been a monumental
hearing. You have helped us go forward and understand better,
and I agree with some of the comments that we would have loved
to have had the head of the EPA in here. But we will get him
in, and some of your comments have helped this Committee to
pierce with some adequate questions to the Commissioner that
you all have mentioned here certainly about the WOTUS
situation, and several other things that you were able to
inform us on.
So, don't think your witnesses and your information have
gone to waste. We will get the Administrator in here, and we
will get some answers.
Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman, and I also want to add
my thanks to, quite frankly, each of our witnesses for making
the trip here, and bringing your life experiences and your
expertise to the table on this issue. The regulatory impact on
those hardworking families who provide us food and fiber,
building materials, energy resources, I mean, it is a tax.
There is just no doubt about it, and there is a lot that the
Environmental Protection Agency, or as I have from time to time
called them, the Excessive Punishment Agency has shouldered on
their backs. And many times, I believe, in a shortsighted way.
I mean, we heard testimony that today the unintended
consequences that come from these regulations, imposing really
climate requirements things that are good for the climate,
quite frankly, like cover crops. But cover crops, we know, in
certain areas there is snow on the ground until it is time to
put those in, and other areas, it is so dry that if you put a
cover crop in, it will suck every bit of moisture out of the
soil to where your cash crop will never grow. And so, I think
we got a lot of good information today, and we are going to use
that basically to prepare to have the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency before us. We will be sending
another invitation. I think we are going to make it a little
more firm this time, because it is time for Administrator Regan
to appear before the Agriculture Committee.
With that said, I also want to say thank you to the staff.
All the Members that are participating, quite frankly, the
staff that work so hard and so professionally. We are blessed
with the staff that we have to work with, and they really help
us to be able to do our jobs.
Under the Rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to receive
additional material and supplementary written responses from
the witnesses to any questions posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:51 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Submitted Letter by Hon. Glenn Thompson, a Representative in Congress
from Pennsylvania
February 6, 2024

Hon. Michael S. Regan,
Administrator,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, D.C.

Dear Administrator Regan:

We are writing with regard to the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP) in its ongoing efforts
to carry out the agency's responsibilities under the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) in compliance with
the Endangered Species Act (ESA). We urge the agency to further develop
these regulatory improvements in a manner that is protective of species
and legally defensible without unnecessarily constraining the safe and
effective use of pesticides. To support that goal, we ask that EPA
expeditiously convene a special meeting of the FIFRA Interagency
Working Group (IWG), the venue Congress created for coordination
between agencies and direct engagement with stakeholders.
Since the release of EPA's ESA Workplan in April 2022, EPA has
received over 30,000 comments on its proposed Draft Herbicide Strategy
and Draft Vulnerable Species Pilot Project. In the coming year, EPA has
also committed to both finalizing the proposed drafts and releasing
additional strategies on rodenticides, insecticides, and fungicides.
Collectively, we'll refer to all these documents as the ``ESA
Strategies.''
EPA has already taken positive steps towards engaging stakeholders
and addressing stakeholder concerns with released drafts of the ESA
Strategies. Some of the interagency and stakeholder engagement include:

Coordinating with leadership at U.S. Department of
Agriculture (USDA), Department of Interior, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service (USFWS), and Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Marine
Fisheries Service (NMFS).

Seeking input from grower groups, professional crop
consultants, and pesticide registrants to align the mitigation
methods that will be the basis for these ESA strategies with
currently recognized conservation practice standards developed
by USDA for the existing voluntary conservation programs.

Releasing an update to the Vulnerable Species Pilot to
respond to the primary substantive feedback the agency received
on the draft from stakeholders following the November 2023
meeting of the Pesticide Policy Dialogue Committee.

Informally hosting multiple stakeholder meetings with grower
groups and environmental advocates to solicit feedback.

An important opportunity to make this process more efficient is to
engage agricultural stakeholders earlier to provide input prior to the
release of the upcoming draft ESA strategies. The early input of
agricultural stakeholders is critical to ensuring that the outcome of
EPA's important work is a regulatory system that protects endangered
species and is feasible, enforceable, and results in legally defensible
product registrations.
This formal process must convene as soon as possible since EPA is
required to begin finalizing and implementing its ESA strategies as
soon as this spring. The agency solidified the timeline for releasing
new drafts and finalizing those already released through the announced
settlement agreement of the ``ESA Megasuit'' (Center for Biological
Diversity, et al. v. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, et al., Case
Number 3:11-cv-00293, N.D. Cal.). The next meeting of the Pesticide
Policy Dialogue Committee--a natural forum for this type of stakeholder
engagement--is not scheduled until May. By the time of that meeting,
two of the ESA strategies, the Herbicide Strategy and Vulnerable
Species Pilot, may already be finalized and the Draft Insecticide
Strategy will be close to release. Engaging stakeholders before these
timelines pass is critical.
In the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, Congress established
the IWG as the venue where multiple agencies that shape EPA's ESA
compliance strategies--including USDA, USFWS, and NMFS--can convene.
USDA provides insight into production practices on the ground, both
through the Office of Pest Management Policy and the Natural Resources
Conservation Service. USFWS and NMFS approve mitigation methods and
potential offsets proposed by EPA and manage approved endangered
species range maps. The current level of coordination among EPA and
these agencies is unprecedented and will continue to be critical to
developing these strategies.
When establishing the IWG, Congress also recognized that
stakeholder consultation is a necessary element for the participating
agencies to appropriately navigate the actual and potential differences
in interests and impacts of ESA consultation among industry and
nongovernmental stakeholders. Under Section 3(c)(11)(E) of FIFRA,
Congress requires the IWG to consult with industry stakeholders and
nongovernmental organizations in the course of its mission. To continue
EPA's important work to fully comply with its ESA obligations in a
manner that is feasible, enforceable, and results in legally defensible
pesticide registrations, we ask that a special meeting of the FIFRA IWG
be held as a closed-door roundtable with key industry and environmental
stakeholders particularly those that are party to the EPA Megasuit
settlement agreement to discuss necessary improvements to the ESA
strategies.
Possible topics for this stakeholder roundtable conversation
include providing ample and affordable mitigation methods suitable for
all farming operations, reviewing the risk assessment process, refining
endangered species range maps, aligning mitigation methods with
existing conservation practices familiar to farmers, addressing the
practical realities of different production systems before releasing
draft strategies, and planning continued engagement with stakeholders
on these issues in the coming months.
Thank you for your prompt response. We request that you respond to
this letter confirming the IWG will convene as early as possible, but
no later than March 1.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Debbie Stabenow,                Hon. John Boozman,
Chairwoman                           Ranking Minority Member,
Senate Committee on Agriculture,     Senate Committee on Agriculture,
Nutrition, and Forestry              Nutrition, and Forestry

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Glenn Thompson,                 Hon. David Scott,
Chairman,                            Ranking Minority Member,
House Committee on Agriculture       House Committee on Agriculture

CC:

The Honorable Thomas J. Vilsack, Secretary
United States Department of Agriculture

The Honorable Martha Williams, Director
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services

The Honorable Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Administrator
National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration

Brenda Mallory, Chair
Council on Environmental Quality
______

Submitted Letter by Hon. Austin Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
July 8, 2024

Anne Overstreet,
Director,
Pesticide Re-Evaluation Division,
Office of Pesticide Programs,
Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, D.C.

Submitted electronically via Federal eRulemaking Portal

RE: Pesticide Registration Review: Proposed Decisions for Several
Pesticides (Acephate) (EPA-HQ-OPP-2008-0915-0058)

Dear Director Overstreet,

We write to first thank EPA for granting the 30 day comment period
extension for the proposed interim decision (PID) for the registration
review of Acephate (EPA-HQ-OPP-2008-0915-0058). The additional time
will be immensely helpful as stakeholders collect and prepare
information for EPA as it continues to consider the registration
review. While we appreciate this extension, we believe the Agency's
data needs are such that an additional comment period extension is
warranted, which would benefit both EPA and stakeholders. We
respectfully request that EPA grant an additional 30 day extension for
the comment period for the PID for Acephate.
While we are deeply troubled with the approach EPA has taken in the
PID by proposing to cancel all uses of Acephate except for tree
injections, we are taking the Agency's concerns seriously. The
additional time offered by EPA through the comment period extension
will allow us to solicit feedback from our members and develop
information that we believe will be helpful to the Agency as it
continues its registration review process. We also understand the
Acephate registrants have been developing new data and considering
potential measures to address EPA's concerns raised in the revised risk
assessments and the PID. We believe it is imperative that the Agency
work closely with the registrants and the Acephate Task Force to ensure
they understand EPA's needs and what data and registration reforms may
be necessary to ensure there are no remaining risks of concern when a
final interim decision is reached.
The 30 day extension to the comment period will be helpful in
allowing this additional data development and registrant engagement
with EPA. However, we believe more time is needed. If stakeholders are
going to have sufficient time to engage in meaningful back-and-forth
with EPA to address the Agency's concerns--especially if that dialogue
requires the development of additional data--that will require an
extension beyond the current July 31, 2024 deadline. To that end, we
respectfully request that EPA extend the comment period by an
additional 30 days to allow for meaningful engagement with the Agency
and development of data necessary to preserve uses.
Thank you for the comment period extension offered to date and the
consideration of our request for an additional 30 day extension. We
look forward to continuing to work with EPA to address concerns raised
within the registration review of Acephate.
Sincerely,

Acephate Task Force                  Council of Producers and
Distributors of Agrotechnology
Agricultural Retailers Association   CropLife America
AmericanHort                         Golf Course Superintendents
Association of America
American Farm Bureau Federation      International Fresh Produce
Association
American Pulse Association           National Agricultural Aviation
Association
American Soybean Association         RISE (Responsible Industry for a
Sound Environment)
Burley and Dark Tobacco Producers    Society of American Florists
Association
California Citrus Mutual             U.S. Peanut Federation
California Citrus Quality Council    USA Dry Pea & Lentil Council
California Fresh Fruit Association   Western Growers
California Specialty Crops Council

______

Submitted Letter by Hon. Nicholas A. Langworthy, a Representative in
Congress from New York
February 14, 2024

Hon. Michael S. Regan,
Administrator,
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Washington, D.C.

Dear Administrator Regan:

We write to you today regarding the Environmental Protection
Agency's (EPA) proposed rulemaking published in the Federal Register on
November 17, 2023, entitled ``Potential Future Regulation for Emergency
Release Notification Requirements for Animal Waste Air Emissions Under
the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA).''
We appreciate that EPA is not currently proposing a rule to require
air emission reporting of certain substances from the natural breakdown
of animal manure under EPCRA, and we strongly encourage EPA to refrain
from considering any such rule in the future. Farmers and ranchers
across our nation are good stewards of the land and have worked
tirelessly to develop new practices on their farms to address
environmental concerns.
We know that some believe that the EPCRA reporting rule is a wise
use of EPA's time and resources; we disagree. Mandating producers
report air emissions from manure hinders EPA's ability to address
genuine emergency releases. This imposition results in extensive
paperwork backlogs, diverting resources away from addressing actual
emergencies. Furthermore, local and state emergency response
authorities have also expressed that receiving manure air emission
reports is of no particular value.
On a related note, farmers also play a leading role in helping to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and have been engaged on many
renewable energy projects. Notably, the U.S. agriculture sector is the
nation's lowest emitting economic sector,\1\ showcasing a remarkable
decrease in per-unit livestock emissions over the past 70 years--21% in
pork, 26% in milk, and 11% in beef.\2\ While we understand the need to
reduce GHG emissions, requiring the reporting of air emissions from
family farms in the future would put an unnecessary and unjustifiable
burden on our nation's agricultural producers. Instead, it is the role
of the government to continue providing producers with the tools we
know work: voluntary, incentive-based, and locally-led conservation
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Economic Research Service U.S. Department of Agriculture, July
2022 (https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/chart-gallery/gallery/
chart-detail/?chartId=104206).
\2\ America's Farmers are Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions, April
2022 (https://www.fb.org/news-release/americas-farmers-are-reducing-
greenhouse-gas-emissions).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The simple fact remains that if reporting were required, farmers
and ranchers would utilize publicly available average emissions factors
generated by the Land Grant University or other public entity to
estimate their emissions. To that end, farmer and rancher data would be
no more valuable than the data that can be generated by anyone in the
community.
We strongly urge EPA to continue to uphold the farm manure
exemption from EPCRA reporting requirements to avoid imposing an
unnecessary regulatory burden on our farmers and ranchers. Thank you
for your consideration of our comments.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Nicholas A. Langworthy,         Hon. Jim Costa,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Glenn Thompson,                 Hon. H. Morgan Griffith,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Henry Cuellar,                  Hon. Pete Sessions,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Sanford D. Bishop, Jr.,         Hon. Michael K. Simpson,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Elise M. Stefanik,              Hon. Glenn Grothman,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. John Joyce,                     Hon. Lloyd Smucker,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. August Pfluger,                 Hon. Jimmy Panetta,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Brad Finstad,                   Hon. Scott Fitzgerald,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Don Bacon,                      Hon. Brian Babin,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Dusty Johnson,                  Hon. Michelle Fischbach,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Guy Reschenthaler,              Hon. Josh Harder,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Trent Kelly,                    Hon. Doug LaMalfa,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Mike Bost,                      Hon. John W. Rose,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Mariannette Miller-Meeks,       Hon. Claudia Tenney,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Lance Gooden,                   Hon. David Rouzer,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Rudy Yakym III,                 Hon. Marcus J. Molinaro,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Ronny Jackson,                  Hon. James R. Baird,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Mike Carey,                     Hon. Jake Ellzey,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Erin Houchin,                   Hon. David G. Valadao,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Mark Alford,                    Hon. Donald G. Davis,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Jerry L. Carl,                  Hon. Ben Cline,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Ashley Hinson,                  Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hon. Lori Chavez-DeRemer,            Hon. Barry Moore,
Member of Congress                   Member of Congress

______

Submitted Question

Response  from  Rebecca L. Larson,  Ph.D.,  Vice President, Chief
Scientist, and Governmental Affairs, Western Sugar Cooperative

Question Submitted by Hon. Mark Alford, a Representative in Congress
from Missouri
Question. At the hearing on July 10th, there was much discussion
about how the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)'s decisions should
be based in sound, up to date science. Can you touch on the importance
of the quality of data EPA's Office of Pesticide Programs chooses to
use in is decision making processes, and where should outside peer
review come into play? Are there any upcoming actions where EPA should
consider incorporating outside peer review?
Answer. Best management practices dictate scientific studies be
subject to in-depth review by an outside group of experts with
familiarity with the subject matter (a.k.a., peer review). This process
ensures appropriate conclusions have been drawn by researchers of all
scientific disciplines. During peer review, errors in methods,
experimental controls, and analytical interpretations are often
uncovered. The principal investigators must respond to and fully
address all concerns before acceptance of their work. This is the point
of peer view; to ensure best quality output of robust science.
EPA acknowledges the importance of the peer review process as there
are well-established policies governing EPA actions.\1\ * For many EPA
decisions, the Agency is relying on registrant data generated following
standard, robust and clearly defined guidelines.\2\ In these instances,
there is less risk for erroneous decision-making by EPA. However, in
other instances, inadequate registrant-based data may exist for a
particular parameter. This forces EPA to rely on open-source data for
decision making.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.epa.gov/scientific-leadership/peer-review.
* Editor's note: references annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
\2\ https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-40/chapter-I/subchapter-E/
part-158/subpart-G.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In instances where open-source data is relied upon, EPA scientists
engage in a subjective process combing through public literature to
select data to include in assessments. Unfortunately, not all open-
source data is created equal. It takes great skill to assess the
individual quality of each study selected.\3\ Scientists must also be
able to differentiate between credible publication sources and
nefarious pay-to-play journals that quickly publish junk science for a
fee.\4\ Therefore, data from open sources is not guaranteed to have the
same rigor as data from registrants generated following strict EPA
guidelines. That is why peer-review of any EPA actions relying on open-
source data is of paramount importance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S0268401216309021.
\4\ http://jceps.com/wp-content/uploads/PDFs/10-2-02.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reliance on open-source data sans independent peer-review has
directly led to improper risk assessment and mitigation requirements by
EPA. One recent example is related to EPA's decision on atrazine.\5\
EPA included data from several flawed open-source studies in its
atrazine risk assessment. That action led EPA to falsely conclude non-
target species were nearly three-times more sensitive to atrazine than
was accurate. Incorrectly calculating risk is not without consequence
for U.S. farmers. According to EPA's own admission, the improper
atrazine risk assessment required farmers across millions of acres \6\
to implement unnecessary on-farm mitigation measures; something farmers
bear sole responsibility for implementing in both cost and time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.epa.gov/pesticides/epa-announces-update-atrazine.
\6\ In its July, 2024 update on atrazine levels of concern, EPA
noted excluding flawed data from risk assessments ``. . . resulted in
the removal of millions of acres of land from the 2022 map of
watersheds that were expected to exceed the level of concern and added
a much smaller number of acres in other areas of the country.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The situation with atrazine highlights the importance of peer-
review. Years after implementing the flawed standard,\7\ the risk
assessment was finally subject to Scientific Advisory Panel expert
review (e.g., peer review).\8\ Fortunately, EPA accepted the peer
review findings and excluded several studies that were improperly
structured from the risk assessment models. The result was a more
reflective level of concern nearly three-times higher than EPA's
original findings. Had EPA elicited peer-review years prior, these
erroneous restrictions could have been avoided saving U.S. farmers time
and expense.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ In 2016, EPA established the level of concern for aquatic
species at 3.4 micrograms per liter. The Scientific Advisory Panel was
not convened until August of 2023. It was not until July of 2024 that
EPA established a new, more scientifically robust standard of 9.7
micrograms per liter when implementing the Scientific Advisory Panel
peer review results.
\8\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0154-
0046.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The unprecedented and impactful nature of the Endangered Species
Act (ESA) Strategies necessitate EPA solicitation of Scientific
Advisory Panel review to avoid the issues encountered with atrazine and
more. The ESA Strategies are complex and being hastily implemented in
response to activist-led litigation.
In the Draft ESA Insecticide Strategy,\9\ EPA notes more reliance
on open-source data for risk assessment, just as it did for atrazine.
For all the reasons outlined above, this should be cause for concern.
The ESA Strategies will be required to follow the Office of Pesticide
Program's open literature guidelines when using open-source data to
calculate toxicity thresholds.\10\ However, this is not to be
considered equivalent to formal Scientific Advisory Panel review; it
not nearly as robust.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-releases-draft-strategy-
better-protect-endangered-species-insecticides see Section 3.1.2.
\10\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-1137
see page 25 footnote 21.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of a larger industry effort, Western Sugar Cooperative
raised concerns over the lack of peer-review for many aspects of the
EPA's ESA Strategies.\11\ Therefore, our concerns reach beyond just the
use of open-source data in risk assessment. We also have concerns
around the methodology used by EPA to calculate risk and exposure. For
one, we challenged why EPA omitted certain species from population-
based risk calculations. EPA highlighted our concern in their response
to public comment. However, they failed to justify why species lacking
pesticide sensitivity and those with a non-definitive toxicity endpoint
were excluded from analyses.\12\ This data omission has serious
consequences for U.S. farmers. It over-inflates the risk of pesticides
to a population thereby requiring more EPA-mandated mitigation measures
be implemented on the farm at the grower's expense.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177
see page 5.
\12\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-1138
see page 6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In sugarbeet industry-wide Draft Herbicide Strategy comments, we
challenged EPA being overly reliant on practical significance, not
statistical significance.\13\ This is especially problematic with EPA's
approach to mitigate exposure from spray drift. EPA's method of setting
maximum spray drift buffer distances is punitive.\14\ According to
EPA's own data, growers using more spray drift resistant application
methods would have to limit exposure ten-times \15\ that of more drift
prone technology.
16, 17
This approach is not equitable, nor
scientifically defensible, yet remains part of the Final Herbicide
Strategy and Draft Insecticide Strategy. There are some slight
differences in methodology when compared to the Draft Herbicide
Strategy\18\ but the inequity for farmers remains the same since there
is no standardization for mitigation expectations across application
methods.
19, 20
The lack of scientific justification for this
methodology makes the mitigation requirement appear arbitrary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177
see pages 12-13.
\14\ In the Draft Herbicide Strategy, maximum spray drift buffers
were determined for each application method by looking for a point at
which negligible change in deposition concentration is found over a
100 distance (EPA defined this as less than 1% change in slope over
100).
\15\ In the Draft Herbicide Strategy, the difference was 25-fold.
The Final Herbicide Strategy and Draft Insecticide Strategy are now
ten-fold, which is still significant.
\16\ Ground application with a low boom height and coarser droplet
size has significantly less drift than aerial application with finer
droplet sizes according to EPA AgDrift model data included in the
Strategies.
\17\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177
see pages 15-16.
\18\ EPA applied the Tier III model in AgDrift for aerial
application and moved from 100 increments of curve to the minimum
possible within AgDrift (e.g., 6.6 increments); see Table 4-2 on page
19 of the Ecological Mitigation Support Document.
\19\ Although our own in-field observations across the industry
demonstrates ground applications are more drift resistant than aerial
application, the reference to ``more drift resistant technology'' in
this context comes from reviewing EPA's own data for various
application methods developed from AgDrift.
\20\ Figure 4-2 of the Ecological Mitigation Support document (page
20) demonstrates ground application with a low boom height and medium
fine to coarse droplet size must reduce drift ten-fold over what an
aerial applicator with a fine droplet size must achieve (0.005 versus
0.05 for depositional fraction).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The methodology applied by EPA to determine spray drift buffer
requirements should also be subject to peer-review. In the Draft
Herbicide Strategy EPA identified risk to listed species and critical
habitats is eliminated when chemical ``deposition [results] in exposure
. . . below a toxicity threshold . . . with a potential for population
level impacts . . .'' \21\ In the Draft Herbicide Strategy, this was
the exposure mitigation level set for the high-risk products. In the
Draft Insecticide Strategy, this level is now applied to medium-risk
chemicals. This change appears overly precautious considering EPA
states in the ESA Strategies that the two factors used to calculate the
potential for population impacts already have conservative bi-
ases.
22, 23

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0009
see Section 6.1 on page 38.
\22\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2024-0299-0005
see Sections 3.1.2.2/3  (EPA states species sensitivity determinations
purposefully overestimate sensitivity, or risk).
\23\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2024-0299-0005
see Section 3.1.1 (EPA states models used to derive estimated
environmental concentrations have a conservative bias. Therefore,
exposure is also over-estimated).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Implementation of overly precautious spray drift buffer poses a
real and present threat to our industry as outlined in our comments to
the Draft Herbicide Strategy.
24, 25
EPA has released the
Final Herbicide Strategy that still contains unworkable requirements
for farmers.\26\ EPA states it will not take any comments on its
Ecological Mitigation Support Document, a governing document supporting
all ESA Strategies. As noted, EPA made substantive changes to its
approach to spray buffer maximums between the Draft Herbicide Strategy
and release of the Draft Insecticide Strategy. The extent and impact of
these changes were not addressed during any EPA update \27\ or workshop
\28\ between release of the Draft and Final Herbicide Strategy, which
prevented constructive stakeholder engagement and feedback. EPA's self-
imposed timing of the Draft Insecticide Strategy (released July 25,
2024) and the release of the Final Herbicide Strategy (August 19, 2024)
are unfortunately misaligned, such that constructive comments offered
as part of the Draft Insecticide Strategy (due September 23, 2024) will
be unable to be incorporated into the Final Herbicide Strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177
see Appendix A.
\25\ https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-0177
see Appendix B. Small fields with irregular shapes simply cannot
accommodate spray buffers making domestic seed production impossible,
thereby threatening the survival of the entire beet sugar industry.
\26\ https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-finalizes-first-its-kind-
strategy-protect-900-endangered-species-herbicides.
\27\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2023-0365-
1131.
\28\ https://aapco.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/06032024-Full-
SFIREG-USDA-ESA.pdf.

Based on the significance of EPA's change in approach for spray
buffer maximums, we insist EPA take advantage of its stated commitment
that ``the Agency . . . expects to provide updated versions of the
Ecological Mitigation Support Document in the future''.\29\ Addressing
public comments around spray drift buffer modifications must be the
number one priority for update. Following updates, the process must be
subject to external peer-review before implementation of the approach
in product registration and registration review processes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPP-2024-0299-0005
see Section 2.3 page 13.

In conclusion, peer-review results in more robust, science-based
outcomes. The unprecedented nature and rapid development/roll-out of
the EPA ESA Strategies makes the need for peer-review extremely
critical. Therefore, this Committee must insist EPA engage with the
Scientific Advisory Panel to peer-review risk and exposure calculations
as well as guidelines that serve as the basis for mitigation required
by U.S. farmers before implementation of any ESA Strategy.

[all]
