- CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS: CONFLICT IN THE 21ST CENTURY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-23]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

ON

CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS: CONFLICT IN THE 21ST CENTURY
__________

HEARING HELD
MARCH 30, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

52-420                    WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin, Chairman

MATT GAETZ, Florida                  RO KHANNA, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
PAT FALLON, Texas                    WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
NICK LaLOTA, New York                PATRICK RYAN, New York
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
Pennsylvania

Josh Stiefel, Professional Staff Member
Michael Hermann, Professional Staff Member
Payson Ruhl, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Gallagher, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Wisconsin, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and Innovation     1
Khanna, Hon. Ro, a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and
Innovation.....................................................     2

WITNESSES

Nakasone, GEN Paul M., USA, Commander, U.S. Cyber Command, and
Director, National Security Agency/Chief, Central Security
Service........................................................     5
Plumb, Hon. John F., Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
Policy, and Principal Cyber Advisor to the Secretary of Defense     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Gallagher, Hon. Mike.........................................    31
Nakasone, GEN Paul M.........................................    49
Plumb, Hon. John F...........................................    32

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Gallagher................................................    61
Mr. LaLota...................................................    61

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

CYBERSPACE OPERATIONS: CONFLICT IN THE 21ST CENTURY

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies, and
Innovation,
Washington, DC, Thursday, March 30, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 8:28 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Gallagher
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE GALLAGHER, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
WISCONSIN, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

Mr. Gallagher. The subcommittee will come to order.
I ask unanimous consent that the Chair be authorized to
declare a recess at any time.
Without objection, so ordered.
I also ask that our members and witnesses be mindful of our
three CITI [Subcommittee on Cyber, Information Technologies,
and Innovation] commandments:
We start on time. Check.
We use language that the average American can understand.
So, please limit the use of acronyms and jargon if you can.
And we will enforce the 5-minute rule, which also includes
witnesses' responses.
So, I will do my best to keep this moving.
With that, good morning, everyone. And thank you for being
here today for our hearing on the Department of Defense's
cyberspace activities. We ask a lot from the Department in this
space, from securely operating networks and inherently insecure
weapon systems, to assisting small and large businesses with
their interaction with the defense industrial base.
However, more important than anything else is how prepared
and capable we are to hold our adversaries at risk. I have
repeatedly expressed my concerns about the Department's pace
for growing and modernizing the ships, the aircraft, and the
weapons that are required for a potential fight with China.
If we accept that we need more time to build the platforms
required for a kinetic conflict, it is my genuine belief that
our ability to robustly use information and cyber operations
should provide us with the opportunity to buy time to maneuver
for our kinetic forces.
While there have been some signs of progress, such as the
first delivery of a budget built through the CYBERCOM [U.S.
Cyber Command] commander's enhanced budgetary authority, there
are still wide gaps in where we are today and where we need to
be very soon.
There are chronic issues such as force readiness, lack of
sufficient intelligence support to cyberspace operations, and
the shortcomings in agile acquisition of cyber capabilities
that continue to plague the cyber force. These problems aren't
new. And it is actually remarkable how much effort Congress has
expended on pulling and pushing the Department to embrace the
promise of cyber operations.
Since 2013, Congress has tried to address force design and
readiness through 24 different pieces of legislation. Twenty-
four. And over that same period we have tried to address the
civilian and military cyber workforce dilemma 45 times;
CYBERCOM acquisition matters, 12 times; and defense industrial
base cybersecurity, 42 times. And the list goes on.
More frustrating is that the country's collective
capabilities in readiness are seemingly no better off because
of it.
In the words of Albert Einstein, insanity is doing the same
thing over and over again and expecting different outcomes. So,
I look forward to hearing why I am not insane from our
witnesses, Dr. John Plumb, serving as both the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Space Policy and the Principal Cyber
Advisor; as well as General Paul Nakasone, the seasoned
Commander of U.S. Cyber Command.
And with that, I will recognize the ranking member.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gallagher can be found in
the Appendix on page 31.]

STATEMENT OF HON. RO KHANNA, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM CALIFORNIA,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBER, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES, AND INNOVATION

Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our witnesses for appearing before us
today, and the men and women you represent.
Thank you, General Paul Nakasone for meeting yesterday and
for your ideas on recruitment, as well as your suggestions on
how we can continue to keep our Nation safe from cyberattacks.
Our adversaries continue to use cyberspace to conduct
malicious activities against the United States, its allies, and
its interests. These include Iran, Russia, and China. I applaud
the Department of Defense and U.S. Cyber Command for the
progress that has been made in recent years. Certainly the
change in posture in the past 5 years has been quite remarkable
as we have transitioned to a posture of defend forward.
But we certainly still have work to do. China aggressively
uses cyberspace to obtain economic advantage and gather
sensitive information. Also, unfortunately, the CCP has been
the prime mover of a lot of trade secret theft, IP
[intellectual property] theft, which I am particularly aware of
given that companies in my district in Silicon Valley have been
the targets.
Russia continues to engage in malicious activities to
achieve its ends.
And the governments of Iran and North Korea, as well as
malicious and profit-motivated actors, continue to act to
further their own interests.
Our cyber forces are engaged every day in the whole-of-
government effort to defend the country. And given our
decentralization and our focus on privacy, this task is harder
for us than for many other nations.
With these growing threats then must come increased
attention. I appreciate that we are going to be supporting the
Cyber Command in this President's budget, especially in areas
of force readiness, training, and support for partners and
allies in efforts such as hunt forward.
The committee is tracking challenges associated with
growing, retaining, and training the force. And I want to make
sure we can continue to discuss that effort in greater detail.
I look forward to some creative ideas you may have of how our
committee can help the recruitment of first-class talent in
technology.
As I said to the general, I want to make sure that some of
the most talented folks aren't just going to IPOs [initial
public offerings] and they become multimillionaires, but also
serving the country.
I also hope to hear about the command's service-like
authorities, including enhanced budget control.
Thank you. And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for
convening the hearing, and I yield back.
Mr. Gallagher. Dr. Plumb, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN F. PLUMB, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE
FOR SPACE POLICY, AND PRINCIPAL CYBER ADVISOR TO THE SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE

Dr. Plumb. Well, thank you, Chairman Gallagher. Thanks,
Ranking Member Khanna, and distinguished members of the
committee.
Good morning. Thanks for inviting me to testify on the
Defense Department's cyber posture. I am honored to appear
alongside General Nakasone.
As Secretary Austin said from his first days in office, the
People's Republic of China is the Department's pacing
challenge, while Russia remains an acute threat. This is as
true in cyberspace as it is in any other warfighting domain.
For decades, China has used its cyber capabilities to steal
sensitive information, intellectual property, and research from
U.S. public and private sector institutions, including the
defense industrial base. Today, in competition, China's cyber
intrusions are the most prolific in the world. In crisis, PRC
[People's Republic of China] leaders believe that achieving
information dominance will enable them to seize and keep the
strategic initiative; disrupt our ability to mobilize, to
project, and sustain the joint force; and to ensure the PRC's
desired end state.
Russia engages in persistent malicious cyber activities to
support its global espionage campaigns, steal intellectual
property, disrupt critical infrastructure, and promote
disinformation. Russia has also demonstrated it has used cyber
as a key component of its wartime strategy. At the outset of
its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in early 2022, Russia
conducted cyber operations against Viasat, a U.S. satellite
company, to degrade the command and control of the Ukrainian
forces and enable Russian maneuvers.
Other persistent threats arise from North Korea, from Iran,
and from transnational criminal organizations. Together, our
adversaries use cyberspace to conduct operations against the
Department of Defense Information Network, the DODIN, and the
U.S. homeland. They do this to weaken our allies and partners
and to undermine U.S. interests.
Since 2018, the Department has recognized that it is not
enough to maintain a defensive posture while preparing for
conflict. We also must defend forward to meet our adversaries
and disrupt their efforts in competition. That is the day-to-
day struggle.
Today, the Department campaigns in and through cyberspace
to sow doubt among our competitors. We conduct intelligence-
driven hunt forward operations to generate insights into our
competitors' tactics, while defending U.S. allies and partner
computer networks. And we disrupt malicious cyber actors
through offensive operations.
The Department is also prioritizing capacity-building
efforts for our allies and partners, who serve as a strategic
advantage and a force multiplier that our adversaries can never
hope to match.
The President's fiscal year 2024 budget request prioritizes
investments in all aspects of cyberspace: our people, our
organization, our operations, our intelligence, and our
capabilities. The request includes $13.5 billion for cyberspace
activities, which is an increase of $1.8 billion from the
enacted level in fiscal year 2023.
These investments will enhance the Department's
cybersecurity; they will increase capacity for cyberspace
operations; they will advance research and development
activities for new cyber capabilities.
The budget requests $7.4 billion for cyberspace operations,
including nearly $3 billion for U.S. Cyber Command. These
resources will go directly to supporting our Cyber Mission
Forces, protecting the homeland, and addressing the threats
posed by our adversaries in cyberspace.
And, I will just say, Chairman Gallagher, I do think we are
better off. And we are getting better every day. And I think
[with] the help from the Congress and the continued
investments, we are more prepared, we are more effective, and
we are integrating cyber more and more into our operations.
Operating in cyberspace today is an essential part of the
Department's ability to deter aggression and ensure our
Nation's security. Our adversaries continue to extend and
evolve their cyber capabilities. They are exercising them in
both competition and conflict to degrade our advantages and
increase their own.
The Department is committed to strengthening both our
defensive and offensive cyber capabilities, and to maturing our
cyber forces in partnership with this committee.
So, thank you for your tireless support of the Department.
And I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Plumb can be found in the
Appendix on page 32.]
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
General Nakasone is recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF GEN PAUL M. NAKASONE, USA, COMMANDER, U.S. CYBER
COMMAND, AND DIRECTOR, NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY/CHIEF, CENTRAL
SECURITY SERVICE

General Nakasone. Chairman Gallagher, Ranking Member
Khanna, and distinguished members of the committee, I am
honored to testify beside Assistant Secretary Dr. John Plumb.
Joining me today is Command Sergeant Major Sheryl Lyon, the
U.S. Cyber Command and NSA [National Security Agency] Senior
Enlisted Leader.
We are honored to represent the military and civilian
members of U.S. Cyber Command.
In the contested cyberspace domain, U.S. Cyber Command acts
against foreign adversaries that threaten our Nation through
malicious cyber activity, and enables actions by our Federal,
private, and allied partners. Last fall, a combined U.S. Cyber
Command/NSA election security group countered malicious cyber
actors and oversaw measures to enable the Department of
Homeland Security and the FBI [Federal Bureau of
Investigation], among other domestic partners, to defend the
recent midterm elections.
The 2022 election cycle proceeded from primaries to
certifications without significant impacts due in part to our
effort.
Going forward, success for U.S. Cyber Command will be
measured how effectively foreign adversarial actors are
prevented from achieving their strategic objectives. Last year
saw significant maturation for U.S. Cyber Command, but our work
is not done.
In 2023 we must continue to focus on our people, our
partners, and our ability to deliver decisive advantage. We
must improve readiness, bolster our reliance--or, I am sorry,
bolster our resilience and maintain a culture of continuous
improvement.
We will continue to deliver warfighting advantage for the
joint force and allied partners through competition, crisis,
and conflict. We are doing so by executing our unique
authorities to build and sustain campaigns in and through
cyberspace and the information environment. Through these
efforts we seek to counter adversaries in competition, to deter
conflict, and to prevail against aggression.
Aligning efforts of both U.S. Cyber Command and NSA is
essential to achieving these goals and is in the best interests
of the Nation and national security.
It all starts with people--the men and women of U.S. Cyber
Command working with NSA and partners here and abroad. We win
with people. The men and women of United States Cyber Command
are grateful for the support [that] this committee and Congress
has given to our command.
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Nakasone can be found in
the Appendix on page 49.]
Mr. Gallagher. That was a very efficient opening statement.
We will now move into the Q&A [question and answer] portion
of the hearing.
Dr. Plumb, last year's NDAA [National Defense Authorization
Act] authorized a new Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Cyberspace Policy. I am confident that the Senate is ready to
rapidly confirm a nominee. Had many conversations to that
effect. Can you explain why we are not seeing one?
Dr. Plumb. Yes, sir.
So, the Department has taken the language from the 2023
NDAA and we are trying to make sure that we create ASD
[Assistant Secretary of Defense] Cyber in a deliberate manner
that has the most positive effect.
So, what we are doing is following the template that was
used to create my current position, ASD for Space, which is
putting a FFRDC [federally funded research and development
center] on contract to examine what is the proper structure,
are there different pieces required, what things should be in
this cyber ASD-ship and not--we are looking at components of
electronic warfare, components of information warfare, what
should belong.
That is on contract now. We expect that that study should
be done around September.
But we are moving forward on it, we just want to do it
right.
Mr. Gallagher. So, the earlier time in which we would see a
nominee would be after the report in September?
Dr. Plumb. To be totally fair, that is above my pay grade,
but that is what I would anticipate. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gallagher. Okay. That is disappointing.
We sat down a few weeks ago and you talked about just the
number of reports that are foisted on you by Congress. On one
level I agree, I think we insert far too many reporting
requirements into the NDAA and it just sort of grows and grows
without sort of cleaning out the number of reports that don't
actually get read.
On the other hand, we do it to draw attention to
significant issues that we think are important, without
actually having to micromanage the Department with statutory
language.
And the best way to avoid reports is to provide us quick
but comprehensive answers to the questions that we are asking
the Department.
Do you happen to know how many reports that are related to
cyber that the Department of Defense is delinquent on right
now?
Dr. Plumb. I don't have an exact number. I would imagine it
is around 10.
Mr. Gallagher. It is 15 reports; 15.
So, I just would submit there has got to be a better way we
can get answers to these questions. And I am happy to work with
you and your team to come up with that solution. Because the
current posture, in my, in my view is unacceptable.
And speaking of reports, you produced the 2022 Cyber
Posture Review. That was a congressionally mandated document to
be produced every 4 years. Three years ago we said that the
Cyber Posture Review needed to include an assessment, ``an
assessment of the potential cost, benefits, and value, if any,
of establishing a cyber force as a separate uniformed
service.'' Yet, when we got the document it did not include
that assessment.
Why is that? Why did DOD [Department of Defense] ignore
that requirement from Congress?
Dr. Plumb. So, first of all, no intentional ignoring of any
provision of the law there, that oversight. I will dig into how
that happened.
But I will say this, Congressman, we are working hard on
answering that problem. It has been tasked in the fiscal year
2023 NDAA as part of section 1533 of the force generation
study.
I have been involved in conversations with your staff on
making sure that that study is going forward. I think it is a
good study. I think it gives us enough time to look at. And I
think it is really important. And one of the things it required
us to explore, among other options for force generation, is a
cyber service.
Mr. Gallagher. I get that. And I understand that where you
stand depends on where you sit. But it is not the prerogative
of the Department to decide which part of the congressional
mandate you get to comply with or, hey, we will answer it--we
will answer it in a different report at a different time. We
wanted that assessment in the Cyber Posture Review.
So, I would appreciate you getting back to my team on why
that didn't happen, just so we can improve this process of
reporting and answering going forward.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 61.]
Mr. Gallagher. How do you think about retention? It is my
understanding that over the last year the Office of the
Principal Cyber Advisor has had at least seven civilians
depart, that is about 75 percent of the office's total civilian
roster.
Is that a concern of yours? How do you think about
improving retention?
Dr. Plumb. It is a concern of mine. I think, frankly,
that--I think creation of the ASD Cyber will help solve some of
that problem. But I am digging into that in my role as PCA
[Principal Cyber Advisor] right now. And it is an issue I am
determined to get after.
Mr. Gallagher. Okay. I look forward to following up on that
and the other issues that I raised.
And I now recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Khanna. You know, when I first got to Washington they
said no one reads in Washington more than one page. The
chairman is an exception to that rule.
But I support the effort to have reports and responsiveness
because I think that is the essence of democracy and oversight.
So, will look forward to working with you on that, Mr.
Chairman.
Let me ask you, Dr. Plumb, given your testimony on the
CCP's cyber threats, how much of a threat do you think TikTok
poses to the United States from a cybersecurity perspective?
Dr. Plumb. Ranking Member, I would say that when we think
about TikTok as a potential threat vector, the things that come
to mind are, one, the scale. I mean, just a tremendous number
of people in the United States use TikTok.
And, two, the control that China may have to be able to
direct information through it, [serve] as a misinformation
platform. And then, of course, the data that it can collect.
So, it is the scale of it I think that is problematic
really for us.
Mr. Khanna. And what do you think should be done about
that?
Dr. Plumb. That is a great question. I know everyone is
considering it.
I think we need to be aware of these various threats and be
able to quantify them, and be able to take action against them.
I know that is somewhat of a vague answer, sir, but I don't
know if I have the exact answer for you right now.
I might ask General Nakasone if he has thoughts on that.
General Nakasone. Ranking Member, coming back to your
question, if you consider one-third of the adult population
receives their news from this app; one-sixth of our children
are saying they are constantly on this app; if you consider
that there is 150 million people every single day that are,
obviously, touching this app, this provides, you know, a
foreign nation a platform for information operations, a
platform for surveillance, and a concern we have with regards
to who controls that data.
The Department has already, as you know, banned the use of
that application on our phones. I think the broader discussion,
obviously, rests with the policymakers now. But certainly this
is a piece that our Nation has to consider.
There are going to be other applications like this. And we
are going to have to have some type of policy that protects
both our ability to, obviously, to see materials but also
protects us from an adversary's ability to conduct surveillance
and information operations against us.
Mr. Khanna. Is it fair to say you view that TikTok has a
different order of threat than an American company on social
media?
General Nakasone. I do. I mean, if you consider the fact
that the difference between an American company and our
government, there is a clear separation in terms of what goes
on there. If you take a look at an application like this that a
nation has already said that they are going to be able to touch
the data at any time they want to touch this data, this
concerns--this concerns me, and certainly concerns most people
as they look at this.
General Nakasone. General Nakasone, when we spoke you had
an interesting idea about scholarships, specifically in STEM
[science, technology, engineering, and mathematics] fields or
in fields that could be of use in AI [artificial intelligence]
and quantum computing for the services. Could you speak to that
and provide maybe some suggestions of what we would do as a
committee on that?
General Nakasone. One of the things that this committee and
the broader Congress has done is to create programs like
Scholarships for Service that has been tremendously helpful for
organizations like U.S. Cyber Command, but broader
organizations within our government.
Artificial intelligence, machine learning, as many, as any
members have looked at and talked about, is the future for our
Nation, it is the future for our economy, it is the future for
our national defense. So, any type of scholarship that would,
obviously, focus young people on this growing importance of
this field, where they are able to study it and then perhaps
give back to any part of the government, I think is something
that is honorable. I think that is something that our
government, and certainly organizations like U.S. Cyber
Command, could benefit from.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Dr. Plumb, my final question is how would you assess both
our offensive and defensive cyber capabilities compared to
China or Russia?
Dr. Plumb. I think we are a premier cyber power. I think
that the United States is, under General Nakasone's leadership
in particular, developing exquisite capabilities. And I think
one of our goals looking forward is how do we make sure that we
can, as I think the chairman said in his opening remarks, work
to integrate these with maneuver to be able to prevail and win
in the Nation's wars.
Mr. Khanna. Yield back.
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. Luttrell.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General and Doctor, thank you for your service and your
continued service. Doctor, I understand that you are a
submariner?
Dr. Plumb. I was indeed, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. You are a special breed of human being, sir.
God bless you for doing that.
My first question goes to you, Doctor.
Senior intelligence leaders from Cyber Command have been
vocal recently about efforts and need to establish a
foundational intelligence center for cyberspace, no different
from the National Intelligence Center for the Army and Office
of Naval Intelligence for the Navy. And, in fact, there is a
foundational intelligence center for just about every
warfighting domain.
What actions have you taken in the Pentagon have
specifically pushed for this center, if any?
Dr. Plumb. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
I do think it will be important for us to make sure that we
are able to provide our operators with the right foundational
intelligence to conduct. I think General Nakasone obviously has
a tremendous part of this.
We are struggling with this question, both in the
cybersecurity strategy which is, hopefully, be published in the
near future. It is not quite through the Secretary yet, but it
is on its way.
And then we are also looking at this from a S&T [science
and technology] standpoint as well. So we are kind of
approaching from two pieces. We are not there yet. I think it
is pretty clear that there is a signal that this is a thing we
need to be working on.
Mr. Luttrell. [Inaudible] if there are roadblocks we can
assist with. It seems to make sense and be advantageous for
something like this to be stood up. So, please let us know.
Dr. Plumb. Yes, sir.
Mr. Luttrell. General, do you think JADC2, the Joint All-
Domain Command and Control 2, should be a part or under the
purview of CYBERCOM?
General Nakasone. Well, certainly, Congressman, this is
under the purview of the Department of Defense right now. Where
we add to it is, obviously, the cybersecurity piece of what
gets done.
This is a broader element of command and control, and
ability to fuse intelligence and operations that extends even
beyond U.S. Cyber Command.
We have a significant role ensuring that what we develop as
a Department is secure and is able to function in the future.
Mr. Luttrell. Seems like there's redundancy, does it seem
like if it was to split or come together would it be more
effective and efficient in your opinion?
General Nakasone. So, as we move forward, I think as we
move from design to actually the operational piece, then I
think the question is where does it reside?
Right now in the design phase I think it's, it's
appropriate within the Department of Defense, and within the
Office of the Secretary of Defense, and certainly within the
Joint Staff as they move this forward.
Mr. Luttrell. So, migration would be beneficial in the
future?
General Nakasone. It likely will. And I think we will learn
a lot as we start to implement this in different places, like
the Schriever Wargames, and Blue Flag, and the National
Training Center. But we will have a better feel for where it
actually needs to reside in the future, I think, Congressman.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. Can you tell me how much China, Russia,
North Korea, Iran individually spent on cybersecurity, cyber
infrastructure this past year?
General Nakasone. I would have to take that for the record,
Congressman.
[The information referred to is classified and retained in
the committee files.]
General Nakasone. But I would tell you that one of the
things that we do see is a rise in both the scope and
sophistication of our adversaries, both in terms of their
ability to conduct cyber intrusions and attacks, and their
ability to defend their data.
Mr. Luttrell. It seems to me, and both of you can
appreciate this as well as the other uniformed men and women in
the room, and my colleagues on the panel with me, is that the
cyberspace is the next frontier of warfare. No more bombs,
planes, and guns. It will be a push of a button, in my opinion,
is how we will be fighting on these fronts.
I think China is projected to spend $31 billion by 2026.
And, yet, I think what are we spending, 13?
And I think my statement for the record would be we need to
be spending more on cyber risk, cyber threat, cyber control on
our side, given the advancements of the nefarious actors around
the globe.
Would you agree with that statement?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, as a combatant commander
I would probably never disagree with more resources.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay.
General Nakasone. But what I would say is that as we take a
look at the future--and you highlighted this--this is the
future of where we need to be able to operate in all domains.
We are seeing this in Russia/Ukraine right now: How do you
combine what we do non-kinetically with what goes on
kinetically?
There will always be a fight on the ground, or the air, or
the sea, but there also is going to be a fight that is going to
take place in cyberspace and space. And that is one of the
things that I think Russia/Ukraine has demonstrated to us.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. I appreciate you saying that. And I
hope you are well aware that if, inevitably, when something
clacks off it will be you all that most likely will be on the
front lines.
So, again, thank you.
I yield back, sir.
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Chairman, thanks so much.
Gentlemen, thanks so much for being here and for your
staffs for participating today.
Gentlemen, as you both know, in 2018 the U.S. Cyber Command
was elevated to a unified combatant command, having been
previously operating under U.S. Strategic Command since 2009.
Cyber is a fairly recent, complex, and critical strength and
vulnerability for the U.S. And Space Force is also a very
recent addition as well, having been established in 2019.
And while I understand the complexities of establishing and
ironing out the nuances of these new commands, Dr. Plumb, in
prior statements made to our colleagues in the Senate you heard
and personally spoke to the criticality of legislation for
Space Force, specifically section 1602 of the fiscal year 2022
National Defense Authorization Act, which designates the Chief
of Space Operations as the ``force design architect'' for
space.
So, my question, Doctor, is should such a designation be
considered for cyberspace as a warfighting domain on par with
space?
Dr. Plumb. Congressman, to make sure I understand the
question, you are asking if we need a cyber warfare architect?
Mr. LaLota. Yes.
Dr. Plumb. I guess I would have to think through what that
would mean. I feel like it would be General Nakasone in
[inaudible] as Cyber Command.
I guess I just--that is a new question for me. I would be
happy to take that for a look-up.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 61.]
Dr. Plumb. I think the fundamental question would be would
it change anything or would we already be doing it and then
we----
Mr. LaLota. Are we on the right track right now
organizationally?
Dr. Plumb. I think we are on the right track. We are
investing in our joint cyber warfare architecture in this
budget, and have continued to do so and making sure that is
modernized. And I feel like we are on the right track.
The General may have some pieces to add. But I think we are
going in the right direction. I am not sure that that
designation would change that at all.
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, you hit a very important
date, 2018. When not only the fact that U.S. Cyber Command is
elevated to strategic--or to a combatant command, but the fact
that authorities, policies, and capability come together in
2018. We demonstrate that in the defense of the 2018 midterm
elections.
And then as you see everything afterwards, whether or not
it was ransomware, whether or not it was actions against other
adversaries, whether or not it is election security, this is
the key starting point. And the--one of the big things that we
were the beneficiaries of was this committee's decision in the
fiscal year 2019 NDAA to call cyber a traditional military
activity. That allowed us to conduct operations like hunt
forward operations.
This is tremendously important.
I think what you are also talking about is that the work
isn't done. And so, when you think about cyber, we need to make
sure that a simulation capability, much in the same way we have
in other domains, is resident within cyber to include and to
reinforce the advances we have already made.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you.
And following up on organizationally how we are proceeding,
Dr. Plumb, to you, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict is responsible
for information operations. But the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Space Policy is responsible for cyberspace
operations.
So my question is, can you explain the logic as to why
these two separate chains are established for operations within
the same informational environment?
Dr. Plumb. Yes. Thanks, Congressman.
First of all, military operations, the chain of command, of
course, is through COCOMs [combatant commands] and through the
Secretary. The policy oversight piece, and then sometimes, so
for instance ASD SO/LIC [Assistant Secretary of Defense for
Special Operations and Low-Intensity Conflict] has some
secretarial-like authorities over SOCOM [U.S. Special
Operations Command].
But information operations are not just the purview of
cyber. Cyber is one vector for information operations. It is
certainly not the whole piece.
So, I actually think that the split does, does make sense
when you take that into account.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. Appreciate that.
And my last question is for the general. General, how do
you envision the Cyber Mission Force and the Cyber Operations
Force maturing over the next 3 to 5 years?
General Nakasone. Congressman, we began with a force 133
teams. The Secretary in the summer of 2020 authorized 14 new
teams to be built. Congress has authorized funding for that.
So, we are in the build of 14 more teams.
So, I think the first part of it is greater capacity. We
are on a road to have more teams to be able to do more
missions.
Secondly is clearly being able to play to our strengths.
What is our competitive advantage? Our competitive advantage is
information, so, being able to further leverage artificial
intelligence, machine learning.
And the third piece is, it is all about our partnerships.
This is what we have learned. It is not only the partnerships
with the National Security Agency but, broadly, how do we
partner with FBI and CISA [Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency]? How do we look at a series of international
partners that provide our Nation greater capacity and, most
importantly perhaps, how do we partner with the private sector?
This is what we have learned in Russia/Ukraine; the power
of partnering with the private sector provides our Nation a
tremendous advantage that no other nation has.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. And I will just close by saying I
join with my colleague from Texas in the thought that you are
on the front lines of our next biggest battle. And we
appreciate the work that you are doing.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gallagher. Doctor, Marine, Soldier McCormick.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In medicine we talk about a scotoma as being a blind spot.
In business when you talk about it, it could be something that
you just get used to and you forget that it is there, and only
the new guy coming in can see it.
And when we talk about the military and its preparedness,
one of the things that concerns me is that, especially in this
arena because it is so quick moving, and we are watching China
in so many other ways go after our resources, go after critical
alliances, they are outpacing us in port production and
valuable resources that we are not going to be able to get to
pretty soon. What do you think that they are going to do to try
to cut us off?
In other words, what would--what should we be looking at as
a blind spot in preparedness to outpace the Chinese and the
Russians when it comes to preparing for the next battle in
cyber?
General Nakasone. I'll take that.
So, Congressman, I think it is all about information. I
think this is, this is where our competitive advantage is
today, and our competitive advantage in the future needs to be
information.
How do we take the information from our most sensitive
sources? How do we take the information from the private
sector? How do we take the information from a series of
partners?
This is what we have done for many, many years. This is
what we have demonstrated as a kinetic force. This is the same
power that we need to continue to demonstrate as a non-kinetic
force.
When I think about China and Russia, you know, our ability
to stay ahead of them in areas like artificial intelligence and
machine learning, in a series of partnerships, and being able
to leverage the private sector, this is what we must continue
to do. That is, that is the blind spot we never can kind of
look away from. We have to make sure that we are watching this
very carefully.
Dr. McCormick. So, one of the things I notice when we talk
about investing in the future, and I was looking at colleges,
for example, and how much money we as the government put in,
about half versus the civilian. Which I really appreciate your
comment on combining civilian with military resources to
advance our technologies.
But one of the things that concerns me is we have a lot of
foreign students over here that we are paying the bill on both
through the civilian and government agencies to educate. And
then some of them are returning back to China. Some are staying
here from China in America.
But we have had problems with this in the past as far as
giving up our data to other countries that are pilfering. They
are putting a tremendous amount, just like Congressman Luttrell
said, they are putting a tremendous amount of assets to develop
their own, and then they are coming over here in my, my
opinion, they are stealing our information.
And sometimes we are just giving it to them in our highest
educated universities. I was a professor at Georgia Tech and I
participated in an investigation and somebody who got put in
jail over that same exact thing. How do we protect our
information from being stolen when we do education like that?
And I will leave that for Dr. Plumb.
Dr. Plumb. Well, sir, I guess I would say that, one, I am
in certainly no position to comment on university hiring
practices. But I will say that when it comes to classified
information or the information in our defense industrial base
we need to make sure we have proper vetting for anyone to make
sure that they are not some type of a threat. And it doesn't
really matter where they are from for that situation. It really
depends on if we are doing a proper vetting.
And then the second part would be to make sure that the
information we are trying to protect, that we are doing the
most modern things to do so, moving towards zero trust, making
sure we have two-factor authentication, or whatever the latest
requirements are. But just a lot of cyber hygiene is
democratized all the way down to the lowest level.
And it is a hard problem. It is one of the things the
government is trying to get after by sharing more information
with private industry and with universities on how to protect
this information to make sure these things don't happen at the
scale you are suggesting.
Dr. McCormick. Okay, thanks.
My final is just organizationally. I had somebody stop by
my office and talk about a department in cyber. And I know this
has been brought up already. But do you think it would be
better, if it had to be folded under a department, kind of like
you have the Department of Navy and Marine Corps, do you think
it would be better folded under an Army or under Space? Because
just given its intellectual capacity and its application to
outer space now, would it be better to be folded under or a
separate standalone department?
Dr. Plumb. Congressman, I think you are asking about
whether we should form a cyber service and, if we did, where it
would nest.
I guess I would say that I think, you know, first of all,
we are taking a hard look at whether should we form a cyber
service to provide the best effective cyber operations. I think
our focus should be how do we get after the threat most
effectively with these taxpayer dollars. And that threat in
particular is that of China.
So, I think that is really how we should focus these--our
thoughts and our approach.
Dr. McCormick. So, standalone or fold under a certain
department that already exists?
Dr. Plumb. I would not want to get ahead of any decision
that really rests with the Secretary.
Dr. McCormick. Just a recommendation. I was just curious.
Okay, thank you. With that I yield.
Mr. Gallagher. The gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Keating.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you very much for being here this morning.
General Nakasone, last year you briefed us about your hunt
forward efforts in Ukraine in advance of the Russian invasion.
Now, looking back, having a little period of time to look back,
how successful do you think those efforts have been to date?
And how do you gauge the success in Russia countering what
you are doing in that respect?
And is there anything at all that surprised you with this
experience?
General Nakasone. Congressman, if I might just take a step
back. Hunt forward operations began in 2018 as we started to
think about how do we secure our Nation's elections.
And one of the bright ideas from a young captain, said,
hey, why don't we send a team of 8 to 10 military members to a
country at their request, hunt down their networks with them,
and share all that information not only with their country but,
broadly, with industry so industry can see what is going on?
Well, since that time we have conducted 47 missions in 22
countries on 70 different networks. Four of them, four of them
have been in Ukraine. Those four operations, to include the
operation that took place 70 days prior to the invasion, I
think were extremely successful. Not only were we able to
identify the tradecraft, not only were we able to identify some
of the malware, but we were able to reassure a partner that we
were going to provide support.
And I think that, amongst all the different things that has
occurred, is incredibly important.
Mr. Keating. Nothing--did anything surprise you or jump out
at you during that experience?
General Nakasone. So, I would say just in general,
surprises, surprises with regards to our hunt forward
operations is just how impactful they have become, and how
popular they are with a series of different nations.
Every country that I meet with says, hey, can we do a hunt
forward operation with you?
And so, I think to the Congressman's point about the future
structure and what does U.S. Cyber Command look like in the
years to come, I think there is going to be a large component
that is going to be doing these type of operations.
Mr. Keating. Yeah. I have been very impressed just from my
vantage point because that was one of our greatest concerns
entering this, just what, you know, Russia might do and what
efforts would be available to Ukraine to counter it.
And I think that work that you described is critical and
will continue to be critical in that regard.
General Nakasone. Congressman, can I just add one comment
to that?
You asked me about surprises. And I think, and I am not
sure if this fits in that category, but one of the things
that's communicated to me by the young men and women that lead
these teams, to include the Marine major who led the team into
Kyiv, is the fact that she told me that when I got on the
ground I was meeting with three- and four-star generals,
sometimes the Minister of Defense, sometimes, you know,
significant players in the government that were well above my
pay grade.
And it just goes to speak to the leadership and the
capabilities of the people that lead these teams.
Mr. Keating. And how they really foresaw the difficulty
that Russia could have imposed there.
I am just following up on an earlier theme that I've had.
Dr. Craig Martell, who's the DOD's first Chief Digital and
Artificial Intelligence Officer, briefed us earlier this year
about workforce issues, and how we are currently leveraging or
planning to leverage aspects of artificial intelligence as a
core competency of the Cyber Mission Force to help them execute
their offensive and defensive missions.
You know, if you aren't already, how are you integrating AI
and this kind of training pipeline into the cyber force? Are
you engaging? Because some of the existing relationships and
partnerships have on the private side, is that something that
has been helpful?
General Nakasone. Congressman, let me tackle that in a
couple different ways.
First of all, to better understand where the talent exists
you have to go to where the talent, you know, is, you know,
occupying space right now, and that is in our academic
institutions. So, U.S. Cyber Command a little over a year ago
started the Academic Network to reach out to a series of 100-
plus universities within the United States to talk about what
we do and encourage people to consider government service.
The second piece is we have taken a very, very hard look at
artificial intelligence and machine learning to look at, you
know, the defense of the DOD Information Network. Every single
day, as Mr. Martell no doubt talked about, was the fact that,
you know, we have to have an ability to defend our networks,
our data, and our weapon systems.
AI and ML [machine learning] is doing that in some part
today.
And the third part is that we need a broader base of this
expertise. To the chairman's point, a number of different
measures have been passed in the NDAAs for this command. One of
the ones that has been very, very helpful is Cyber Excepted
Service, which is 97 percent now of our civilian population are
utilizing. It provides us extra pays and abilities to attract
top talent.
And the other one that we are looking at very, very
carefully was passed in the 2021 NDAA, which is section 1708,
to look at a series of very high-tech personnel that can come
into our command. We are now targeting four that we anticipate
to hire off that.
Those are with increased pays that allow us to go after the
talent that is necessary to bring that to our command.
Mr. Keating. Well, I thank you.
And in my own district with the Navy Undersea Warfare
Institute, and the University of Massachusetts, they have
models and curriculum that are right there. So, I would like to
see that continue.
I yield back.
Mr. Gallagher. The pride of Texas, Pat Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Plumb, which branch of the military is in charge of
maritime domain?
Dr. Plumb. The United States Navy.
Mr. Fallon. How about land domain?
Dr. Plumb. The Army.
Mr. Fallon. Air?
Dr. Plumb. Air Force.
Mr. Fallon. Cyber?
I mean, that is what I am talking about. We are here today
and we are talking about cyber being the fastest growing
domain, and it bothers me that not only do we not know who is
in charge, it seems, but I don't know, we need a leader for
this. Because as we just said, I heard my colleague say next
frontier, and it is going to be the front lines of the next
conflict.
When you think about how inexpensive it is relative to the
potential impact and damage that cyber can do today, it kind of
harkens for me Billy Mitchell comes to mind, General Billy
Mitchell, who rang the alarm in the 1920s about the importance
of air, and got court-martialed for it, because he saw the
future. We can't fight the war of today, we have got to fight
the war of tomorrow and prepare for that.
And it seems to me, you know, when I look at CYBERCOM's
mission statement it includes, one, defend the Department of
Defense Information Network; two, strengthen the Nation's
ability to withstand and respond to cyberattacks; and then,
three, conduct full-spectrum cyber operations to assist
combatant commanders and the joint force.
And that reads well on paper. But the third one is the one
that concerns me because, you know, the Navy is going to be
concerned about the sea with a side of cyber; and the Air
Force, you know, air with a side of cyber; and Army, land with
a side of cyber. And, you know, I would really, I strongly feel
that we should be creating a seventh branch and making cyber a
cyber service.
And, General Nakasone, I know that you don't talk
particularly policies. You know, our job here is to implement
it. But would you accept command of a cyber service, sir?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, I would offer that, you
know, that is, obviously, as you said a policy decision.
But let me just provide a thought on this in terms of how
we, how we model ourselves. And I think, as you asked a number
of different who is in charge of. Special operations. Special
operations is not run by any specific service yet. It is elite
service and capability that our Nation has.
That is what we have modeled ourselves at Cyber Command,
this idea that having special and unique authorities that we
are able to train, and man, and equip our force, and agility to
maneuver. And I think that that is from my perspective, having
commanded now for 5 years, that is a really good place that we
are emulating towards, and making sure that our focus is on
doing operations against our adversaries and continuing to
build our capability.
Mr. Fallon. Well, you know, General Nakasone, you said
earlier that there are always going to be a land, and there is
air, and then space. And, you know, we made a space service
because it is ever-changing and evolving. And I am glad we did
because of that importance.
But I really would argue that we should consider, strongly
consider, and we didn't get a report for it, but strongly
consider cyber as its own service. And we have 800, well, over
$800 billion budget and $13.5 billion is going to cyber, less
than 2 percent. So, it is something that I really want to ring
the alarm bells. And I think that is something that we should
be seriously considering.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. Kim.
Mr. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to the two of you for coming on out here and
talking to us about this. General, I wanted to start with you.
Over the last couple months I have been engaged with a lot
of ambassadors and other interlocutors from partner nations of
ours in the Indo-Pacific talking about, you know, what are some
areas of cooperation we can focus on. I think coalition
building is so critical, especially given the challenges that
we face there.
And one thing that kind of keeps coming up over and over
and over again is their concerns about their capabilities when
it comes to cybersecurity, and whether or not that is at the
level that is needed.
This is something that I feel like would not only help them
in terms of their capabilities and their ability to prevent
vulnerabilities, but also in terms of our ability to work with
them and engage, whether that is intel sharing or other
capacities there. But you see, you know, major partners of
ours, like Japan, having significant challenges across their
society when it comes to this, a lot of the ASEAN [Association
of Southeast Asian Nations] nations and others.
So, I guess I just wanted to ask you if you would support
or if you think it would be a good thing for us to do to try to
increase our engagement, our efforts to be able to lift up
their baseline of cybersecurity capabilities in the Indo-
Pacific. Is that something you think would be valuable here?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I certainly do think it
would be of value. And we are doing that right now.
I just returned from an 11-day tour of many nations, to
include several of them in the Indo-Pacific region, and you are
right, the number one topic that they talk about is how do we
work together with cybersecurity?
This is the way that we are doing it at U.S. Cyber Command:
First of all, through a series of exercises. So, Cyber Flag
is our major exercise that takes place every summer. This
summer it will have over 30 nations from around the world to
participate with us.
Secondly is through bilateral arrangements where we go and
work with a force to ensure that they develop the capacity and
capability to defend their own networks.
And the last piece, which is I think just an incredible
success story for the Department of Defense, is a State
Partnership Program that the National Guard runs that provides
a continuous ability for us within the Department to have
relationships, to have exercises, to have an exchange of ideas
with a nation.
Mr. Kim. Yes.
General Nakasone. The State Partnership Program that was
run by California, and is run by California with Ukraine, is a
great example of this. This is the platform that we have been
using.
Mr. Kim. Do you feel like there is--so, that is really good
to hear about the different facets in which this is happening.
Do you think that there is room to scale this up and room to be
able to increase this capability and this kind of engagement?
General Nakasone. I do. And I am seeing it already through
our operations with hunt forward where we have had a number of
different nations within the Pacific have asked us, and the
Department has agreed, for us to deploy to those areas to do
that.
Mr. Kim. Dr. Plumb, what are your thoughts on this right
now?
Dr. Plumb. Congressman, fully agree with your concerns and
with General Nakasone's statements. We are working on this.
And your point is exactly right, which is that the more we
can build the capacity of our allies and partners to defend
themselves, then the more capacity we have to get after the
adversary under the theory of a fixed number of resources, even
if that number keeps going up.
So, it is a strategic advantage to us to be able to do
this.
And the other part is, and this is really important, sir,
it doesn't just unlock cyber cooperation, it unlocks all sorts
of other parts of deeper cooperation, the foundation of which
is decent cybersecurity processes so that information can be
protected so we can share more information with all these
partners. Absolutely essential.
Mr. Kim. Yes. I just think this could be such a good win-
win to really help us build just these deeper, lateral,
horizontal connections while also sort of hardening some of
the, again, the vulnerabilities that we face in that region,
which we know are immense there.
And, General, I appreciate that you talked about some of
those different facets because, you know, that Reserve
Component, you know, specifically our National Guard members,
they build incredible cyber capabilities. You know, in my--and
one of those Guard programs, that State Partnership Program,
that is something that has been incredibly fruitful.
You know, we have the 140th Air National Guard Cyber
Operations Squadron at Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst in my
district. And, you know, looking at their ability to be able to
partner with these nations, it seems like that is essential.
So, I know you kind of raised that earlier, but it sounds
like that is something as well that we can continue to push on
in terms of thinking about how to surge up these types of
efforts. Is that right?
General Nakasone. Congressman, the Minister of Defense from
Albania came to visit U.S. Cyber Command. And one of the first
things that he did was to recognize the New Jersey National
Guard for the work that was done on a hunt forward operation.
He told us that. He knew the captain and the lieutenant colonel
that was leading those teams to help his nation as they came
under cyberattack.
This is a really good example of building partnerships in a
way that we should be doing in the future.
Mr. Kim. Well, I look forward to working with you on that.
Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher. Mr. Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is good to see you again, General Nakasone.
I remember back in the 1990s when President Bill Clinton
said that we were at risk of a space arms race. And our country
put a bit of a pause on some of our space work. And the
governing theory was if we pause, we could slow down and make
space more of a safe domain and not a contested domain.
And the reality we know, as we sit here now, is while we
may have paused during some years in the 1990s, our adversaries
did not. Russia, China, Iran, they all became more capable in
this regard.
And so I just wanted to get your initial take on a similar
call for a pause regarding AI right now. We've seen some of the
largest tech leaders, including Elon Musk, sign this letter
saying that the advancement of AI is such that we ought to take
a pause and determine how to frame those capabilities.
What is your assessment of whether or not America's
adversaries would follow the lead of principally U.S. tech
companies?
General Nakasone. My sense, Congressman, is that artificial
intelligence, machine learning is something that is resonant
today and is something that our adversaries are going to
continue to look to exploit in moving forward.
Mr. Gaetz. Do you worry that if U.S. companies take a pause
that that could constrain some of the capability development
that you testified earlier is so necessary in getting people
interested and engaged in AI?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, I guess I really
haven't, haven't thought about that. That is a piece of policy
that, that I am sure will be discussed in the future.
But what I am focused on is how do we build a bigger pool
of people that have this capability and capacity to work it?
How do we engage with academic institutions to encourage
young people to study AI and machine learning?
How do we get them interested in government service?
How do we continue to utilize this in the future?
Mr. Gaetz. I fully share that vision. And I think the
future of the country literally may depend on it.
But, you know, and I am not an expert in AI. I am just
starting to use and understand the technology intentionally.
And it seems to me if you have got some of the big tech
influencers in our country saying, ``whoa, whoa, pause; don't
expand commercial vectors in AI,'' that could be
counterproductive to the goals you just stated about enhanced
engagement in our country.
Do you share that concern?
General Nakasone. So, again, Congressman, you know, my, my
focus right now is being able to develop the talent, and the
techniques, and the tradecraft as we look forward to utilizing
this, you know, this important advantage that our Nation has.
Mr. Gaetz. And as you look at the AI domain right now, we
would, we would certainly have to concede there are some areas
where China is ahead; right?
General Nakasone. I think right now, as we take a look at
the AI and machine learning domain, what we need to be focused
on is how do we look at it in a way that we can use it
responsibly, not only for our national defense but also for our
economy.
At U.S. Cyber Command we are very, very interested in the
use of large language models and the ability----
Mr. Gaetz. Alright. But who is ahead? My question is who is
ahead right now?
General Nakasone. The United States is ahead.
Mr. Gaetz. You think we are ahead, we are ahead of China in
AI right now?
General Nakasone. I do.
Mr. Gaetz. And what is your basis for that belief?
General Nakasone. Again, discussions with experts. But I
think that this is a tenuous place that we are at as well.
This is being developed in the United States. This is being
developed by, you know, a series of entrepreneurs and those
that are working it. But this isn't take--we should not take
this for granted that this is going to be the way of the--in
the future. And so we need to continue to invest in it, and
work it, and continue to utilize it.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
We don't have the classified room until 10:00 a.m. It is
not my intention to filibuster until 10:00 a.m., but I do want
to entertain a second round of questions if any members have--
have one.
I will start with myself.
General Nakasone, I want you to imagine you are talking to,
let's say, my grandma, who is a great lady. She is extremely
smart, but it is fair to say she is more concerned about her
great granddaughters than she is about China and cyber.
In terms that she could understand, explain the threat that
the Chinese Communist Party poses in cyberspace.
General Nakasone. Mrs. Gallagher, good morning. I am
General Nakasone.
Mr. Gallagher. Technically, Virginia Justice is her name.
General Nakasone. Mrs. Justice, good morning. I am General
Nakasone. As we think about our Nation, one of the things that
I think that we should consider is the fact that our Nation is
a nation that has been able to have a strong economy and a
strong national defense.
Our strong economy is based upon the fact that we are able
to develop ideas and bring those ideas to a number of different
people and be able to have business thrive on that. It is based
on this idea of, you know, an idea being able to be patented
and then being able to be sold to a broader government.
What happens if a foreign nation takes those secrets as
they are being developed? Doesn't have to do their research,
doesn't have to pay for it, in fact can get it to the
marketplace before we can. That affects our economy and that
affects our jobs.
That is what we are seeing today in many of our industries
where the Chinese have had ability to steal our intellectual
property, to repurpose it, and then to bring it to the market
at a much lower cost than we can.
The other thing I would say, Mrs. Justice, is the fact that
national security is important in the sense of being able to
take information and secure it. One of the powers of our Nation
is the fact that we may not have the largest Army, Navy, Air
Force, and Marines, but we have the best Army, Navy, Air Force,
and Marines because we can really do one thing, and that is
fuse information and operations.
We have to be able to secure that information. And when a
foreign power like China can get into our networks, our data,
and our weapon systems, that puts our Nation at risk.
Mr. Gallagher. Now I am going to ask you to do something
even more difficult.
I want you to hop into the DeLorean and I want you to go
into the future. And I want you to talk to my daughter, who is
currently 2\1/2\, and consider her as a high-school senior. And
I want you to sort of explain two things to her.
One, what is your pitch for her serving the country in some
sort of cyber capacity, going to work for NSA or CYBERCOM? Make
the pitch to her.
And, two, what is the basic set of cyber hygiene practices
that she and all her friends in high school should follow?
General Nakasone. Ms. Gallagher, good morning. I would like
to talk to you a little bit about the future.
Mr. Gallagher. And indeed, it will be Ms. Gallagher for a
long time, not Mrs.
General Nakasone. The future is one where I would tell you
that the jobs that you see today may not exist in the jobs in
the future. The areas that our Nation is going to produce work
in the future will likely be tied to our ability to work in
this domain of cyberspace, the domain that you know very well
from operating on your smartphone.
Two decades ago the smartphones didn't even exist. And yet
today they are accounting for a good portion of our economy.
So, as you think about the future, one of the things that will
not change is the importance of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.
And as you look to the future, being able to specialize in
one of those areas opens up a broad opportunity for you to
think about jobs that may not exist today. But being able to
think about jobs that don't exist today also means the fact
that you have to be able to be responsible to operate in the
domain of cyberspace today. And being able to do that is
understanding the fact that what you say on your phone, or text
on your phone, or share images on your phone, sometimes are
shared not only with the person that receives them, but other
people that have access to it.
And being able to understand that securing that information
is very important.
The second piece is, is that you should also understand
that what you say in cyberspace perhaps may not be only viewed
and heard by one person, so be very careful about what you
record and what you say.
And I think the last piece is understanding that what you
see on the internet and what you read today may or may not be
actually true. And so, being a discerning--being a discerning
viewer of what you are reading and what you are seeing is part
of being a responsible person.
And I would say the last piece of my advice is thinking
about government service. There is honor in government service.
As your father has served, I would offer that he would probably
communicate to you that the ability to give back to your Nation
is something that will stay with you for the rest of your life.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
The good news is, in this future TikTok no longer exists,
'cause we will have taken bipartisan action against it. Perhaps
it [inaudible] in the second Khanna administration in this
future. But if anyone--do you have a second round?
Mr. Khanna. Do we have time?
Mr. Gallagher. Yeah, of course.
Mr. Khanna. Terrific.
Dr. Plumb and General Nakasone, what role have tech
companies played in Ukraine? I know there is Starlink. Are
there other examples of tech companies that have played a role
in Ukraine that you are aware of?
General Nakasone. Congressman, I think that you have
highlighted one of the major lessons learned from Russia/
Ukraine is the power of the private sector. Whether or not it
has been Starlink being able to provide satellite
communications, whether or not it has been a series of
different U.S. companies that have been able to provide
cybersecurity support, such as Microsoft in Palo Alto, and
others, this is an, this is an ability for us to scale.
That is the lesson learned is that bringing the private
sector is the opportunity for us to get to not tens of
thousands it's tens of millions if not billions of people with
the information that is readily important and assisting Ukraine
today.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Dr. Plumb. I would just add, thanks, sir, one of the
issues, and Mr. Keating actually spoke to it earlier about
surprise or lessons. I think it has been clear that Ukraine has
been much more resilient from a cybersecurity standpoint than I
think Russia might have anticipated. A lot of that is due to
help from private sector.
One way of making yourself resilient is to make sure that
your data can be protected. And one way to do that is to move
into the cloud. And, so, individual attacks have not had,
perhaps, the effect that Russia anticipated.
Mr. Khanna. Appreciate it.
The reason I ask is it has become somewhat fashionable on
both the far left or far right to be criticizing Silicon
Valley. And I share some of the criticisms: privacy, and issues
about protecting people from, kids from social media.
But I also represent the area, and I fundamentally believe
that it is going to be critical in our national security. I am
excited that Chairman Gallagher his--in his other role as
chairman, he is chairman of every committee around here,
chairman of the China Committee, is leading a delegation to
Silicon Valley and will be engaging with some of these tech
leaders.
If you could just, my last final question here is, talk
about how you see the importance of that collaboration, and
what you would like to see for a 21st century national security
strategy?
Dr. Plumb. I think the collaboration is essential. I do
think that there is one piece that we could use your help with,
which is communicating that technology, like any other system,
can be used for good or for bad. And making sure that, as our
brilliant men and women working in the tech corridor, in
Silicon Valley for example, understand that there are also
downsides to technology, and try to build in safeguards as they
go. I think that would benefit us all going forward.
General Nakasone. Congressman, I would just say that as we
think about the future here, this is, this is where we need to
have the partnerships that are so strong, not only the
partnerships of the technology that is being developed but the
talent that exists there.
I am very interested for young people and even mid-career
people to come and join our force for a period of time. This is
perhaps something that is a unique part of U.S. Cyber Command
that you would come in at the mid-career. But that is the type
of talent that we need. That is the type of engineering know-
how that would really assist us.
And so, again, I think it is both the technology and the
talent that exists there that we want to make sure is clearly
partnered with us in the future.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you.
Mr. Gallagher. I thank the ranking member.
I am very excited to visit his district. And I might need
your advice on how to fit in, if there's any extra, sort of,
like, hoodies, or Allbirds, or ironic t-shirts I could wear.
Mr. Khanna. Just wear your Packer [inaudible].
Mr. Gallagher. Yes, appreciate it.
Mr. Luttrell.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When asked a question--from my district, my constituents
ask me questions, like, is our military the most formidable
force on the planet. It is easy for me to say yes, even when
they talk about how aggressive Russia is, and how large China
is. I say, well, we are an All-Volunteer Force, and we are
terrifying.
But I can quantify that by showing them the special forces
community or a handful of Marines.
And, General, you said that the U.S. is leading in the
cyberspace. Now, I think it was 16 or 17 when we had the fifth
fastest computer in the world, Titan, over at one of the
national laboratories.
Are you familiar with that?
General Nakasone. I am.
Mr. Luttrell. Okay. And so, then, right in that same
timeframe we fired up Summit. And if I remember correctly,
Summit went from petaflop to exascale computing speeds, which
pushed us into the next phase of evolution when it comes to our
processing abilities, moved us closer to AI, ML, or quantum
which I think one of the most brilliant men in the world
[inaudible] 15 years ago we said in 15 years we are going to be
at quantum computing. And they said it again the day that I was
standing there. Right?
So, my question is--this may be a classified setting
question--is how do I see, how do you confirm to me, because
you said you talked to the subject matter experts in this
space, but what does that, what does that mean? What are they
telling you?
Because, to me, if China, given the timeframe from when we
fired up Summit, should have onboard or online another computer
that would have trumped us and pushed us back some. So, the
amount of money they are spending in that space as compared to
us would make me think that they are ahead of us.
So, can you give me some amplifying information or do we
need to wait till 10:00?
General Nakasone. If I might provide a bit of information
and take also a portion of this in the closed classified.
Spending money doesn't necessarily mean that you are the
best in what you do. And being able to integrate that kind of
capability is what really matters.
So, being able to take, you know, the intelligence,
integrate it with a maneuver force to have an outcome, is where
I clearly see the United States has the lead. And it is, you
know, not only in the fact that we can do it in the air, on the
ground, but also in the sea.
Being able to bring disparate parts of information together
that mine for data, that provide the key piece of information
to a soldier, sailor, airman, Marine on the point is what we do
so well, Congressman. And that is the difference in terms of
what our Nation can do.
Mr. Luttrell. Yeah, but that is our military presenting a
defensive posture, where the Chinese Government is reaching out
and touching my civilians. And that is a problem.
Does that make sense?
General Nakasone. Again, I think perhaps more of this we
can discuss in closed session, if you would like.
Mr. Luttrell. Fair enough.
I yield back, sir.
Mr. Gallagher. Any other members?
Okay, with that, we will adjourn the open session. And we
will reconvene the classified portion upstairs.
The subcommittee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 9:34 a.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 30, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 30, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

March 30, 2023

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER

Dr. Plumb. The Department is currently undertaking assessments of
the readiness of the Cyber Mission Force, to include an evaluation of
the current model for force generation and alternative models such as a
cyber service branch. Those assessments are ongoing and will be
complemented and informed by efforts in response to congressional
direction, including sections 1533, 1502, and 1534 of the National
Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2023. I am committed to
keeping Congress informed when the Department completes these
assessments.   [See page 7.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. LaLOTA
Dr. Plumb. Cyberspace is a warfighting domain, and we treat it as
such both in doctrine and in practice. Congress has given USCYBERCOM
USSOCOM-like authorities for organizing, training, and equipping cyber
forces. GEN Nakasone, as USCYBERCOM Commander, is the Department's
cyber ``force design architect'' in practice. A legislative designation
is unnecessary.   [See page 11.]

[all]
