- FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST FOR MISSILE DEFENSE AND MISSILE DEFEAT PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-25]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST

FOR MISSILE DEFENSE AND

MISSILE DEFEAT PROGRAMS

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 18, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-417                    WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California,
DON BACON, Nebraska                  RO KHANNA, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              MARC VEASEY, Texas

Ryan Tully, Professional Staff Member
Maria Vastola, Professional Staff Member
Zachary Calderon, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Lamborn, Hon. Doug, a Representative from Colorado, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces...............................     1
Moulton, Hon. Seth, a Representative from Massachusetts, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Strategic Forces.......................     3

WITNESSES

Hill, John D., Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space
and Missile Defense, Office of the Secretary of Defense........     6
Hill, VADM Jon A., USN, Director, Missile Defense Agency.........     7
Karbler, LTG Daniel L., USA, Commanding General, U.S. Army Space
and Missile Defense Command, and Commander, Joint Functional
Component Command for Integrated Missile Defense...............     9
Miller, Maj Gen David N., Jr., USSF, Director of Operations,
Training and Force Development, U.S. Space Command.............    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Hill, John D.................................................    35
Hill, VADM Jon A.............................................    46
Karbler, LTG Daniel L........................................    60
Miller, Maj Gen David N., Jr.................................    84

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Moulton..................................................    97
Mr. Strong...................................................    97

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Ms. Houlahan.................................................   101

FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST FOR
MISSILE DEFENSE AND MISSILE DEFEAT PROGRAMS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Strategic Forces,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, April 18, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:01 p.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Doug Lamborn
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LAMBORN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
COLORADO, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Lamborn. We will come to order. I ask unanimous consent
that the Chair be authorized to declare a recess at any time.
Without objection, so ordered.
I'd like to begin by welcoming our witnesses who are here
today. We have Mr. John Hill, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Space and Missile Defense policy. We have another
Jon Hill, Vice Admiral Hill, the Director of the Missile
Defense Agency. We have Lieutenant General Karbler from U.S.
Army Space and Missile Defense Command. General Karbler, it was
great visiting with you last week in Huntsville and seeing all
the work you and your team are doing. And finally, we have
Major General David Miller, Director of Operations for Space
Command.
This will likely be the last time that we have Vice Admiral
Hill and Lieutenant General Karbler before our subcommittee.
Thank you both for your decades of service and for the
sacrifices that your families have made as well. Our country is
stronger and safer because of your tireless dedication and
sacrifices that accompany your service. I offer a heartfelt
thanks from myself and the members of this committee for it.
And now onto the topic of the day, missile defense. Missile
defense policy has shifted from a partisan issue years ago to
one where there is much more consensus today. One of the
driving factors behind this shift is the aggressive actions and
advancing military capabilities of China and Russia.
It is challenging to argue, as some have, that U.S. missile
defenses are destabilizing when Russia's Moscow missile defense
system alone has 68 interceptors, more than the total number of
U.S. ground-based interceptors, and they are armed with nuclear
warheads. And just last week, China claims to have conducted a
successful midcourse intercept test.
In addition to China and Russia's actions, North Korea and
Iran are growing rogue threats. North Korea just last week
conducted a flight test of a solid-fueled ICBM
[intercontinental ballistic missile], a new capability for its
military that is the result of its unprecedented pace of
missile tests over the past year.
And Iran has multiple space launch vehicle programs that in
my opinion are nothing more than flimsy cover for an ICBM
program.
Missile defense policy has evolved in places like Ukraine
and Israel, as we have seen how it is executed in real-world
operations. This is especially true given what Israel has been
able to do with Iron Dome to protect its citizens and recent
advancements it has made with the Iron Beam directed-energy
program.
In Ukraine, Vladimir Putin's unprovoked and unsuccessful
invasion attempt has been stifled by missile defenses of
critical military assets and population centers. Through both
conflicts, it has proven that missile defenses save lives and
buys time for senior leaders to make decisions regarding how to
respond.
Missile defense of the American homeland provides similar
benefits. If for some misguided reason an adversary would
attack our territory, we need to be able to take out as many
incoming missiles as possible, saving lives and providing
senior leaders additional time to calibrate an appropriate
response.
Furthermore, knowing that we can defend our country and our
people deters an adversary from even considering an attack on
our homeland in the first place. This is inherently
stabilizing.
There are some other issues I hope our witnesses will
address today. I hope we will hear how vital that spectrum is
to our homeland missile defenses. If we get the current
spectrum debate wrong, there will be unfathomable consequences
on our missile defense capabilities.
These consequences include an overwhelming financial cost
that we would shoulder to replace our current systems and the
unimaginable capability gap that would occur in the interim.
With this in mind, I hope we get an update on the Next
Generation, NGI, Interceptor program and hear how DOD
[Department of Defense] and Congress can work together to
accelerate it. Buying only 20 NGIs doesn't make sense to me.
Instead, we need to look at a full replacement of the current
fleet for a total of 64.
I am also interested in having a discussion about
reenergizing plans to field additional interceptors in upstate
New York, which General Milley gave his support to earlier this
month. We can't wait for Iran to test an ICBM before we begin
construction on an east coast site. We know from site
construction in Alaska that this will be a multiyear project so
it is best to get started now.
On Monday, I was able to attend the Space Symposium in my
home district of Colorado Springs. I guess that was just
yesterday. Time flies. Based on current trajectories in
military technology and the innovation of the private sector,
it is clear that the future of missile defense is increasingly
becoming space-based. I hope we can address this issue sometime
during our classified session later this afternoon.
One example of this that we can discuss here and now is a
high-priority program for me, and that is the HBTSS [Hypersonic
and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor Satellites] constellation.
This will provide the sensing, tracking, and fire control
needed for hypersonic and other missile defense. Two of these
payloads will launch this year while the rest of the
constellation will follow in a few years.
I also hope to hear from our policy witnesses as to why we
are settling for President Biden's limited budget request for
the Glide Phase Interceptor, or GPI, that doesn't get us a
capability until the mid-2030s.
Given the rapid pace with which our adversaries are
pursuing and fielding hypersonic systems, I am eager to hear
ideas from DOD on how to pull both HBTSS and GPI to the left.
On this issue, many of us in Congress feel a sense of urgency
that does not seem to be shared by the executive branch. And
that is a problem for our national security.
With that, I turn to the ranking member for his opening
remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. SETH MOULTON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MASSACHUSETTS, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES

Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Vice Admiral Hill,
during your 38 years of service, you have been committed to the
development and deployment of at-sea and land-based missile
defense capabilities for not only the United States, but for
our allies and partners around the world.
Lieutenant General Karbler, you have played a critical role
across the Army's artillery and air and missile defense
communities to address the growing threat to our forces and
have had a unique purview across both the space and missile
defense missions.
Your collective achievements for our security, for the
safety of every one of us in this room, have entailed
sacrifices for your families not to mention the professional
burdens and responsibilities that you have so often carried
heavily on your shoulders. So gentlemen, thank you. You have my
sincerest appreciation as you culminate extraordinary military
careers.
It is appropriate and important to begin our discussion
this afternoon by acknowledging that unlike your impeccable
military careers, missile defense and defeat has a mixed legacy
and continues to pose difficult questions about what its
purpose is and should be, under what conditions it actually
makes us safer, and therefore how much and what kind of it we
need.
As a committee, it is important for us to evaluate these
budget requests with a clear understanding of the strategic
logic behind them. And so I think it is helpful to frame the
conversation with a discussion of the scenarios or levels in
which we use or don't use missile defense. I'm aided by this
chart behind me.
The highest possible level of missile defense is the
strategic level, which means deterring or defeating a nuclear
attack on the United States by a near-peer adversary, as
President Reagan's fanciful and infamous Star Wars program
envisioned.
As both the chairman and I discussed during a recent CSIS
[Center for Strategic and International Studies] panel, and as
affirmed by both the Trump and Biden administrations in the
2019 and 2022 Missile Defense Reviews, this is not an area
where the U.S. is pursuing nor should pursue missile defense.
Going down this road would not only be prohibitively expensive
but fundamentally destabilizing.
Of course, the crazy logic of atomic peace is achieved
through mutual vulnerability where no major nuclear power would
launch a nuclear attack because they know--we all know--that
the result would be nuclear holocaust.
Until we can safely rid the world of nuclear weapons, which
I believe is ultimately necessary for the survival of humanity
itself, we can neither unilaterally disarm nor unilaterally
render useless our adversaries' arsenals. If we were to try to
render our adversaries' missiles incapable, they would simply
develop new ones to defeat our defenses as we have seen with
our adversaries deploying increasingly sophisticated
maneuvering weapons to evade current U.S. missile defense
radars.
We should always remember that the U.S. decision to leave
the Anti-Ballistic Missile [ABM] Treaty in 2002 to develop a
homeland missile defense system in response to advancements by
the DPRK [Democratic People's Republic of Korea] can almost
directly be tied to both the Chinese Communist Party and Russia
pursuing more advanced ballistic cruise and hypersonic
missiles.
And the result has been to make the balance of power
between nuclear superpowers fundamentally less stable. As
multiple general officers have restated before this committee
in the past month, we deter our near-peer nuclear adversaries
with our own safe, secure, and reliable nuclear forces.
Now the next level down, the fourth level, is the area
where there is the most debate and that is the limited
capability to address rogue nations.
This is where our current ground-based missile defense
system and the Next Generation Interceptor fit in. And this is
where we can argue that our advancements in missile defense
over the past two decades since pulling out of the ABM Treaty
have provided a security blanket against aspiring nuclear
powers like North Korea and Iran.
However, it should not be lost on this subcommittee that
during the latest parade, North Korea showcased 11 KN-22 ICBMs.
The publicly stated shot doctrine for the GMD [Ground-based
Midcourse Defense] system is four to five interceptors per one
incoming ICBM. Given the fact that we currently have 44
emplaced interceptors--so, 11 times 4 for anyone rusty on
elementary school arithmetic--if North Korea gets just one more
ICBM capable of reaching the United States, we won't have
enough interceptors.
We therefore are in an arms race today with North Korea,
exactly the arms race the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty was
designed to stop. And at some point if we continue to expand
our current arsenal of interceptors, we must ask not just how
North Korea will respond but how Russia and the CCP [Chinese
Communist Party] will respond as well, as they see a pathway
for our missile shield to impact their deterrent.
I hope that in today's discussion, Mr. Hill can help us
understand how the Department of Defense is weighing that
important question. At what point will this arms race provoke a
response from Russia and the CCP? And therefore, at what point
do we move North Korea's nuclear arsenal from category four
into category five, which we deter with our own nuclear
response?
We must all recognize that decisions like that, indeed
decisions that we make on this subcommittee this year, have
implications not just for meeting today's tactical threats, but
for ensuring the strategic stability of America and the world
for decades to come.
Now the third level of missile defense, the nuance that I
think is important to distinguish from a rogue nation because
the size of a homeland system required to deal with it is very
different. And that is the instance of anyone, including a
near-peer adversary, from having an accidental launch. The
chairman referenced this in his testimony--his statement as
well. Any student of history understands how close to this
possibility we have come in the past and having some ability to
defend against a small even single accidental launch should be
maintained.
Level two, which we are seeing play out on the battlefield
today, is what we call regional missile defense. There is a big
difference between level three and level two from taking out a
strategic intercontinental nuclear weapon to stopping theater-
level missiles in current conflicts. Systems such as the
Patriot, THAAD [Terminal High Altitude Area Defense], and the
Aegis BMD [Ballistic Missile Defense] system are the
cornerstone of regional missile defense. And the investments
being made in this budget request to improve these systems are
needed to meet increasingly complex short to intermediate
weapons that have been proliferated around the world.
We've seen these at work in action. The incredible support
Ukraine has received from allies and partners in the [area of]
air and missile defense has enabled them to fight back against
near non-stop Russian missile attacks.
Missiles are an integral part of the modern way of war. So
this, too, is important for missile defense. Ukraine has also
reaffirmed the power of the higher level strategic nuclear
stability between nations, even in the presence of regional
missile defense because it has not resulted in any strategic
nuclear exchange. But we must be cognizant of the danger of
crossing this line when developing theater-level defense could
it be interpreted to impact strategic stability.
The final piece of missile defense is the foundation of all
levels, level one. And that is the ability to detect and track
threats from the moment they are launched, throughout their
flight, and up until they reach their target. Our ability to
see an incoming threat is what gives us decision space to react
and respond either offensively or defensively. And this is an
area where the subcommittee has consistently pushed the
Department to address.
It is a place where more investment in better capabilities
unquestionably make us more safe and the world more stable. And
I am encouraged that the administration has requested over $6
billion across several programs to develop, improve, and expand
the capabilities of both land- and space-based missile centers
to address more complex threats that our adversaries are
developing.
When we look at this complicated multilevel and multilayer
picture, it is easy to be overwhelmed. This is esoteric stuff.
But it is vitally important that we get it right, not just for
our own national security but for the security of humanity
itself.
Taking the narrow view, it is an easy vote to buy a few
more interceptors., But it is up to us in this room to
recognize the much longer term strategic implications for the
narrow authorization and budgeting decisions we make today.
As an American citizen, having a robust, layered missile
defense system makes me feel more safe and secure this
afternoon. And buying a few more interceptors would probably
make me feel a little bit more comfortable tomorrow. But when I
think about the world we will leave to my 2- and 4-year-old
daughters, I am less sure. How will expanding U.S. missile
defense today impact strategic stability tomorrow?
We are already in an arms race. Will it make our world more
safe? That is the discussion that we have too often glossed
over or left for another day on this subcommittee and in
Congress. And it is a discussion and a debate that we must have
the political and intellectual courage to resolve. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Our first witness will be Mr. John Hill,
Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Space and Missile
Defense. The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF JOHN D. HILL, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR SPACE AND MISSILE DEFENSE, OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY
OF DEFENSE

Mr. Hill. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Moulton, and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify on behalf of the Office of the
Secretary of Defense. I am honored to be alongside my
distinguished colleagues here on the panel.
Today I am going to review recent missile threat
developments, provide a policy update, and explain how the
Department's fiscal year 2024 budget request implements our
policy.
Secretary Austin and the National Defense Strategy have
made clear that People's Republic of China [PRC] is the
Department's pacing challenge while Russia remains an acute
threat.
Over the past year, the PRC continued to develop, test, and
field advanced missile systems of all classes and ranges. It
also launched ballistic missiles in unsuccessful attempts to
intimidate and demonstrate a capability to forcefully unify
with Taiwan.
Russia conducted thousands of missile strikes in Ukraine to
terrorize the Ukrainian people and degrade Ukraine's
warfighting capability. Iran launched missile attacks into
neighboring states and provided rockets and uncrewed aerial
systems to non-state actors who in turn used them to target
U.S. forces and partners. And North Korea showcased an array of
missile systems, including 11 ICBMs, and it conducted yet
another ICBM test just last week.
As outlined in the 2022 National Defense Strategy,
integrated deterrence incorporates the Department's efforts to
deter and defeat air and missile threats. Our top two NDS
priorities are to defend the U.S. homeland, pacing to the PRC,
and to deter strategic attacks against the United States allies
and partners. This includes staying ahead of the threat from
North Korea through improvements to the Ground-based Midcourse
Defense system as part of a comprehensive missile defeat
approach complemented by the credible threat of direct cost
imposition.
Our third priority is to deter regional aggression and
prepare to prevail if necessary, prioritizing the PRC in the
Indo-Pacific and Russia in Europe. The defense of Guam
intersects all three of these priorities.
To defend our homeland, we requested $3.3 billion to
improve our Ground-based Midcourse Defense, including $2.2
billion for the Next Generation Interceptor.
Our homeland defense priorities include $1.5 billion for
the defense of Guam, an increase of over $600 million compared
to the FY23 request; $64 million to improve the defense of
Hawaii through investments in air surveillance and other
capabilities; $423 million to continue fielding over-the-
horizon radars; and nearly $5 billion for modernizing our space
capabilities with new missile warning, missile tracking, and
next-generation overhead persistent infrareds architectures.
For regional defense, our key priorities include $259
million for hypersonic missile defense sensors and development
of the Glide Phase Interceptor; $2.2 billion for the Standard
Missile-3, THAAD, and PAC-3 interceptors; $1.5 billion to
counter lower tier missile threats; and $308 million for
directed-energy development.
Missile defense is a notable element of our $35 billion of
support to Ukraine since Russia's further invasion last year.
Ukraine endures today as a sovereign and free nation in large
part because it made air and missile defense top priorities as
it leveraged extensive assistance from the United States, our
NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies, and many
others.
Our international missile defense cooperation also includes
developing testing and training together with allies and
partners around the world and supporting them through sales of
equipment.
So in conclusion, missiles have become foundational to our
adversaries' way of war. And missile defense has become
foundational to integrated deterrence and defense of the
Nation. To that end, the best thing Congress can do to support
the warfighter is pass on time the Defense and Military
Construction Appropriations Acts. Thank you for your attention.
I am prepared to take questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hill can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We will next hear from Vice Admiral
Jon Hill, Director of the Missile Defense Agency.

STATEMENT OF VADM JON A. HILL, USN, DIRECTOR, MISSILE DEFENSE
AGENCY

Admiral Hill. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
distinguished subcommittee members, thank you for the
opportunity to talk to you about missile defense today. I would
like to take a quick moment to thank the women and men of the
Missile Defense Agency [MDA] who focus on developing,
delivering, and supporting the services to meet the joint
requirements of our combatant commands with credible
capabilities to counter ballistic, maneuvering, and hypersonic
missile threats.
To summarize the threat, I would call it large numbers,
high speeds, and heavy maneuver. Those are the challenges today
and for tomorrow.
We are requesting $10.9 billion to continue our mission to
meet these threats. And I'm going to talk to you about three
priorities. The first is homeland defense, level four, and then
I will talk about the priority for Guam and then the priority
for hypersonic missile defense, which are at the level two of
missile defense.
So the first priority of homeland defense, which includes
Alaska and Hawaii, the Ground-based Midcourse Defense as
mentioned earlier, has protected the homeland from rogue nation
ballistic missile attacks since 2004. Our current focus is on
new capabilities to counter the limited but advancing North
Korean long-range ballistic missile threat. The GMD system is
undergoing a service life extension program to improve
reliability and extend the GBIs [Ground-based Interceptors]
beyond 2030.
These upgrades mitigate the risk until the Nation fields
the Next Generation Interceptor, which is on track for first
emplacement no later than the end of 2028. NGI development is
executing to deliver advanced interceptors featuring multiple
kill vehicle technology which we will add to the current fleet
of interceptors at Fort Greeley, Alaska, and Vandenberg Space
Force Base in California.
On to priority two, which is the defense of Guam. The
Department is developing an integrated air and missile defense
system to defend against diverse missile threats. Working with
the services and the agencies, we are driving to meet
INDOPACOM's requirement for a persistent 360-degrees layered
defense. That capability on Guam against simultaneous raids of
cruise, ballistic, maneuvering, and hypersonic threats. We are
driving operational capability in phases to meet the clear
warfighting needs.
As I go to the third priority, which is also level two, the
priority of hypersonic missile defense, this to counter the
hypersonic threat. We have integrated tracking capabilities
into existing radars, both ground and sea-based. That
capability is here today. Today's sensor architecture and
command and control can track hypersonic threats to support
warning and domain awareness.
Level one. Aegis ships equipped with the Sea-Based Terminal
capability can engage some hypersonic threats in the terminal
phase today. Now due to the global maneuver capabilities of
hypersonic missiles, space-based tracking and targeting
capability is a clear need. Later this year, the MDA developed
Hypersonic and Ballistic Tracking Space Sensor, as mentioned by
the chairman, HBTSS, will start on-orbit operations to
demonstrate unique tracking and targeting designed to support
hypersonic engagements.
HBTSS will participate in flight tests and real-world
threat collections through FY24. The capability will be
proliferated and operated by the Space Force.
We continue to work closely with the Navy to upgrade Sea-
Based Terminal defenses to counter more advanced maneuvering
and hypersonic threats. Based on threat evolution, we will
deliver the next incremental upgrade in 2025. Sea-Based
Terminal is the only active defense available today to counter
hypersonic threats.
In order to expand the battlespace against hypersonic
threats, we have initiated the Glide Phase Interceptor to
counter regional hypersonic threats. GPI leverages proven Aegis
weapon system engage-on network sensors to provide the depth of
fire needed to thin the raid for terminal defenses.
Homeland defense BMD against rogue nations, defense of Guam
against large raids of high-speed maneuvering threat, and
building out the defense-in-depth against hypersonic threats,
those are our priorities. Thank you, and I look forward to
answering your questions. And it has been an honor to serve.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Hill can be found in the
Appendix on page 46.]
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We'll next hear from Lieutenant
General Daniel Karbler, U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense
Command.

STATEMENT OF LTG DANIEL L. KARBLER, USA, COMMANDING GENERAL,
U.S. ARMY SPACE AND MISSILE DEFENSE COMMAND, AND COMMANDER,
JOINT FUNCTIONAL COMPONENT COMMAND FOR INTEGRATED MISSILE
DEFENSE

General Karbler. Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member Moulton,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, I am honored to
again testify before you and to represent an incredible people-
first organization of 2,600 soldiers and civilians across 13
time zones and 19 disbursed locations, 20 if you count Army
Astronaut Frank Rubio aboard the International Space Station
and multiple time zones throughout this hearing.
Every day, these amazing professionals provide space, high-
altitude, and missile defense forces and capabilities to Army
and joint warfighters.
First, let me express my sincere appreciation for your
steadfast support of our people and their families. My role
remains unchanged from previous testimonies. I serve as the
commanding general for the U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense
Command; the commander of the Joint Functional Component
Command for Integrated Missile Defense; and as the Army's
proponent for air and missile defense, or AMD.
I provide U.S. Northern Command the soldiers who stand
ready to defend our Nation from intercontinental ballistic
missile attack; serve as the Army's service component commander
to both U.S. Strategic Command and U.S. Space Command; and I am
the chief of staff of the Army's air and missile defense
enterprise integrator.
In Europe, we see a continuation of the largest employment
of offensive missiles since World War II and the unprecedented
use of attack UAVs [unmanned aerial vehicles] in Russia's 14-
month war against Ukraine. In the Pacific, against the backdrop
of multiple missile tests by the DPRK and China, threats of
regional and transregional complex missile attacks still loom.
And in the CENTCOM AOR [U.S. Central Command area of
responsibility], our adversaries continue to attack partner
nations and U.S. forces using missiles, UAVs, rockets,
artilleries, and mortars.
In short, in my 36 years as an air defender, I have never
seen adversary threat activity, whether that be test or
operational use, as great as I see it today. Adversary actions
in the space domain are equally as aggressive as they continue
to challenge us across multiple space-enabled mission areas. To
address these threats, we must strengthen our capabilities to
deny our adversaries the benefit of their aggression.
We must continue investment and sustainment of combat
ready, capable and lethal AMD capabilities. And fortunately, we
do not face these threats alone. We have allies and partners
who contribute significantly to the AMD and space missions.
Please allow me to briefly outline a few milestones
accomplished by our space and missile defense soldiers and
civilians.
This past year we have partnered with the U.S. Army Special
Operations Command and Army Cyber Command to create a space/
cyber/SOF [special operations forces] triad to provide
deterrence and response options to the integrated use of our
unique capabilities. We have continued to mature the triad
through multiple exercises to include the Army's Project
Convergence 2022.
In the air defense enterprise, we recently reached a
historic milestone with a full-rate production decision for the
Integrated Air and Missile Defense Battle Command System, IBCS.
This any sensor, best shooter, optimal command and control
construct allows us to integrate the right quantity and mix of
AMD capabilities across all echelons, building an effective
tiered and layered defense. This is the linchpin of the Army's
broader AMD modernization effort, critical to transforming air
and missile defense capabilities well into the future.
In closing and on a personal note, this will be my last
opportunity to address the distinguished members of the
subcommittee as I will retire later this year. I am confident
in the direction and momentum of the Army's air and missile
defense and space enterprises. I look forward to addressing
your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Karbler can be found in
the Appendix on page 60.]
Mr. Lamborn. And thank you. And lastly, we will hear from
Major General David Miller, Director of Operations, U.S. Space
Command.

STATEMENT OF MAJ GEN DAVID N. MILLER, JR., USSF, DIRECTOR OF
OPERATIONS, TRAINING AND FORCE DEVELOPMENT, U.S. SPACE COMMAND

General Miller. Thank you, Chairman Lamborn, Ranking Member
Moulton, and distinguished members of the subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to join Deputy Assistant Secretary
Hill and Admiral Hill and Lieutenant General Karbler, and I am
honored to speak today on behalf of our commander, General Jim
Dickinson, as well as the men and women of the United States
Space Command.
Our strategic competitors are expanding and evolving their
inventories of advanced weapons capable of threatening both the
U.S. homeland and our interests around the globe, as my
panelists have also stated.
Our challenge and my focus here today will be mainly in
level one, discussion of the domain awareness, warning,
targeting, and tracking capabilities needed to quickly
identify, characterize, and defeat these threats.
To accomplish this task requires a joint combined, and
partner solution involving an array of traditional and non-
traditional sensors capable of delivering space domain
awareness, missile warning, and missile defense. U.S. Space
Command has made tremendous strides in optimizing our legacy
space architectures as the global sensor manager and
integrating non-traditional sensors capable of contributing to
this mission set.
While we are excited about the future space-based sensors
and architectures being delivered by the Space Force as well as
by our Missile Defense Agency teammates, we are focusing now on
maintaining our advantage in the space and cyber domain and
providing the space-enabled combat edge that the joint and
combined force enjoys today.
The complexity and scale of the threat environment demands
that we integrate these sensors and enable timely decision-
making and response. Additionally, our missions are not
confined to one region. They are inherently global. This only
increases the need for close coordination across all combatant
commands, supporting agencies, as well as our allies and our
commercial partners.
This environment demands integrated missile warning, space
domain awareness, and missile defense solutions to enable
globally persistent space and missile threat tracking along
with many other responsibilities the unified command plan
assigned to General Dickinson as the United States Space
Command commander. As the Nation's global sensor manager, he is
required to plan, manage, and execute the DOD's space domain
awareness, missile defense, and missile warning sensors.
Recent successes in the integration of these operations,
activities, and investments is a direct result of assigning
U.S. Space Command as the global sensor manager.
We have developed the synergies among disparate missions,
functions, and systems, significantly enhancing the joint
force's effectiveness in protecting the United States and our
allies.
Since all missile defense travel in, through, and from the
space domain, it made sense to assign U.S. Space Command as the
global sensor manager. We have the tools, tactics, training,
and expertise to accomplish this mission.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you
today. I submit my written testimony for the record. And I
welcome the subcommittee's questions on this critical topic as
well as the collaboration with these agencies' representatives.
[The prepared statement of General Miller can be found in
the Appendix on page 84.]
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you. And thank all of you for
being here today and for your opening statements. We will now
have a series of questions. I am going to ask a specific one of
you, General Karbler, and then a couple on hypersonic defense
and a couple on NGIs and then I'm going to turn it over to my
ranking member.
General Karbler, when we were here last year, you told me
that our soldiers working the missile defense mission,
particularly Patriot and THAAD, were going through a meat
grinder. In other words, the dwell times were 9 months at home
for every year deployed, you know, less than the time deployed.
What is the current dwell time for Army missile defenders and
has the Army made any progress reducing dwell times for these
soldiers?
General Karbler. Chairman, yes, the Army recognizes as a
challenge the high OPTEMPO [operations tempo] for our Army air
defense soldiers was such a priority for the chief of staff and
the under secretary, they commissioned a health of the force
study specific to address the OPTEMPO challenges for our air
defense soldiers.
That study encompassed multiple surveys--families,
soldiers, officers, NCOs [noncommissioned officers] across the
entire air defense force. Got back great feedback and then the
Army made recommendations and now has implemented those
recommendations really over the past year, recommendations that
stem from everything from pay incentives to professional
military education opportunities for our NCOs because they were
deployed, didn't have a chance to go to different schooling,
our officers as well; mid-tour leave, for example, just all
those different opportunities.
And we also decreased the demand across our force,
specifically in the CENTOM AOR. So when we went from 1 to .9,
dwell to deploy, we've gone now from 1 to 1.9; so it's almost 1
to 2. So the current battalions that are over there, one
battalion's deploy to dwell is 1 to 1.9 and the other battalion
is 1 to 2.2.
So you can see that in that year we have really made a
significant change. And the SECDEF's [Secretary of Defense's]
red lines for deploy to dwell is 1 to 2. So we are getting
right within the Secretary of Defense's red lines.
And quantitatively, we also have proven that this is making
a difference. The 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command,
the command that is responsible for providing those soldiers to
CENTCOM, last year led the Army for division-sized retention
with 109.7 percent exceeding the retention rate.
And this year, they have met 70 percent of their annual
retention goal already. And they also have a 39 percent
stabilization request of the soldiers within that formation. So
those soldiers are voting with their feet and they are voting
with their feet to stay where they are at right now. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Thank you for your great progress in
that area. So on the first issue, I wanted to ask about
hypersonic defense. My top priority this year is accelerating
our Nation's hypersonic capabilities.
There are two capabilities for hypersonic defense that I
want to dwell on here for a moment. The HBTSS for sensing,
tracking, and fire control, and the Glide Phase Interceptor.
The first two HBTSS payloads are set to launch later this year,
but the rest of the constellation to get us to full coverage is
not expected to launch until the end of this decade.
Additionally, the administration's proposed budget does not
get us even an initial capability for the Glide Phase
Interceptor against hypersonics until around 2035. Only in
Washington, DC, does a missile development program take 13
years. And I don't think it takes that long in Beijing, Moscow,
or Pyongyang.
So Vice Admiral Hill, given sufficient funding, what's the
earliest that MDA believes it could get a Glide Phase
Interceptor program to initial operational capability?
Admiral Hill. Thanks, Chairman Lamborn. The Glide Phase
Interceptor, as I mentioned earlier, is based on Aegis fire
control so we are going to leverage the existing engage-on-
remote, which today we can do from a forward-based ship. We can
leverage existing space-based sensors. We can fuse that through
command and control battle management communications. Today
that drives Sea-Based Terminal.
The Glide Phase Interceptor really is providing that area-
level defense. It really thins the raid before we deal with it
down in terminal, which is the worst place to do this sort of
intercepts, particularly in the sea-base when the debris just
comes forward onto the ship.
We laid out the plan, and we worked within the Department.
We are very early in the program, Chairman. So just so you kind
of level set where we are. We are not at milestone A yet. We
should be kicking into that next phase, which is all about the
risk reduction. And that is where we would really build our
confidence to be able to accelerate the program.
I believe that we can pull it earlier. It is certainly a
funding challenge. But we will continue to work closely within
the Department to pull it as left as possible because I agree
with you that out in the mid-30s is, you know, almost
irrelevant. We are not meeting the threat.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. I really appreciate that. And I
know it is based on years of great service. So I appreciate
that answer.
For you and for General Miller, what is the importance to
both of you to field the full HBTSS constellation as quickly as
possible?
Admiral Hill. I will go ahead and just kind of go back to
why we should do that. It really is about the maneuvering
threat. We no longer have predictable trajectories that go down
a threat access where your land-based sensors would typically
be located to look in that one direction with limited field of
view. By being in space, we have the ability to catch these
maneuvering threats and then provide the fire control quality
data and the latency that is required.
The first two that go up later this year, the launch time
is roughly September depending on the manifest. And we will be
collecting data throughout 2024 to prove out in space what we
have already proven on the ground. We are working very closely
with the Space Force to integrate into the overall architecture
to proliferate HBTSS. So I will hand it over to ``Rock''
Miller.
General Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just echo
Admiral Hill's points. A couple key things, I think. The first
is the HBTSS capability provides two things in particular,
certainly the maneuvering threat and the custody therein, but
it also provides a level of discrimination that is essential if
you are going to provide quality missile defense across the
regime of threat areas that we see.
So I think within both the COCOM [combatant command] as
well as--you know, we would have to talk to the service for
their specific integration requirements, I think it is
absolutely essential to complement what we already have in the
budget in terms of the missile warning, missile tracking
architecture.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. And lastly on this subject,
Secretary Hill, don't you think that providing the GPI or the
HBTSS faster in both cases should be a higher priority?
Mr. Hill. I think we are going to have a lot of learning
this year as Admiral Hill spoke to in terms of the GPI program
as we're moving into this risk reduction and that is going to
give us information that would help make a more confident
decision. If you want to move it to the left, we still have the
space to move it to the left, so coming forward in that program
and that is an option you want to keep open to do that as you
look at the threat.
Likewise, with the HBTSS, with these launches that are
going to be happening this year, now you get that space-based
data to inform your decision as you move to the actual fielding
timeframe. And I think you are still maintaining that
flexibility to do to make the kind of decision you are
suggesting, Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay. Well, let's work on making this the
highest priority so that we can move it to the left as we have
all just talked about.
On Next Generation Interceptor, NGI, the current plan is to
buy 20, and these will come online around 2028. I have heard
2027 a little bit, which is even better. But in any case, this
will give us a mix of approximately 44 older GBIs and 20 newer
NGIs at the end of this decade. Vice Admiral Hill, what is your
best military advice? Wouldn't it make sense to eventually
start replacing aging GBIs with NGIs if the funding was there?
Admiral Hill. Chairman Lamborn, great question. And when we
laid out the acquisition plan, we thought through all of that.
We wanted to leave ourselves enough flexibility to give the
Nation options. So we have two companies that are competing now
and that's why you hear different timelines.
The government reference architecture for first emplacement
is 2028. Both companies are running towards a 2027 timeframe,
which is great. The power of competition does work. And then
along the way we will make decisions on inventory.
Right now the acquisition plan was, basically what it was,
you know, 4 years ago which was to add 20. And so that was the
starting point for the acquisition plan. But what is great
about carrying two, the Nation has the ability to go beyond the
critical design review.
You could have two production lines if you want to really
build out capacity. You can neck down to one supplier at that
point and have a single production line. You can build the 20.
You can add to the 44 or you can replace some numbers of those
and then increase more as you go.
So it's a very flexible acquisition strategy. And I think
those decisions do not have to be made today.
Mr. Lamborn. And Vice Admiral Hill, could the flexibility
also encompass not just having two contractors through critical
design review but into production.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. So that we have two perhaps varying
capability, maybe one for a particular threat, and one for
another threat that is better suited over here. And we can mix
and match.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. And in fact, whenever we talk about
just interceptors, I always like to go back to the total
system. The ground-based weapons system itself is designed to
handle basically the three variants that are in the ground
today plus two new variants.
And so, again, we built in the flexibility so that we could
make decisions at the right time. I would say we have got to
come through preliminary design review later this year. I have
high confidence that we can in fact close the design and then
move to critical design review where we can either down-select
or not. Those decisions are open to the Nation.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lamborn. Ranking Member Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to start
by just really hammering home one of the points that you were
addressing here if I can attempt to quote Major General Miller.
The HBTSS not only detects a maneuvering threat and maintains
custody therein but also provides discrimination so you can
accurately prosecute that threat. That's a very difficult
statement for anyone watching C-SPAN right now to understand.
It is probably a difficult statement for many of us on the
committee to decipher and pull apart.
But what we are talking about is fundamentally important.
And it is something that every American should actually
understand, which is that if Russia or China were to launch a
hypersonic missile on Washington, DC, where we are all sitting
this afternoon, how much advance warning would we have of that
attack? Vice Admiral Hill.
Admiral Hill. Ranking Member Moulton, thanks. Great
question. And so what I will do is I will go back to your
levels chart, right? Right now when it comes to hypersonic
threats from an engagement perspective, we are pursuing a
regional capability. But you are exactly right. From a sensing
capability, we are at that level one piece, which is, you know,
you want to cover everything, right? So you want to see a
strategic attacks on the States for sure.
Just to kind of add on to what General Miller mentioned,
when I say latency and fire control quality data, if I was
explaining that to my daughter, I would say latency means
timely, right? We want timely information going to any
defensive system or to a warning system. So that is what I mean
by latency.
When we say fire control, what we mean is position and
velocity accuracy at a level that can support a missile on
target. So that is what we mean when we say fire control
quality against a hypersonic threat.
The other piece of the B in HBTSS, right, so--and I didn't
mention that in my opening statement, but the B really means
the dim targets of ballistic missiles. So what we are seeing in
the North Korean shots, and you see it with other countries
too, is they shift their propulsion types. And they are much
dimmer up in the upper stages.
And so when they go there we lose them with radars. They
are very hard to see with other infrared systems. And so you
need a sensor that can see that as well. So it is not just the
hypersonic maneuvering threat that has gone global, but it is
these different propulsion types that are very, very hard to
see. And it is what HBTSS was designed to actually detect and
provide either warning or weapons control.
Mr. Moulton. That is very helpful. But to just get back to
my question, how much advance warning would we have?
Admiral Hill. I am probably not the right guy to do that. I
don't know, Dan, do you want to talk about it or?
General Miller. Sir, for the current threats that we are
looking at boosted on the vehicles that you are talking about,
you will get warning within seconds to minutes of that threat
activity. And depending on where a threat is located will
dictate how much advance warning that you have.
Obviously, a threat immediately off the coast has always
been talked about over years as a challenge in a submarine-
launched environment. But given the launch timelines that you
have talked about from the PRC or your example you provided, we
will certainly have adequate warning for decision-making.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I think, you know, my understanding is
that part of the need to really develop our level one sensing
capabilities is that, you know, this is not like dealing with
the traditional ICBMs and that we could essentially have an
attack on a place like Washington, DC, without getting much
advance warning at all.
I understand you might be able to detect the launch, but
you wouldn't necessarily know where that missile is headed.
That is why investing in these capabilities is so important.
And I also think that you are going to hear from, well, he may
have just disappeared, but Mr. Bacon, about the need to
maintain command and control until we have those capabilities,
which is another, I think, really important question for us to
address and something that I hope that you will be considering
as we go forward.
ASD [Assistant Secretary of Defense] Hill, you know, back
to my opening statement, I want to ask how the Department
thinks about missile defense requirements for North Korea and
specifically how you can weigh the trade-off between continuing
to try to keep pace with the North Korea missile threat and the
reality that at some point it becomes not only an arms race
with North Korea but also might influence Russia and China's
behavior in ways that are counterproductive to nuclear
stability.
So under what conditions would North Korea become a nuclear
power that we deter with our own nuclear response instead of
with missile defense, essentially moving North Korea from level
four to level five?
Mr. Hill. Thank you, Ranking Member Moulton. We described
in the Missile Defense Review that the North Korea challenge,
what we deal with, we have the missile defense that we have
talked about already today. Missile defeat, which is about the
things you can do to reduce their confidence in how their
system is going to work. And then we have always had, and this
has been consistent in dealing with the North Korea threat, the
ability of U.S. to cost impositions that can be nuclear
response as well. That has always been part of our posture with
respect to North Korea and deterrence there.
I think with your question, though, of if North Korea
continues to just deploy more and more missiles, more advanced
missiles, how far do you go in your question how that relates
to Russians? At some point you decide, the missile defense we
have is enough interceptors, and the interceptors are improved,
the warning that you are talking about is improved, we will
deal with the missile defense problem there. If North Korea
were to take that shot, that will be the time when the nuclear
retaliation, the strategic deterrence portion also has to play
its part.
It is real. That is the foundation of all deterrence for
the United States. And it's part of the North Korea challenge,
too.
Mr. Moulton. Well, I think it would be helpful for the
Department to understand where we make this transition, because
if we're just sort of blindly, you know, producing more
interceptors to try to keep up when that is actually not the
main deterrence strategy that we have for this particular
threat, then we risk other consequences as we have just
discussed.
Can you just--the last question is, look, if we were to get
into the realm of level five missile defense, deterring a near-
peer adversary in theory by saying we are going to shoot down
all your missiles, I mean, how GMD interceptors would you
estimate we would need if we were to--trying to deter or defeat
an all-out Chinese or Russian nuclear attack on the United
States?
Mr. Hill. I think in any realm of warfare from the lowest
conventional levels to the highest nuclear levels, defense has
a role. But the key role of defense is you are denying people
the advantage of the attack that would launch in the first
place and you are assuring your ability to impose costs that
would make them regret having started it in the first place. So
whether that is at the conventional level or at the nuclear
level, your defense is there to assure your command and
control.
You mentioned Washington, DC. One of the things that we
have been investing in starting with last year's budget and
continuing in this is over-the-horizon radar. That is to
improve warning against cruise missile type threats that are a
concern as well. The space-based sensors we have talked about,
dealing with some of the hypersonic, the dimmer targets, the
dimmer threats we are seeing.
So it is that combination of saying, I can sense and see
what you are doing. I will have means to intercept, to defend
myself, to assure critical capabilities like command and
control and response and power projection. And I will have my
nuclear deterrent if I need to use that as well.
Mr. Moulton. At some point this is just math. ASD Hill,
what is the answer? How many do we need?
Mr. Hill. I don't think we have--what we have said is right
now we have the 44 that you mentioned. There are 20 more that
are part of the NGI program. That is for 64. That is what we
covered in the Missile Defense Review. And in the Missile
Defense Review, to come back to Chairman Lamborn's question, we
also left open the possibility, looking at, as the NGI program
develops, do we replace the existing [inaudible] or do we go
beyond that.
Mr. Moulton. If you could just take this question for the
record, I would appreciate it.
Mr. Hill. Oh, sure.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Mr. Moulton. Thank you. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank each of you
for being here today. Admiral Hill, General Karbler, thank you
for your service. You have been instrumental with your
colleagues in promoting peace through strength. And as a
retiree myself from military service, I know you will be
looking back on the successes that you have had, and they are
so meaningful for our country. Thank you.
Secretary Hill, facing the threats of the Chinese Communist
Party, the murderous threat of war criminal Putin, the unstable
North Korean government, and the irrational threat of the
regime in Iran, as they continue to develop capacity to conduct
long-range missile threats with greater capability, capacity,
and intent to challenge America, our allies, and our partners
by being part of authoritarians promoting the rule of gun, how
concerned are you that their continued missile development and
production--what steps is the Missile Defense Agency taking to
adequately detect, deter, deny, and protect the homeland and
regional partners from these threats?
Mr. Hill. I think we covered Russia and China and a whole
range of the threats, I believe, in there. And so the budget
that we have put forward this year, focusing on significant
investments in the Missile Defense Agency alone, about $10.9
billion in their programs covering the Next Generation
Interceptor, covering the space-based centers we talked about,
the HBTSS, and a discriminating space sensor as well as well as
the regional programs.
And we are covering it from both the homeland missile
defense perspective as well as all of the regional defense for
our forces forward deployed in those conflicts.
There are also investments going in through the services.
So, for example, the Space Force budget deploying the missile
warning and missile tracking layers. Another nearly $5 billion
there. Total expenditures of about $29.8 billion in the total
budget that we are looking at for the ranges of defenses
against the threats you described.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much. And Admiral Hill, the
defense of Guam. It is such a strategic location for the
defense of our country, such an appreciated American territory,
such patriotic people living there who we so cherish as to
their importance in our national security strategy.
The Missile Defense Agency is responsible for efforts of
integrating the Army integrated air and missile defense and
Navy Aegis ballistic missile defense in support of the defense
of Guam through the command and control battle management and
communications.
The current plan would demonstrate an initial capability in
Guam in 2024 followed by the delivery of an enhanced capability
by 2029. Are there any additional requirements or resources
that the Missile Defense Agency may need to ensure this
function is established on the vitally located and patriotic
territory of Guam? Can you highlight the challenges and
limitations on this current plan?
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. Thank you. This is really our first
year in 2023 starting the program. Our total focus right now is
on establishing the sites. We know what they are. We have done
the early environmental work there. And as you mentioned, at
the end of 2024, our intent is to have the first radar, an
engineering version of the command and control suite, and a
launcher system so that we can test in the environment just
beyond signals and checkouts and those sorts of things.
So we will be on island with capability at the end of 2024.
And then as you mentioned, there is an enhanced capability as
we move forward.
If you ask me what I know we need, it is really the
infrastructure on the island. So as, you know, General Karbler
mentioned, the Army's IBCS system is a core part that will
integrate with the Aegis capabilities on the island is really
about quality of life for those soldiers and for the other
operators that will be on the island.
There are some other capabilities that are meant for a
different environment that Admiral Aquilino has challenged us
to ensure that we have the ability to integrate those in as
well. And so that is what the program really encompasses,
primarily Aegis and IBCS along with some additional
capabilities that we will save for another session.
Mr. Wilson. And very briefly, General Karbler, the people
of Ukraine have been so courageous resisting war criminal Putin
in his invasion, what have we learned from missile defense in
the war in the Ukraine?
General Karbler. I had the opportunity to go to Fort Sill,
Oklahoma, and watch the Ukrainian soldiers train in our U.S.
Patriot system. And I would like to talk about that in a closed
session, if I could, of my assessment and observations of their
training and their abilities.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Representative Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you all for
your testimony today. My first question is for General Miller.
General, you have written in your written testimony that
USSPACECOM's [U.S. Space Command's] commercial integration
strategy and American commercial innovation is an asymmetrical
advantage that our competitors don't possess. And I certainly
agree with you on that. And I have led efforts in the past NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] years to ensure that
programs like SBIR [Small Business Innovation Research] and
STTR [Small Business Technology Transfer] operate unimpeded.
And I am again leading a similar effort to bridge the so-called
valley of death this year between small businesses and the
Department of Defense.
So my question to you is could you talk a little bit more
about the commercial integration strategy at SPACECOM and do
you think that we are doing enough both here on this committee
and also at the DOD to leverage our asymmetrical advantage of
commercial innovation and what more should we be doing if we
aren't doing enough?
General Miller. Yes, ma'am. And thank you for your support
on those programs in particular.
So I think that I would start with that the relationship
particularly with U.S. Space Command and even the predecessor
STRATCOM [U.S. Strategic Command] with commercial industry has
gone on for quite some time. It has typically started in the
commercial SATCOM [satellite communications] arena. What you
have seen in recent years is expand into other mission sets as
well.
One area in particular that it has expanded into is in the
space domain awareness area. We have leveraged commercial
sensors at a scale that we had not really anticipated just
years ago to fill in potential gaps in locations for coverage,
provide new technology developments, and also provide
synchronization and integration and more accuracy in some of
the capability that we see for space domain awareness.
What the commander did in the commercial integration
strategy was a focus to try to get a couple of things in
particular. One he wanted a single point of entry, and that is
our Combined Joint Integrated Commercial Office within our J-8
staff to provide a single face to all of our commercial
partners on what our requirements are.
The second piece was to lay out some key priority mission
sets and devolve down into some specific capabilities that we
are looking at so that our commercial partners are not guessing
what they are looking for. In fact, they have specific asks and
requirements that we definitized to the extent that we can.
There are some examples of goodness, though, that have
already shown up. In the last few years, you probably have
heard about Joint Task Force Space Defense's Joint Commercial
Office. And they have leveraged the space domain awareness
capabilities of a number of sensors and provided us an
independent, verifiable, publicly available catalog that we use
to provide warning on a range of threats.
They also augment and allow us to inform our missile
warning capabilities in the future is what we are looking at,
particularly from a data transport layer, less so from a
warning perspective.
So I think the future is bright. You will see that within
the unfunded priorities list that the commander has submitted
there are some specific things that he is looking for to try to
expand and hasten some of the delivery of those capabilities. I
think your continued support there would be most appreciated.
Ms. Houlahan. I will definitely take a look at that and so
in terms of what more we can do, that would be something to
take a look at.
Also a question is, you have outlined sort of defining what
the priorities are. Is there any sort of inverse of that where
you don't know what you don't know, but that civilian industry
is innovating on, and you might be able to take advantage of or
benefit from? How are you interacting with civilian industry to
understand the innovations that are happening that may be
useful to you?
General Miller. Absolutely. There is a commercial
integration cell that is at Vandenberg Air Force Base has been
a main place for our commercial industry partners to go to
partner with us. So in the realm of what we are learning all
the time.
In the SDA, or space domain awareness enterprise, a number
of the capabilities they provide are varied. There are some
really exquisite capabilities some have, but also increased
capacities that others have. So we are learning more about what
they have to offer and are interfaced with that as the
commercial integration cell.
We have also learned that they have specific relationships
they want to have with us on safety of flight and awareness of
what the threats are that are on orbit and how are we sharing
that information. That that is a mission set that you will see
transition to the Department of Commerce ultimately is their
space traffic management, it's largely a civil function, stands
up and begin to repurpose those guardians that are at
Vandenberg to do some of the more operationally driven threat
warning and assessment mission sets that we see them having.
So there is a benefit on both ends here, both in what we
can get out of the commercial enterprise but also exploring new
technologies they are providing us in order to execute our
mission sets even more efficiently.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I have several other questions,
but very little time. So I think if it is all right, I will
submit them for the record for you all. And thank you very much
for your service and for your time.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Turner.
Mr. Turner. Thank you. Gentlemen, I think the last several
years have shown us that deterrence by nuclear weapons arsenals
alone is dead. Russia has threatened both NATO allies, even
nuclear weapons nations, with nuclear weapon attack. China is
tripling its nuclear weapons and is vastly expanding its ICBM
capability and, of course, not in response at all to any
missile defense that may, in fact, thwart in any way their
ability to hold us at risk for a target.
Our missile defense system, as it is currently configured,
and our Aegis Ashore that sits in Europe, are publicly by
policy stated as targeting North Korea and Iran. We by policy
state that we are not deploying missile defense systems for the
purposes of defending ourselves against the threat of Russia
and China.
Clearly, Russia and China are not being deterred by our
nuclear weapons arsenals alone because of their continuing vast
expanse, and the fact that both of them are pursuing what many
people call exotic weapons, which are completely new
capabilities. They are not modernization of existing
capabilities, completely new capabilities that can easily be
classified as first-strike weapons, weapons that are intended
to initiate a nuclear weapons strike, not one that is merely to
deter as our posture has been.
We are clearly going to have to move to a more blended
architecture where we understand that if there is an attack
that we have a responsibility to protect the American public,
because right now most Americans believe that if a nuclear
weapon is headed at this very moment to Washington, DC, whether
it be hypersonic or an ICBM, that we have systems in place to
protect them, and we do not. It is time that we do.
Let's start with Europe first. In Ukraine, Russia has
claimed that they may use tactical nuclear weapons. And even
all of the analysts looking at the situation have been
concerned that they might. If they did, with the placement of
our Aegis Ashore in Poland and in Romania, we restricted those
systems so that they, again, are intended to target Iran and
not Russia, meaning that the United States would basically be a
casual observer to watch a nuclear exchange instead of having a
role to be able to intervene.
Admiral Hill, could you please describe to us the issue
that we are facing with the Aegis Ashore in Poland and Romania.
They are not fully functioning Aegis systems, correct? So if
you had a ship that was sitting there, as opposed to Aegis
Ashore, which Congress funded and authorized, it would have
greater capabilities than what sits there today. Is that right,
Admiral?
Admiral Hill. That's correct, sir. We carved out the
ballistic missile defense capability for Europe as part of the
European Phased Adaptive Approach. We do have the computer
base, the computer program base, that would include cruise
missile defense and strike capabilities, but those are not
included at those sites.
Mr. Turner. Would we have to scrape off the Aegis Ashore
that is there or can those be modified so that they could be
fully functioning Aegis Ashore like our Aegis at sea?
Admiral Hill. So very early on, we wanted to make sure that
we maintain the flexibility on that site should policy change
or we require additional capabilities. We could bring it back
in through the computer programs, which it is only certified
for use for ballistic missile defense only. But, you know, it
is an inherent capability. There would likely be some
additional consoles required depending on what the missions
are, and potentially additional launching systems.
Mr. Turner. So existing capabilities that we have could be
appended to the systems giving them the full functioning
capabilities that an Aegis at sea has?
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. And I wouldn't refer to it really
as appended. It would just be enabled.
Mr. Turner. Okay. Excellent, excellent. Do you think the
situation has arisen that we seriously need to consider our
European footprint? We have voluntarily restrained ourselves so
that these Aegis capabilities are missing. Don't you think we
have gotten to the point where we need to from a policy
perspective begin the debate as to why have we done this and
shouldn't we look at modifying them?
Admiral Hill. We have had questions in the past about
whether or not we should enable the cruise missile defense
capability just to defend the site itself. But it really is a
policy question if you are going to add----
Mr. Turner. And I'm going right there.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Turner [continuing]. To our other John Hill. So, Mr.
Hill, don't you think it is time that we take a look at this
issue, that deterrence is dead? What blend do we need and what
do we need to do in Europe?
Mr. Hill. I think it is time. And I think NATO thinks it is
time. And I think NATO is looking at whether NATO needs to
change its policy structure.
NATO has what is called NATO ballistic missile defense
policy, and they have NATO integrated air and missile defense
policy. We won't go into all of the deep dark art of NATO, but
ballistic missile defense focused on Iran. Integrated air and
missile defense focused on all threats, all directions, and so
forth.
The real question is should we be able to use the Aegis
Ashore sites for both? As Admiral Hill explained, technically
you could do it. Now the policy question, given what everybody
has seen in Ukraine over the past year, people are asking
themselves exactly that question of, what is the balance of
deterrence and defense going forward that we need to have?
Mr. Turner. And that is what our committee I am certain
will be doing. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. First I would like to
take a second to congratulate the Space Force on their recent
successful launch from the Vandenberg Space Force Base in my
district. Congratulations.
The rocket carried the initial tranche of Space Development
Agency satellites that are a key part of the missile warning,
missile tracking architecture that we are discussing here
today.
Vice Admiral Hill, GAO [U.S. Government Accountability
Office] published a report in May 2022 that highlighted
opportunities to reduce the risk of Missile Defense Agency
programs from experiencing cost overruns and schedule delays.
One recommendation is for increased collaboration between
program offices and warfighters. What steps has the agency
taken to enhance the partnership between MDA and other missile
defense organizations?
Admiral Hill. Great. Thank you for the question,
Congressman. We have a series of hybrid programs within the
agency. And I will just start from the bottom and work my way
up. When we have the THAAD program, it is there on Redstone
Arsenal. We have an Army colonel running that program. He is
right next door to his partners who are running Patriot and the
IBCS system. So that partnership is alive and well from an
acquisition perspective and as we field and deploy those
systems.
Our Navy program for Aegis is in Dahlgren, Virginia, right
at the center of excellence for the Aegis program, tied closely
in to all capabilities there. The Aegis Training and Readiness
Center there. Naval officers are in charge of the efforts there
at Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense in Dahlgren.
When you look at the work that we are doing for GMD, there
is not a day that we are not talking either directly to
Northern Command and the different servicemen that are serving
on that staff to ensure that we are providing them all the
support they need.
The same thing with Fort Greely, the maintenance is done
hand in hand with the soldiers up there in terms of the launch
site and all the command and control. So I think we have a very
good, strong hybrid system. And our partnership with the
services is as strong as I have ever seen it.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Lieutenant General Karbler, the
need for missile defense assets is at an all-time high due to
the operational tempo of NATO and our allies. How are we
balancing the global demand for Patriot and THAAD missile
defense batteries while maintaining our readiness requirements?
General Karbler. Thanks, Congressman. As I talked about a
little bit earlier, we identified--we had to reduce the demand
signal for our air and missile defense forces, specifically in
the CENTCOM AOR, so that we could get that balance so we
weren't putting the air defense soldiers through the grinder
and affecting readiness through a very high OPTEMPO. So we have
done that.
The soldiers have elected to reenlist and stay with their
current units, which increases readiness. So instead of a big
turnover, now soldiers, particularly this year, 39 percent of
the soldiers have stabilized within their current units as they
reenlist. That helps readiness because those crews now that
have been training together for months and months now stay
together for 2 or 3 years. And then they get promoted through
the ranks, and then they can share those lessons learned with
their subordinate soldiers and so that helps improve readiness
as well.
Our air defense readiness, we are there 24/7, always stays
well within the combatant commanders' requirements. And, again,
that is a testament to the soldiers who have stayed on with
their organizations.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Vice Admiral Hill, what are the
challenges of defending against hypersonic missiles from a
technological standpoint? And, as it relates to hypersonic
missiles, are your efforts focused on homeland defense or are
you looking at regional applications as well or both?
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. We are focused in on regional
capability. If you look at it through the framework of detect,
control, engage, detection, tracking of hypersonic is
incredibly challenging because of their maneuver capability.
So they don't launch in a singular azimuth. They don't come
directly at you. They go in and around you. So field of view of
radar has become very limited, which is why we advocate for
space in order to track hypersonic missiles.
When it comes to the command and control, because of the
speeds they fly, that means reaction time is very short and so
that challenges command and control and the ability to get the
information to the operator to make decisions.
And finally when you get to engagement, typically, if you
engage them in the terminal, that is a very dirty environment.
It is electromagnetic down there. There are jammers on the
front ends of these things. They maneuver quickly. Our most
recent test from 2 weeks ago demonstrated our capability to
take that threat on in terminal.
And then Glide Phase Interceptor that we talked about
earlier, a regional capability is to be an area defense that is
in the glide phase. So if you look at a boosting hypersonic
threat it goes into a glide phase before it dives down, we want
to engage it there in glide before it comes back into the
atmosphere, which is one of the hardest places to engage, but
we do have capability there today.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Admiral Hill. Thank you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Stefanik.
Ms. Stefanik. Thank you, Chairman, for your statements
regarding the east coast missile defense as you opened this
hearing. I wanted to address Vice Admiral Hill.
As you know, both the NDAA and the Department of Defense
have publicly designated Fort Drum as the site selected for a
potential east coast missile defense location. And recently in
this hearing room, Chairman Milley responded to my question,
stating his support for a third missile defense site,
specifically focused on the east coast at Fort Drum.
What is your best military assessment regarding the
national security and missile defense need to face 21st century
threats and specifically, how is Fort Drum well positioned to
meet those?
Admiral Hill. Yes, ma'am. When it comes to defense,
geography is very meaningful. And our ability to expand the
battlespace for something like a Next Generation Interceptor,
that is exactly what the location does and what it does
provide.
We will often talk about a shoot/assess/shoot. That means
getting a shot in early. So if you are geogra/phically
dispersed and you have a third site, you have the ability to
engage early and then engage again after you have assessed
whether or not you've hit the first time. So there is a
compelling need there that we continue to watch as the threat
increases.
Chairman Lamborn talked about space launch vehicles as a
ruse. It really is. It is ICBM technology being demonstrated
and being matured. So I think the threat is real. And I think
where the chairman was going, the more defenses you have, the
better. It is a key part of deterrence.
Ms. Stefanik. So you would support Chairman Milley's
assessment?
Admiral Hill. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Stefanik. My next question is, in terms of the
timeline, there are many steps that need to be taken to prepare
for that threat of the future. Can you walk us through that
timeline and the steps that are needed to be taken in the next
few years?
Admiral Hill. Yes, ma'am. The comment you made earlier
about the site selection is really step one. You assess some
number of sites, generally to meet the NEPA [National
Environmental Policy Act] rules. You have to assess at least
three sites so you have a comparative on nature there. And that
is usually at a very top level view, you know, what would make
sense? All the analysis goes into play in terms of, you know,
timelines and whether or not you can get that shoot/assess/
shoot capability and so those locations do matter.
And you get a general scrub of what that area would be and
what the challenges would be just from a geography perspective.
The next steps generally involve going in and doing more
invasive work on the areas that we might be considering. So if
it is Fort Drum, we would want to go in and determine how hard
would it be to build there?
And then you have the other discussions about, well, how
many silos would you require? What are the timelines? What
would we do with the NGI production line, because to me that
would be--the best military advice on what to plan for would be
the Next Generation Interceptor since we will have at least one
production line, maybe more depending on the decisions that are
made.
Ms. Stefanik. And then lastly, the FY23 NDAA required an
MDA to report to Congress on an updated assessment for an
additional defense missile interceptor site specifically at
Fort Drum as well as a funding profile for that site.
You recently wrote a letter to Chairman Rogers dated March
24 indicating that the report is now late, but you are going to
meet a deadline of June 30. Can I get your commitment that you
will meet that deadline of submission before June 30?
Admiral Hill. Absolutely, ma'am. We have heat and light on
that report. We know what you are asking for and those are
reasonable requests, and we will get those to you on time.
Ms. Stefanik. Well, thank you, Admiral Hill. I also want to
take this opportunity to thank my colleagues. I have led this
effort as the Representative for Fort Drum for many, many
years. And because of the bipartisan work on this committee as
well as our work with MDA and DOD broadly, we are continuing to
move this project forward. We know how important it is for our
national security, our military, and our missile defense. So
thank you very much, and I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A couple of things.
In a recent hearing on defending Guam, there wass a long list
of unfunded priorities. Can any of the programs that you three
gentleman have be delayed so that the defense of Guam can go
forward, in other words shifting money from your programs to
the defense of Guam?
Admiral Hill. As the acquisition guy at the table, I will
tell you that I have limited capability to move money from
program to program. There would have to be----
Mr. Garamendi. How much money do you have?
Admiral Hill. We are at $10 billion--10.9 in 2024.
Mr. Garamendi. $10 billion.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. I think the number may have been classified
so I won't give it here. It is significantly less than $10
billion.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. One of the things that we ought to be paying
attention to here on this committee and in the full committee
is we make choices. Some people say the defense of Guam is
rather important.
What is the role of directed energy, not in the
exoatmosphere, but in the other defense mechanisms that you
intend to employ?
Admiral Hill. Is that a question for me, sir?
Mr. Garamendi. It seems to me all three of you are in this
business----
Admiral Hill. I am happy to give you----
Mr. Garamendi. So why don't we start with you, and we will
go down the line.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. We are investing in directed energy
specific in lethality. So what we do is we are actively running
tests to determine the right places to place energy in order to
get an effect. And there is a range of those effects from just
absolute destruction to just disturbing something to take it
off track.
Mr. Garamendi. Against what threat are you looking at?
Admiral Hill. Multiple different types, the whole range of
missile threats.
Mr. Garamendi. And how far off is your culmination of this
effort?
Admiral Hill. I would say that directed energy is
promising. It is not something you are going to see in the near
term, at least for missile defense. If you just look at the
threat, ballistic hardened nuclear threat, you have to have
energy on that target for a long period of time.
Hypersonic threats are designed to fly in a very high-heat
environment. So you have to overcome that baseline heat
environment to inflict damage. So it is a big challenge for
missile defense to leverage direct energy in the near term.
Mr. Garamendi. I see. Are you familiar with the Israeli
application of----
Admiral Hill. I am.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. Directed energy coupled with
the Iron Dome and David's Sling where they have a software
system that will determine whether to use a missile or a
directed-energy solution?
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. And we also have investments in
weapons selection logic that would determine best use of
whatever weapon it is, directed energy or hard-kill weapon.
Mr. Garamendi. Does their system work?
Admiral Hill. Their system is in trials. It has not been
deployed. It is not certified for operational use yet.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Could you give us an update--I
don't know which one of you would handle this one. Maybe it is
Mr. Karbler. What is the Aegis Ashore situation in Poland?
Admiral Hill. I will take that. Aegis Ashore in Poland has
reached its technical capability declaration. It is going
through the Board of Inspection and Survey, a Navy process for
acceptance. The Chief of Naval Operations is on track to accept
the site for the Navy at the end of this fiscal year. And then
it will go through EUCOM [U.S. European Command] and then NATO
acceptance to be fully operational next year.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. How many Aegis Ashore missiles
would be necessary to deal with Russia's intermediate-range
nuclear weapons?
Admiral Hill. Sir, I would like to take that to the closed
session.
Mr. Garamendi. I see. Well, probably the number, if you go
1 to 1, which we probably ought not assume, we may need 2 to 1
because we sometimes miss or there may be some problem. It's
been calculated it is over a trillion dollars just to defend
Europe.
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. And I am not sure what assumptions
you are making on which threats and----
Mr. Garamendi. I would be happy to share them with you.
Admiral Hill. I would love to see it. But, yes, sir, it
would be expensive.
Mr. Garamendi. I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Admiral Hill, I just had a quick question
for you. Fiscal year 2024 budget request include $800 million
to support the defense of Guam. The current plan outlined is
for an initial capability to be ready on Guam in 2024 followed
by delivery of the enhanced capability by 2029.
I met with the Guam Chamber of Commerce earlier today. And
they echoed Admiral Aquilino's concerns this morning about
whether the present workforce is capable of meeting these
goals.
To what extent are you hindered by labor and workforce
issues in meeting these timeline goals and what can we do to
support the workforce in Guam to ensure we stay on track?
Admiral Hill. Yes, sir. It is a great question, and it is a
real concern. I would say anyone that is doing military
construction on the island of Guam will be impacted. We have
not realized that yet. We are just doing site selection and the
initial environmentals.
Once we get to military construction in the 2025 timeframe,
there will be an impact if we don't come through the visa
issue.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. Apparently, they had mentioned that
there was some misconception that workforce was coming in from
China. They said that is not true. And they were wanting to
know about H2-B visas. Would that be helpful?
Admiral Hill. That would be very helpful, not the Chinese
piece, but----
Dr. DesJarlais. Exactly. Okay. Thank you. I have some
questions for the closed session, but I will yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Representative Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Karbler, thank
you for stopping by my office yesterday. And it has been a true
honor to work with you over the years. I thank you for your
service to our country. I would be remiss if I didn't note how
proud Alabama's Fifth Congressional District is to host the
Missile Defense Agency and the Army's Space and Missile Defense
Command at Redstone Arsenal.
General Miller, Admiral Hill, Mr. Hill, it's good to see
each of you again.
Last year's NDAA mandated the Department to provide a
report to Congress, a comprehensive and layered strategy of how
the U.S. military will use asymmetric capabilities to defend
hypersonic missile threats. That was due on March the 1st. Do
you know how the current status--what is the current status of
this report?
Mr. Hill. Let me take that one for the record if I may.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
Mr. Strong. That would be fine. Thank you, sir. General
Karbler, yesterday in my office you shared that capacity is a
top concern of yours. Like you said, the CCP isn't conducting
science projects. The threats posed are real. Can you share
with us what your top capacity concerns are when it comes to
our missile defense system and how potential problems can be
avoided?
General Karbler. Yes, sir. As we look at the adversaries as
we talked about throughout the hearing thus far, every
combatant commander wants more Patriot. They need more THAAD.
And the Army has been very good. We are getting a 16th Patriot
battalion and an 8th THAAD battery through the work with the
Missile Defense Agency. We are standing up four Maneuver-SHORAD
[Short Range Air Defense] battalions to get after the counter-
UAS drone challenges that our soldiers face. Continued
invigoration of the organic industrial base through FMS
[foreign military sales] purchases of Patriot and THAAD
batteries are very helpful for us.
But the additional capacity requirements we have to meet
the adversaries that are out there, I just am--I am never
comfortable with the current capacity that we have. And I know
it is challenging in a budget environment to have additional
air and missile defense units. That's why I am very happy with
where the Secretary and Chief of Staff of the Army are at in
terms of helping increase our air and missile defense
capabilities, again on the Patriot, THAAD side, and with the
Maneuver-SHORAD.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Right now the U.S. is facing
extremely high operational tempos for our air and missile
defense assets. Can you discuss how the global requirements are
impacting the readiness of our Patriot and THAAD batteries?
General Karbler. Yes, sir. We have gotten after this. We
recognized it again in the health of the force study that the
Chief of Staff of the Army commissioned; identified the stress
on the force, laid out recommendations that we are
implementing. And again, as we see soldiers reenlisting at the
highest rates within the Army for a division-sized element,
that is a quantitative measure to show that we are making a
difference.
We have also been able to provide a level of predictability
to our soldiers. One of the challenges that was very
frustrating was they would go for a 6-month rotation. It would
get extended to 9 months, or a 9-month rotation to a year, or a
year rotation and then get extended beyond a year. And what we
have been able to do here in the past year and a half is really
get that predictability back to the soldiers and their
families.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. And again, thank you for service to
our country.
General Miller, I know space domain awareness is a top
priority for both SPACECOM and the DOD at large. How is Space
Command integrating with commercial companies to strengthen
space domain awareness and sensor management?
General Miller. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I
think a few areas I mentioned previously, I will foot-stomp on
a couple if I can.
The main effort we focused on up until now is to ensure
that--we call those non-traditional sensors, in other words not
purpose-built necessarily for a missile warning or missile
defense mission. So we have taken sensors and capabilities that
the commercial sector has offered to provide on the one hand
unique places and locations for us to leverage for collection,
detection, tracking.
We have also looked to that commercial sector to provide us
advanced algorithms and tools to allow us to provide better
analytic data on any potential risk threats or even just
safety-of-flight concerns that we see while simultaneously
disseminating a warning to our partners and using unclassified
means in order to be able to do that.
So all the way from detection all the way through
reporting, the thread of commercial integration has been put at
every step along that way.
The commercial integration strategy was designed to enhance
that, and we see a lot of productivity coming out of that
relationship just so far and it has only been months since
initiated, Congressman.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I thank each of you for being here
today. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. We will now go into a brief recess.
We will go up to the SCIF [sensitive compartmented information
facility] in room 2337 and votes will be called at about 5
o'clock. So with the indulgence of the witnesses, we will go
until approximately 5 o'clock and then we will be done for the
day. And we will now be in recess.
[Whereupon, at 4:26 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 18, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 18, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 18, 2023

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. MOULTON

Mr. Hill. As stated in the 2022 Missile Defense Review and
consistent with U.S. defense policy for nearly two decades, the United
States continues to rely on strategic deterrence--underwritten by safe,
secure, and effective nuclear forces--to address intercontinental-range
nuclear threats from Russia and the People's Republic of China (PRC).
Though the United States reserves the right to defend itself
against attacks from any source, the Ground-based Midcourse Defense
(GMD) system is neither intended for, nor capable of defeating the
large and sophisticated ICBM, air-, or sea-launched ballistic missile
threats from Russia and the PRC.   [See page 17.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. STRONG
Mr. Hill. The Missile Defense Agency (MDA) is drafting this report
on behalf of the Secretary of Defense and received an extension to June
1. The Agency is on track to deliver the report on time.   [See page
28.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 18, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN

Ms. Houlahan. What steps is MDA taking to ensure that the threat
models and targets it uses during testing are up-to-date and based on
relevant threats, as identified by the intelligence community?
Admiral Hill. [The information provided includes controlled
unclassified information and is retained in the committee files.]
Ms. Houlahan. Can you please describe MDA's efforts to address
cyber vulnerabilities overall and in response to DOD IG findings?
Please also describe how MDA is addressing cyber security within the
defense industrial base, and the work you have done with Prime
contractors to improve cyber security throughout the supply chain.
Admiral Hill. [The information provided includes controlled
unclassified information and is retained in the committee files.]

[all]
