[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 118-42]

AN UPDATE ON UNACCOMPANIED

MILITARY HOUSING AND THE MILITARY
HOUSING PRIVATIZATION INITIATIVE

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

QUALITY OF LIFE PANEL

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

SEPTEMBER 27, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-808                        WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

QUALITY OF LIFE PANEL

DON BACON, Nebraska, Chairman

NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        SARA JACOBS, California
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
JIM BANKS, Indiana, Ex Officio       ANDY KIM, New Jersey, Ex Officio

Ellie Bender, Professional Staff Member
Ilka Regino, Professional Staff Member
Alexandria Evers, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Bacon, Hon. Don, a Representative from Nebraska, Chairman,
Quality of Life Panel..........................................     1
Escobar, Hon. Veronica, a Representative from Texas, Quality of
Life Panel.....................................................     3

WITNESSES

Coulson, Carla, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army for
Installations, Housing, and Partnerships, Department of the
Army...........................................................    16
Field, Elizabeth A., Director, Defense Capabilities and
Management, U.S. Government Accountability Office..............     3
Moriarty, Robert E., Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force
for Installations, Department of the Air Force.................    18
Thompson, Robert E., Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of the
Navy for Energy, Installations, and Environment, Department of
the Navy.......................................................    17

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Bacon, Hon. Don..............................................    35
Coulson, Carla...............................................    59
Field, Elizabeth A...........................................    39
Houlahan, Hon. Chrissy, a Representative from Pennsylvania,
Ranking Member, Quality of Life Panel......................    37
Moriarty, Robert E...........................................    86
Thompson, Robert E...........................................    78

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[Documents submitted are retained in the committee files.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bacon....................................................    97
Ms. Houlahan.................................................    98
Ms. Jacobs...................................................   107
Ms. Strickland...............................................   114

AN UPDATE ON UNACCOMPANIED MILITARY
HOUSING AND THE MILITARY HOUSING PRIVATIZATION INITIATIVE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Quality of Life Panel,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, September 27, 2023.
The panel met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Don Bacon (chairman
of the panel) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DON BACON, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
NEBRASKA, CHAIRMAN, QUALITY OF LIFE PANEL

Mr. Bacon. The hearing will now come to order. I ask
unanimous consent that the Chair be authorized to declare a
recess at any time. I do not think we have votes scheduled
during this. So that is good. So without objection, so ordered.
I want to welcome everyone to this hearing of the Quality
of Life Panel. Today's hearing is an update on unaccompanied
housing and we are going to focus on that in the first panel.
And then we are going to talk more about Military Housing
Privatization Initiative with our second panel.
I want to thank our witnesses for being with us today. I
hope this hearing provides an opportunity for our members to
have a productive exchange with our witnesses and provide
answers to their questions.
Today, we are addressing an issue that is critical to the
quality of life for service members and their families: the
state of military housing. This is an issue that goes beyond
party lines and demands our attention and action. Our men and
women in uniform have put their life on the line to protect our
freedom. They and their families make countless sacrifices for
our Nation. We owe it to these individuals to ensure they have
access to safe, comfortable, and affordable housing.
Unfortunately, the reality of military housing is often far
from that. And that is our focus for today.
Last week, the Government Accountability Office published a
report detailing deplorable and frankly inexcusable conditions
of our unaccompanied housing for junior service members. Sewage
overflow, water quality issues, rodent infestations, mold,
broken air-conditioning units in sweltering heat, and others
all have been found in these facilities, facilities that
service members are expected and required to live in. I just
want to say I was a base commander at Ramstein and at Offutt
Air Force Base. If I would have had these conditions in any of
our barracks, I would have got fired.
One of the things that we want to know today, where is the
accountability at with these barracks? Has anybody been held
accountable? And what are we going to do to get this right and
get it fixed? I don't recall the standards being this way when
I got out in 2014. Something has happened. We need to put our
finger on it and get it fixed.
So we cannot allow this situation to persist. It is an
issue not only of justice and dignity, but also of military
readiness. When our service members are preoccupied with their
health and safety, they cannot focus on their mission.
A few years ago, we saw similar conditions in private
family military housing. Families dealt with long delays in
repair and maintenance requests or requests that were not
responded to at all. Children were getting sick from mold and
lead paint, and members feared retribution from private
companies if they complained to their command. This situation
required extensive congressional action to make improvements to
these conditions.
The Department [of Defense] and individual services have
continued to neglect the oversight and management these
projects require. They have failed to provide the housing that
service members need and deserve. I believe what we are going
to hear next will prove this. This matter must be addressed. We
must demand greater accountability from the Department of
Defense [DOD].
Today, we will hear from two panels. The first panel is an
expert from GAO [U.S. Government Accountability Office] that
will share the results of a recent audit of unaccompanied
housing facilities, including issues related to funding and
oversight.
In the second panel, we will hear from DOD officials
responsible for housing policy. They will describe the current
status of privatized military housing. Additionally, they will
address the implementation of statutorily required provisions
ensuring the quality of this housing.
I would now like to welcome our witnesses for the first
panel. We have Elizabeth Field. She is the director of GAO's
Defense Capabilities and Management Team. Before doing so, I
want to yield to Ms. Escobar who is filling in for our ranking
member.
Before I do, this is so important, just to go off script a
little bit. We have a recruiting and retention problem in our
military right now. The quality of life isn't the only factors.
There are other factors, but quality of life is one. When you
talk to parents with an 18-year-old son or daughter and you ask
them do you want their son or daughter to serve, when they hear
stuff like these barracks, it inhibits folks from wanting their
18-year-old sons or daughters to join. If you're an 18-year-
old, you see this. It is an inhibiter. We have got to get this
right.
And with that, I yield to Ms. Escobar.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bacon can be found in the
Appendix on page 35.]

STATEMENT OF HON. VERONICA ESCOBAR, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
TEXAS, QUALITY OF LIFE PANEL

Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. And I would
like to thank you for your focus on this issue at the hearing
today. And I would like to associate myself with your remarks
on just how unacceptable the current situation remains.
We know that especially for young families, this is a
critical component of their quality of life. We also know that
part of our recruitment challenge is the fact that it is not
just the service member who serves, but the entire family. And
so we have to make sure that we are upholding our commitment to
the highest potential standard of quality of life and this
discussion is a critical component to that.
I have the incredible privilege of serving on behalf of my
community, El Paso, Texas, home to Fort Bliss, a critical, key,
amazing asset for our national defense. And I have had some of
these same concerns for some time now. Unfortunately, I was not
surprised by the GAO report issued this month on military
housing. And so our responsiveness is going to be key to
continuing to see improvements. And I know that there are many,
not just here on this dais, not just in Congress, not just
Active Duty service members, but I know there are members of
the administration who also find this absolutely unacceptable.
And I look forward to a path forward and I am eager to get into
these two panels.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Ms. Escobar. Ms. Field, you will have
the opportunity to present your testimony and each member will
have an opportunity to question you for about 5 minutes. Your
written comments and statements will be made part of the
hearing record. And with that, Ms. Field, you may make your
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH A. FIELD, DIRECTOR, DEFENSE CAPABILITIES
AND MANAGEMENT, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Field. Thank you, Chairman Bacon, Congresswoman
Escobar, and members of the panel. It is an honor to be here
today.
Since March of 2018, GAO has made more than 80
recommendations to the Defense Department to improve both
privatized family housing and government-owned unaccompanied
housing. The most recent of these recommendations come from a
report that we issued just last week focusing on the condition
of unaccompanied housing, which I will refer to as barracks.
As you know, military barracks are used to house our most
junior enlisted service members, many of them teenagers fresh
out of high school. Unfortunately, because of this, we found
that many, although not all, Department officials have chosen
not to obtain their input about the quality of their housing.
According to these officials, this demographic group is so
unreliable in terms of completing surveys or replying to email
or telephone inquiries that it isn't worth trying to solicit
their opinion. Other officials told us that the condition of
barracks is not a key factor in military retention and
therefore doesn't merit inclusion as a topic in already lengthy
surveys.
What we learned, however, is that these service members
have a lot to say and are eager for someone to listen. Over the
course of 5 months, we visited 10 military installations where
we held discussion groups with service members living in the
barracks. We promised them that their input mattered, that we
needed to hear from them because Congress wanted to hear from
them.
So today, because this panel is all about quality of life,
I would like to honor that commitment to them and share what we
heard and saw about quality of life in the barracks. As I
recount our discussions, I invite you to turn your attention to
the slides projected which document some of the substandard
conditions we observed.
[The slides referred to are retained in the committee files
and can be viewed upon request.]
Ms. Field. One of the most common complaints we heard was
about mold. There was a leak and black mold in the shower, one
resident told us, and maintenance still won't fix it, no matter
how often it is reported. Another resident said mold in the
barracks makes you feel expendable, like we don't matter.
A number of the facilities we visited had broken HVAC
[heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning] systems. One
Marine said, I often wake up at night sweating from the heat,
itching from bed bugs, and feeling like I am suffocating. And
this from an airman: It can be really challenging to come in
from a day of working where you may be exposed to the cold or
to the heat all day and then get no relief from the
temperatures when you return to your room.
Although DOD standards call for barracks rooms to have at
least a kitchenette, we found that none of the military service
standards reflects that requirement. Not surprisingly,
therefore, we saw barracks where residents had access to only a
small fridge and microwave or in one case only a small
microwave. They told us it made it hard for them to follow a
healthy diet. For example, one resident told us it is
challenging to meet physical readiness requirements when the
only options for meals are frozen food that can be microwaved
and fast food.
Perhaps some of the most troubling statements we heard had
to do with safety. It is difficult to feel safe in the
barracks, one sailor told us. The doors don't work. Anyone can
access our rooms, recounted a Marine. Sexual assault happens in
the barracks more than people think, one service member said.
In every one of our discussion groups, the topic of mental
health came up. These are just a few of the statements we
heard. It is depressing to come home to a dark box after work.
I feel cramped and like the walls are closing in and that
causes me anxiety and stress. The barracks feel like living in
a run-down motel or in a prison.
These problems are, unfortunately, not dissimilar from the
ones we have observed and documented in privatized family
housing. The only real difference is that the Defense
Department has felt more pressure in recent years to fix the
problems in family housing than it has to fix the problems with
barracks. I appreciate that today's hearing should help rectify
that.
History tells us though that ensuring better housing for
our service members and their families will take sustained
oversight and attention. Twenty years ago, GAO reported many
similar problems with the condition of barracks. Ten years ago,
in a report to Congress, DOD lauded the progress it had made in
modernizing its barracks program. It stated that by increasing
military construction funding, introducing new designs offering
more privacy and amenities, and directing more maintenance
funding to barracks, it had brought the modernization program
closer to completion. The Department also promised that
military barracks would be adequately maintained over the long
term. Obviously, that didn't happen.
We believe that the recommendations in our report, if fully
implemented, will put the Department on a better footing to
address this substantial challenge, but it will take years to
reverse the chronic neglect and underfunding we uncovered.
I appreciate this panel's focus on the problem and hope
that it is the beginning of many conversations about how the
military can do better by its most junior Active Duty members.
Thank you again for this opportunity and I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Field can be found in the
Appendix on page 39.]
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Ms. Field. When you see these
pictures, it is disgusting, unacceptable, cannot go on. During
your time, and during GAO's time investigating this, was there
a sense of accountability in the services whether it is at the
Pentagon level or the installation commanders? Does anybody
take ownership of this?
Ms. Field. I think that changed to a certain extent over
the course of our audit. As we began to do more interviews and
site visits, I think people knew GAO was there and maybe they
should start paying attention. But I will tell you what was one
of most troubling things we observed during our audit was that
the Office of the Secretary of Defense, which is supposed to
oversee the barracks programs, give guidance to the military
services, very much had a hands-off approach to this, to this
topic. When we asked them some basic questions at the beginning
of our audit about how many barracks there were, whether they
were not complying with standards, how many service members
lived there, they couldn't tell us. I think that is changing,
but you are absolutely right that it has been an issue.
Mr. Bacon. Was there at least a sense at the installation
level, that the commander of that installation had ownership of
this? Or was it ``it's not my problem''?
Ms. Field. I think at the installation level, there was
more of a sense of ownership. We spoke to a number of
installation commanders who, frankly, told me, told us that
they felt sick about the conditions that their junior enlisted
service members were living in. They often recounted facing
sort of impossible choices between where to put limited
funding. So yes, at the installation level, I think there was
more accountability.
Mr. Bacon. So how would conditions in unaccompanied housing
been able to deteriorate over time? And what has prevented the
Department from paying adequate attention to this housing and
making improvements? I note that for every Presidential budget
on DOD, Congress has put more money in. So I don't see how we
can blame it on funds. We have actually plussed-up DOD's
Presidential requests. So I am curious, what is the story--how
did this happen?
Ms. Field. Well, you are right that Congress has in many
cases given funding to the services when they haven't asked for
funding for barracks. It might not have been the entirety of
what they needed though and that is because we found in our
audit that a lot of times even though installations know they
need funding for constructing new barracks, they don't feel
comfortable requesting that funding because they know it won't
compete well against other requirements. And so they don't put
those requests forward.
It really is a matter though of chronic underfunding at the
DOD level, not on Congress' part. So what happens is facilities
need to be maintained, up-kept, as any facility does. But the
Department, we have reported previously, tends to only fund to
about 80 percent of sustainment needs. And the facilities that
most often lose out are things like barracks. Eventually, if
you don't fund sustainment enough, you are going to need to
build an entirely new barracks. Which means you need new
MILCON, military construction funding. And eventually, if you
don't do that, you are going to have to spend money on basic
allowance for housing to get service members to live in the
economy because you just can't find a place for them to live.
So I think it is a combination of that chronic underfunding and
neglect, but also that lack of accountability.
And this is just the last point I will make, I know I am
out of time. But I think it is important because it strikes to
the heart of your question. I think there has been a cultural
perspective within the Department that part of being in the
military is toughing it out and this is just going to get them
ready for the military. And unfortunately, I think that has
gotten us in part to where we are today.
Mr. Bacon. So what I am hearing to a degree is when you buy
a new car, if you maintain it, do the oil changes, spend
smaller amounts of money to maintain it, you keep the car for a
longer time. If you don't, you have to pay a lot more money to
replace it. And what I am hearing is we are not doing the
normal maintenance to maintain these, and then we are having to
put a lot more money in. It is penny-wise, pound foolish is
what I am hearing. Am I hearing you right?
Ms. Field. Yes, you said it better than I did. Absolutely,
that is right.
Mr. Bacon. I am a farm kid. That's what we do. So if you
had one or two key recommendations right now to make this
better, what would you recommend?
Ms. Field. So, I think in a time of limited resources, what
the Department needs to do is gather the information it needs
to make more strategic decisions about where to put limited
resources. That means knowing what condition the barracks are
in. They don't know that right now. Knowing how much they are
spending on things like basic allowance for housing so they can
do a more informed cost-benefit analysis. It means reevaluating
policies about who is required to live in the barracks and how
you make exceptions to those policies. It means reconsidering
the barracks manager position. So there is a lot.
Our hope is, and this is one of our final recommendations,
that the Department develop a joint strategy so the services
can learn from one another so that standards can be put in
place that are consistent to try to behind this problem. But as
you pointed out, we have 31 recommendations so there is a lot
the Department needs to do.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you very much. With that, I recognize Ms.
Escobar for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I would like to
thank you so much for your work. And the component of the
impact on mental health is something that really struck me. And
it made me recall a hearing that we had last Congress on the
Military Personnel Subcommittee about suicides, Active Duty
member suicide and veteran suicide. And I will never forget one
of our experts and I wish I could recall his name in his
moment, but a psychiatrist who said you have got to think about
this in a different way. Many of our service members, it is not
that they come in suffering with chronic depression or even
have had suicide ideation before, but so much of this is rooted
in environment. And he said your job, Congress, is really to
think about the environment and the impact it has on mental
health. And it was just such a--I think a profound realization
for me in terms of not just how much more significant our
obligation is around environment, but the impact of chronic
underfunding and these chronic issues can have on our service
members.
And as an example, at Fort Bliss we have some transient
barracks that honestly in comparison to what we saw, there is
no comparison. However, the HVAC system was so outdated and in
El Paso, we struck a record this year of about 3 months of 100-
plus-degree temperatures which had never happened before in the
history of our weather tracking. And our transient barracks
just could not sustain that even under the best of conditions.
And as we kind of pulled the thread on that, we learned that it
was a priority, it is just in terms of the context of so many
other priorities fell further down the list. And we ended up
making the decision to fund this out of our community project
funding requests which took a huge chunk of our funding for the
community, but it was critical and important for the
installation.
My question to you is, and thank you for the
recommendations, aside from me, for example, as the Member of
Congress who was frequently going on site visiting these
barracks, wanting to keep direct eyes on it, if we could do one
thing, the most important thing in our oversight function,
would it be, for example, making easier surveys that are online
through an app? Maybe you already do that. Or are there
others--like is there one strategy for us to have better eyes
on this?
Ms. Field. So, it is hard to pick because there are so many
problems and this might sound like sort of a cop-out, but it is
not. And that is, if we don't see the Department implement all
31 of our recommendations in a meaningful and timely manner, I
would encourage you to consider putting those recommendations
into legislation to make them statutorily required. That is
something that has happened with privatized family housing and
I think that has been effective. I will note that the
Department concurred with most of our recommendations, but in
some cases they were partial concurrences and statements that
they have already implemented the recommendations and so they
are good. They are not good. So focusing on full and prompt
implementation of our recommendations would be my
recommendation.
Ms. Escobar. That is excellent. Thank you so much. And then
I do want to follow up on the surveys because it is a problem
when the users of an asset don't participate in helping
evaluate it and we only have, and we only have--we have less
than a minute. What can we do to improve surveys, because those
are critical?
Ms. Field. Well, the importance is to survey in the first
place. So we found that only two of the services were even
bothering to survey barracks residents about their satisfaction
with housing, so the remaining two need to do it. We also found
that none of the services routinely inquire and ask barracks
residents how the barracks conditions impact their decision to
reenlist, which is a DOD requirement. So we have
recommendations for them to do that. I will note that I think
it is the Navy and the Marine Corps--Navy and Marine Corps that
are the ones that are surveying and they have developed a
number of interesting ways to try to get their responses up. So
I would encourage you to ask the next panel, particularly the
Navy representative, how they have done that because they have
been successful.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I would like to recognize Ms.
Strickland from Washington.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you, Chairman. Ms. Field, thank you
so much for your testimony. I do appreciate it. I represent
Joint Base Lewis-McChord, one of the largest military
installations on the west coast. The housing challenges of the
barracks aren't as severe, but there are still challenges we
have.
So much of our conversation today has been about resources,
so I don't know if you all have had this discussion, but if we
were to bring our barracks up to what I call safe, habitable,
something that doesn't look run-down or uninhabitable like we
saw on these slides, what would the price tag be for that?
Ms. Field. So that is a great question. It is one that we
tried to answer through our audit. Bottom line is we don't know
a total figure, in part, because the Department itself does not
know how much it has been spending on barracks, whether it is--
particularly if it is maintenance funding. But I can give you
one statistic that might be helpful in terms of even getting a
ballpark. In I think it was 2022 the Air Force did submit a
report to Congress in which it stated that it estimated it had
about a $3.6 billion backlog just in terms of maintenance and
upkeep of its existing barracks and it would cost about $1
billion to newly construct some barracks that it needed. That
is one service. It is not the biggest service, so that should
give you some sense of scope here.
Ms. Strickland. I know and I appreciate that. I know in
this committee we often have conversations about chronic
underfunding, but until we put a dollar amount to it, it
doesn't have context. And I say that because as you know, in
Congress there is often a push-pull between let's just
arbitrarily cut defense by 10 percent and then there are people
who want to plus it up more. So I think that having a specific
dollar amount to talk about what it is going to take to bring
our barracks up to par in addition to any new capital
investments we need, gives us a more realistic place to start.
I want to talk a bit about privatization. I know that with
the family military housing, it did not turn out to be the
silver bullet that we thought it would. Private developers have
to make money and I know that the business model for them isn't
panning out. So can you talk a bit about the challenges that
the services have shared with you about initiatives to
privatize the barracks?
Ms. Field. So privatization is a tricky question because I
think one of the things we have learned from this audit is
whether it is government-owned or privatized, if you don't pay
attention, if you don't fund, you are going to end up with poor
living conditions. We did tour some privatized barracks,
particularly in San Diego, and I have to be honest, they were
in amazing condition. They were way ahead of some of the
government-owned barracks. Privatization though is not a silver
bullet and that is because particularly for the population
living in the barracks, it is not as easy as it was for family
housing. For example, OMB [Office of Management and Budget]
scoring can be an issue because it essentially commits the
government to a financial obligation and so scoring can be
problematic. This is a population that moves around more often
than families and so if you have barracks that are--you know,
privatized barracks that might be left for months at a time if
someone goes off on a training mission, that is a problem.
There is also issues related to unit cohesion and the fact that
this is a younger population who are new to the military. So
there are a lot of things to work out, legal, legally related,
funding-related. It could actually cost more. It is a difficult
policy question.
Ms. Strickland. All right, and I would say finally, can you
talk about--well, you talked a bit about this, where do you
think it makes more sense to privatize the barracks versus just
having them government run? Because to your point, it is not
necessarily a silver bullet. But I do think that we have to use
every possible tool available to make sure we are doing this.
And the comment I want to make is I think about how parents
would feel if they went to dormitory to drop off their kids at
the university and if some of those pictures existed, hell
would be raised. And so I want to make sure that we are
treating these barracks for the people who are serving the same
way we would treat parents dropping their kids off at college.
Ms. Field. Well, I agree. As a mother of a 17-year-old who
is one year away from college, you are absolutely right. I
think your question was where would privatization make sense?
Two thoughts on that. One, the Department is on the hook to
deliver a report to Congress on overall joint approach to
privatization. That was due in July of this year. The
Department has not delivered it. We could not get any clear
information from the Department on when it will be delivered,
so I think if this committee could push the Department to
complete that report, that would be helpful.
The other note I will make is that I think some
installations have been successful with privatization for some
of the slightly more senior service members, so E-5s, E-6,
maybe E-4, that might make more sense.
Ms. Strickland. All right, thank you very much. And as we
talked earlier, we have a challenge with recruiting. Word of
mouth is very, very strong, so if you want to address some of
these quality of life issues, housing is a basic need and it
cannot be substandard. But I think solving the problem means
coming up with a dollar amount and not being afraid to say it
is a lot of money. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Ms. Strickland. I read that we had--
let me get the number here, that we had $137 billion in
maintenance backlog. Does that jive with the number you have?
Ms. Field. Yes, that is what we have reported. And I should
note that is probably, likely an underestimate.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. With that, I will recognize Mrs.
Kiggans from Virginia. She represents large naval
installations.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I represent Virginia's
Second Congressional District, so Virginia Beach-Hampton Roads
area, a large Navy and veteran population. I can't imagine how
frustrating it was just to visit those barracks. I know on
barracks tours in my district, I have left almost in tears. It
is hard to watch. As a veteran, Navy spouse, Navy mom, I think
of my kids and their friends, and I put my staff in my minivan
the first weekend I could and drove them down to Hampton Roads
and said look around and think about, you know, we talked about
the college campuses, but think about the dorms there. And I
have done lots of dorm tours with my high school kids. And then
think about the conditions that we are asking these guys to
live in. So I know we have mentioned recruitment, retention,
but I mean this is absolutely directly correlated to those
issues. It hurts my heart when I hear other Navy and military
parents say I can't recommend this job to my kids for these
reasons. So we have to do better.
I know that as a nurse practitioner, housing is certainly a
component of healthcare. So when I think of nutrition, I think
of I want troops that have good physical readiness, good mental
health, all of the things we talk about routinely here in
Congress, housing is certainly a component of that, so we have
got to get it right. You said, chronic neglect and
underfunding, I think that was kind of a perfect summary of
what is wrong with this. And you talked about base leadership
and how they--you know, the requests for money weren't there. I
got so angry with our base leadership because they didn't put
in the request. They are busy warfighting. They are busy
training. I get it. But I think it is our job and we talked
oversight a little bit, but to pester them, hey, what do you
need? The deadline is coming up. What do you need? I want to
put money in for you. We got zero dollars for NAS [Naval Air
Station] Oceana this past year. And only 49 percent of our
housing is livable, 49 percent. That means that 51 percent is
not livable. And when I say livable, that is even questionable
when we went and we saw the conditions that looked eerily
similar to some of the pictures you posted. So we have to do
better. I know our defense budget is limited. We just had a
brief discussion on privatization. I have seen some of the good
things we have done at Norfolk.
You talked about scoring. I mean we need to change that
scoring, the way we are doing scoring so that we can allot for
that housing money to be going towards privatization. We can't
do it all on the defense budget. I certainly want to prioritize
warfighting, so we've got to think outside the box here. So you
know--I know you said there were some things that you were--
privatization, some concerns, but do you think that is a
direction we should be pursuing? I personally think it is a
direction we should be pursuing, but you are the expert.
Ms. Field. I have so many thoughts based on what you said.
But GAO has in the past recommended that DOD explore and
examine privatization more closely as a possible option. What
came out of that were service-specific strategies that you
really couldn't use them to inform policy decision making,
which is why we are really looking forward to that DOD report
which is overdue.
Certainly, I think that is an option that should be
explored. I don't, from the GAO perspective, want to make a
policy call, but absolutely, there are benefits to
privatization, as well as there are cons. But, as I said, the
facilities I toured that were privatized were really
impressive.
Can I make one note about Oceana? Because I think it is
important, and about Navy, in particular. And I'm sure you are
aware of this. Condition score is zero to 100 for every
facility or every barracks. The one in Oceana that we looked at
has a score of 12 out of 100. That said, for 3 fiscal years in
a row, the Navy requested zero dollars for new military
construction for barracks.
In one installation, one other Navy installation, the
installation did put forward a request for funding for new
barracks for 10 years in a row and never got it funded. So,
that is, I think, in part, why installation commanders are
throwing up their hands and giving up.
Mrs. Kiggans. Well, I think it is our job in Congress to
educate them. I mean, they change every 2 to 3 years. They are
focused on things that need to be focused on--getting that
mission done. So, it is our job to say, hey, we want to get you
money, help us with how to do that.
And the DOD accountability piece, I mean, I think Assistant
Secretary Berger has been wonderful. She has come down a couple
of times. So, I've really enjoyed working with her.
I don't know if we need to--you talked about the Department
of Defense was kind of a little less clear. So, putting some
just people in place to make sure there is that accountability,
in addition to Members of Congress doing our job as well.
And then the only other comment I would have is that, you
know, I think of other apartment complexes. Who is building
these things initially? I know we have one at NAS, or Naval
Station Norfolk, that $80 million and it is less than 20 years
old, covered in black mold. And it is on the demo list.
That is another thing; we need to increase funding for
demolition. I'm sick of looking at these buildings that we are
not going to be able to restore. But just making sure that we
are building quality products. I think we are not building
quality products, and that is leading to a lot of these issues.
And I'm out of time, or I would go on for about another
hour. Thank you.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mrs. Kiggans. I would like to
piggyback on something you said. Because there is a point you
are making, or we are making, that commanders at these
installations worry about fighting wars and combat readiness,
and all that. And that is so true. But as an installation
commander, you have got folks that they are in charge of the
installation, civil engineering and all these facilities, and
then you also at the headquarters, you have two-stars and
three-star level leadership that is supposed to be overseeing
this.
I would just like to submit again, yes, we have got to win
wars. We have got to make sure we are ready to fight and win.
But it is also a responsibility to make sure these facilities
are serving our men and women who are there.
And so, this goes back to a leadership issue in my view. I
just wanted to add in because somebody took their eyes off the
ball here, bottom line.
So, with that, Ms. Jacobs from California.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Ms. Field, great to see you. I first want to talk about
this funding of barracks. As you mentioned, barracks are
competing against other facilities funding. The fiscal year
2022 NDAA [National Defense Authorization Act] included a
provision that required the military to make investments in the
improvement of unaccompanied military housing using FSRM
[facilities sustainment, restoration, and modernization] funds
in an amount equal to 5 percent of the estimated replacement
cost of the total inventory of unaccompanied housing under the
jurisdiction of that Secretary. Is this 5 percent requirement
being met?
Ms. Field. So, we don't know, in part, because the
Department could not figure out how to do it. That is one of
our recommendations, is that the Department track its funding,
particularly FSRM funding, for barracks. So, we asked that
question. We couldn't get an answer. In all likelihood,
probably not. And I would encourage you to ask that at the
second panel as well.
Ms. Jacobs. Okay. Good to know. And based on your research,
I'm guessing you would say it would be helpful for Congress to
require DOD to disaggregate the funds, so we can track this
funding?
Ms. Field. That certainly would be one way to do it. We
also encourage the Department to do it, even if there isn't a
congressional requirement.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. I know you mentioned you visited the
privatized barracks in San Diego. One of the things I hear from
our--I represent San Diego--one of the things we hear from our
folks there is that part of why they can be so much nicer is
because they are doing the BAH [basic allowance for housing]
replacement to the barracks. It is essentially fenced-off
funding directly for the barracks that isn't actually competing
with other funding.
Ms. Field. Right. Those barracks, I believe the Pacific
Beacon you are talking about was created under a pilot that
gave the Navy authority to do that, that full BAH for that
specific project.
Ms. Jacobs. I also want to touch on aircraft carriers.
Obviously, representing San Diego, we have a lot of those. And
I know the report detailed why living on aircraft carriers can
be difficult. Can you expand on what some of these difficulties
are and how they compare to the living conditions for other
junior enlisted sailors?
Ms. Field. Yeah. In fact, I had the opportunity with my
team in San Diego to tour one of the carriers that was in port
and where some service members were living.
It is, it is a rough life. It is extremely noisy because
they are doing maintenance on the ship when it is in port.
Oftentimes, they will not have running water. Oftentimes, there
might not be heat or air-conditioning. We spoke with service
members who were living on the ship, and they were pretty
unhappy. We also toured a barge which was not much better.
Ms. Jacobs. Good to know regarding the barge because we
pushed hard to try and get the barge to try and alleviate some
of the carrier conditions, but it seems like that was not
actually an improvement?
Ms. Field. When you are on it, you feel like you are back
on the ship, to be honest, but it does have running water and
heat and air-conditioning. So, it is an improvement, but it is
not much better.
Ms. Jacobs. Got it. Well, that is helpful. One of the NDAA
provisions that Chair Bacon and I were able to get in this year
is to give commanding officers the ability to grant BAH to
junior service members when they determine it is in the best
interest of the member and the command. And so I'm hopeful we
will get that all the way through and at least be able to give
some of our commanders a little more flexibility for our junior
enlisted to be able to get into community housing, when needed.
The last question I have is on this oversight question. You
know, GAO found that, although each of the military departments
is conducting inspections prior to resident occupancy, they
have not developed clear or consistent inspection standards,
and the military departments have not provided adequate
inspector training.
I know that these were recommendations from a prior GAO
report. Can you provide an update on whether these
recommendations have been completed?
Ms. Field. To date, I do not believe they have been
completed. We are expecting a letter from the Department in, I
believe, early October that would provide us an update, but,
thus far, no.
Ms. Jacobs. Okay. Thank you. Well, I will look forward to
this panel working to make sure that we are getting DOD to both
do the disaggregated funding and spend money on barracks, but
also do some of these other recommendations and track the
quality of facilities in a more coherent way.
So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Ms. Jacobs.
One of the goals in this committee is to write down
recommendations to the HASC [House Armed Services Committee]
that we can put in the next NDAA. So, we hope to have some
strong recommendations for the committee as a whole to execute
in the next defense authorization bill.
There is another Don in the room. I would like to recognize
Mr. Davis from North Carolina.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Davis. Thanks so much, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Director Field, for being here today. I want
to start by saying I associate with earlier comments that we
must be focused on winning the fight, but as the Chair also
indicated, leaders, if they are focused on winning the fight,
understand you have to take care of your people. That is the
bottom line. So, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And that leads me into just wanting to have a greater
understanding of the comment that I heard earlier, when I
believe I heard there was a lack of knowledge, of understanding
of the conditions that was actually taking place on the
barrack. Could you please shine some light on this?
Ms. Field. So, each facility is given a condition score
between zero and 100, as I noted. What we found when we went
out to installations is that those scores are really
unreliable. So, for example, we went to a facility in the DC
[District of Columbia] area that had a score of 86 out of 100,
which sounds pretty good. That facility had a quarter of its
air-conditioning broken. So, a quarter of residents had no air-
conditioning, and yet it still had an 86.
And this happened again and again when we would go to
installations and the scores just did not make sense. We tried
to figure out what is going on; why is this a problem? And we
identified a few issues.
One, the frequency of assessments was likely not enough.
Right now, the DOD standard is every 5 years. Consistently,
installation commanders told us 5 years is not frequent enough.
In some cases, they weren't even doing them that frequently. So
that is a problem.
Another one is the number of systems that they are
assessing. There are 13 building systems that they are supposed
to be assessing. In some cases, they don't always do that.
Another is the training of the inspectors. They may not
have training. There is no standard right now. Some services,
like the Air Force, do have standard. They hire personnel with
expertise to do the inspections. Some services do not.
Some take a centralized model, where the same team will go
out and inspect various barracks across the services; others
have a decentralized model. So, we have a recommendation to DOD
to reassess everything from requirements for frequency, to
standards, to inspector training.
Mr. Davis. And I would follow up on that by simply saying,
so even if we throw all the money at it, but we still never
keep up; there is no consistency on how we are assessing the
situation, how does that help us?
Ms. Field. That's right. That is why so many of our
recommendations are toward getting greater consistency across
the Department and better information. Because I think there
always will be resource limitations, but if you have better
information, you can make smarter, more targeted decisions.
Mr. Davis. Let me ask another question. We are talking
about readiness. This has come up several times. And without
any doubt in, I think, anyone's mind that's thinking about
this, because this is so unacceptable, there must be an impact,
but clearly, data is all over the place. But was there any data
that exists whatsoever that would really help us understand how
this is impacting us from a readiness perspective?
Ms. Field. Data, no. I wish there were. But, certainly,
that is something that we heard about. I will just give you two
examples.
We heard from residents of barracks that, because they are
so uncomfortable in their barracks rooms, they have a hard time
sleeping. They are tired on the job. They don't feel like they
can perform and focus on the work that they have to do.
We also heard from first sergeants who are responsible for
training these junior enlisted service members, and they say,
they told us, specifically, that sometimes they take it easier
on them in training. They will cut back the length of runs or
the specific drills they are going to put their service members
through because they know they are going home to the barracks
at night. So, clear readiness implications there.
Mr. Davis. The last thing I would like to raise, which
really resonated to me, because it is connected to readiness as
well, is specifically talking about the concerns around
nutrition. Could you address that just a little bit more?
Because this is not just a matter of not having the access to
certain accommodations in a room, but I think there is a
broader readiness part of this. If you could speak towards
this?
Ms. Field. Absolutely. And I should note we have an audit
ongoing right now looking at food and nutrition more broadly,
and that report will be coming out early next year.
In terms of the barracks, it was one of the most common
complaints that we heard. It actually surprised us how often it
came up. And service members do want to be able to cook for
themselves. One first sergeant told us that when he moved out
of the barracks and could finally cook for himself, he lost 20
pounds because he was able to cook for himself.
And access to the dining facilities is part of it. So,
sometimes, if you are working a night shift, you don't have
necessarily access to the DFAC [dining facility] when you need
it, because you are sleeping during the day and it can be hard;
walking distance to the DFAC can also be an issue, operating
hours of a DFAC. So, a lot of issues there, and we look forward
to reporting out on that.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Bacon. I want to take a moment to say thank you for
your testimony today, but also the GAO for what they have done.
I think you have highlighted something that this committee
knows we have got to focus on. And I think the moms and dads
all over this country appreciate this because it will make
things better for their sons and daughters and those who defend
our country.
And some of my key takeaways here is this isn't just a
money problem, which it is and we need to know definitively
what is it going to cost to get this right; but it is also
policy, accountability. So, there is a whole, I guess,
smorgasbord of stuff that we need to work on here, just not
money.
So, thank you so much. We appreciate your time.
Ms. Field. Thank you.
Mr. Bacon. With that, we are going to go into about a 2- or
3-minute recess. We are going to switch to panel two. And we
will come back in about 2 or 3 minutes.
Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Bacon. Okay. I want to welcome our second panel and our
witnesses. Thank you for being here.
We have Ms. Carla Coulson, Deputy Assistant Secretary of
the Army for Installations, Housing, and Partnerships; Mr.
Robert Thompson, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of the
Navy for Energy, Installations, and Environment; and Mr. Robert
Moriarty, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for
Installations, and somebody I served with back at Ramstein.
Each witness will have the opportunity to present his or
her testimony, and each member will have an opportunity to
question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
Your written comments and statements will be made part of
the hearing record.
And with that, Ms. Coulson, you may make your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CARLA COULSON, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY FOR INSTALLATIONS, HOUSING, AND PARTNERSHIPS, DEPARTMENT
OF THE ARMY

Ms. Coulson. Thank you, Chairman Bacon. I think
Congresswoman Escobar isn't here, but thank you also to the
distinguished members of the House Armed Services Committee
Quality of Life Panel. Thank you for inviting us here today to
testify on our, the Army's, unaccompanied and privatized family
housing programs.
As the Army's Deputy Assistant Secretary for Installations,
Housing, and Partnerships, I hope to have the opportunity to
share with you the Army's progress, objectives, goals,
challenges, and focus on these very essential programs.
Quality of life, and in particular the opportunity for all
soldiers and their families to live in safe, adequate, quality
housing, remains at the very top of the Army's senior leader
priorities, as it has been for a number of years now. Army
leadership remains steadfast and purposefully committed to
improving the Army's housing posture, fully recognizing the
linkage between the quality of our housing and our ability to
recruit and retain a ready force.
Our commitment is evidenced by our continued, what we
believe to be, high investments in unaccompanied housing and in
the owned government Army housing inventory, which is mostly
located overseas, as well as our continued focus on improving
oversight of operation of our privatized housing portfolio.
Under the Army's leadership and direction, we have made
great strides in executing privatized housing-related actions
directed by several NDAAs, beginning with the Military Housing
Privatization Reform of 2020. And we have also implemented
dozens of recommendations made by the GAO, the DOD and Army
Inspectors General, the Army Audit Agency, as well as an
independent third-party auditor that we hire annually to review
20 percent of our privatized housing projects.
The Army is proud to fully implement the Tenant Bill of
Rights in September of 2021. This was a foundational step
towards reestablishing trust with our families.
And the Army has also included the provisions of the fiscal
year 2020 NDAA reforms in our ground lease template. This
template is the foundational legal document that governs our
privatized housing projects. All new or modified Army ground
leases will contain statutory language that further helped to
strengthen project-level oversight.
Although we have made great strides in improving the
privatized housing program, we must build on our progress. We
very much appreciate and have carefully considered the GAO's
recent reports and have moved immediately to address the
reports' recommendations. Our focus going forward is to
continue to provide soldiers and their families with safe,
quality, and habitable housing, while also continuing ever
vigilant oversight of the privatized housing program through
enforcing standards, holding providers accountable, and
ensuring long-term project sustainability and financial
viability.
The Army is also fully committed to improving soldier
quality of life by addressing deferred maintenance and
underinvestment in unaccompanied housing that was referred to
in the previous panel. Even before GAO issued its initial
report, and we had seen the draft earlier this year, in the
fall of 2022 the Army took the unprecedented step of inspecting
every room in every barracks building, of which there are over
6,700 buildings, to remedy life, health, and safety issues
identified.
Going forward, we are committing to spending at least--at
least--a billion dollars a year to improve barracks across the
Army. We have also developed an in-depth barracks resourcing
strategy that I think was the number one recommendation from
Ms. Field. And this takes a holistic approach for improving
single soldier living conditions.
Recommendations from the recently released GAO report on
military barracks will assist us in further refining our focus
as we continue to work initiatives to improve housing
conditions for our single junior enlisted population.
We are also very conscious of the need to address the
requirements of our Reserve Components. A primary concern for
both the Army Guard and Reserve is their ability to replace
poor and failing training barracks inventories, where the
average age of this inventory is more than 50 years. Both
components anticipate increasing barracks deficits, space
deficits, as these older facilities become uninhabitable.
We look forward to working productively with this panel,
with the Readiness Subcommittees of the Armed Services
Committees, to improve the quality of life for our treasured
soldiers and their families. And I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Coulson can be found in the
Appendix on page 59.]
Mr. Bacon. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Thompson.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT E. THOMPSON, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF THE NAVY FOR ENERGY, INSTALLATIONS, AND
ENVIRONMENT, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY

Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman Bacon, distinguished
members of the panel. Thanks for inviting me here today to
testify on the Department of the Navy's unaccompanied housing
and privatized family housing.
First, I would like to thank the Government Accountability
Office for its attention and focus in these areas; for its
recommendations on how we can improve the Department of the
Navy's unaccompanied housing portfolio in this report; for
their previous and continued work on military housing
privatization; and for Ms. Field's testimony here today.
I'm proud to have served more than 20 years in the United
States Navy, both enlisted and later as an officer. And I'm
humbled to have the privilege to continue to serve sailors,
Marines, and their families in my current capacity.
I have lived aboard ships, in berthing barges, in barracks,
and in family housing. The quality of service, both the quality
of work environment for our sailors and Marines and the quality
of life that our service members deserve are a personal issue
for me.
While the Department has made meaningful, tangible progress
in improving the quality and livability in our privatized
housing, thanks in part to GAO highlighting those issues years
ago, it is clear today we have significant work ahead in our
unaccompanied housing to provide safe, clean, reliable,
comfortable, and dignified places for our sailors and Marines
to call home. We would expect nothing less for ourselves, and I
expect nothing less from myself.
I would like to thank Congress and each member of this
panel for your resolute support of our service members, and I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson can be found in the
Appendix on page 78.]
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Thompson.
I now recognize Mr. Moriarty.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT E. MORIARTY, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF
THE AIR FORCE FOR INSTALLATIONS, DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE

Mr. Moriarty. Thank you, Chairman Bacon and distinguished
members. Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
Department of the Air Force's Military Housing Privatization
Initiative, or MHPI, program.
I lived in five different government-owned homes during my
28-year military career. All have been torn down and replaced.
I left my family twice during deployments there. And so, I
understand how important housing is for our members, especially
when deployed and your loved ones are back home.
I came back to Federal service to serve our Nation and view
my responsibility to take care of our members and their
families as a sacred trust. Taking care of our airmen,
guardians, and their families is a fundamental responsibility
and commitment of the entire Department of the Air Force. Our
ability to provide safe and habitable housing for our members
is a critical component of their quality of life and greatly
impacts our ability to recruit and retain the people we need to
lead the Department and accelerate the transformation our
Secretary has us on to meet our pacing challenge.
While we have made significant changes and improvements in
our privatized housing, we continually evaluate the oversight
and needs of our airmen, guardians, and their families to
update our policies and take action accordingly.
We empower our tenants and commanders to address housing
challenges at our installations when needed and take action to
hold our privatized housing project owners accountable.
Additionally, we exercise senior-level governance and program
oversight to provide housing for our members--housing they
deserve.
We continue our efforts to improve our privatized housing
portfolio to implement the most recent actions, audit actions,
that the GAO identified. And I, too, would like to thank the
GAO for their continued partnership. I think, in MHPI, the
improvements we made, in large part due to their first report;
the second report, I'm glad to see they recognize some of the
improvements, but that there is still work to do.
I also thank them for their recent report on the
unaccompanied dormitories that we have and our training dorms,
because that, too, is an area, as clearly dictated earlier,
that we need to focus on.
Similarly, we thank the House Armed Services Committee for
the MHPI reforms set forth in the 2020 through 2023 National
Defense Authorization Act. We have made significant progress to
implement reforms and enhance our oversight and hold our MHPI
companies accountable. But as I have outlined in my written
testimony, we still have more to do.
We continue to maintain resident councils to foster
communication between residents, installation, and project
owner leadership, and we use that feedback for action plans to
improve resident experiences. Clearly, we can apply those same
techniques to our dormitories and tech training dorms.
We also need to ensure that our projects remain financially
viable. As was mentioned earlier by the GAO, that continues to
be a concern.
And we also continue to work with communities. Eighty
percent of our members live off the installations, thereabouts.
And so, we need to continue to work with those communities to
provide safe, affordable housing for our members.
In conclusion, I would like to communicate that the
Department of the Air Force is committed to providing safe and
habitable housing for our airmen, guardians, and their
families, and our unaccompanied airmen living in our dorms. Our
leaders are fully engaged, and only through partnership with
our privatized owners, local communities, and installations can
we effectively achieve that end.
I look forward to working with you on our mutual goal to
address quality of life for our members, and look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moriarty can be found in the
Appendix on page 86.]
Mr. Bacon. Thank you very much.
I want to put a little more emphasis on military housing,
but before I do that, I would like you to each maybe address
the unaccompanied housing. The report from the GAO was
appalling. How did we get there? Who is responsible? What
happened?
I will start off with Ms. Coulson.
Ms. Coulson. Thank you for your question, Chairman Bacon. I
have been working this portfolio for a very long period of time
now. And I think it is through many years of not looking
closely at the deferred maintenance, at investments. And so
now, we are, in effect, playing catchup.
And this is not--the report, frankly, was not news to the
Army. We are well aware, and our leadership--from our
Secretary, our Chief of Staff, on down--are focusing very
clearly on quality of life, and barracks is a piece of that. We
have done a lot of work already.
And I know that you have probably heard the testimony
previously. We have, over the last several years, committed
more than a billion dollars a year. We have done a barracks
resourcing strategy. So, we are looking at how do we spend our
dollars in the most effective manner.
When you see our budget that comes over in February, I
believe you will see a multiyear investment strategy that looks
at providing additional sustainment dollars. As Ms. Field
pointed out, we need to sustain the inventory we have.
Just as an example, we have got in the Army, through our
modeling efforts, we can see that we have 300 permanent party
barracks buildings that are in poor and failing shape. Across
our fiscal year defense program, from 2024 to 2028, we can
address 113 of those barracks buildings. But, at the same time,
if we don't fully sustain, we will have 110 barracks, existing
barracks buildings, that will move from good or adequate into
the poor and failing category. So, we don't make much progress
unless we can ensure that we are doing preventative maintenance
and fully sustaining our inventory.
Mr. Bacon. I will just point out, though, again, we have
taken the services' budgets, we have added to it. So, there is
a disconnect here between each service's budget request, and we
are adding to it, and yet, it has not been enough. So, it
doesn't add up, would be my point.
But, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Yeah. Thank you, Chairman. I will go back to
Ms. Field's testimony. I can't speak to leadership decisions in
the past. I have been blessed to be in this position for 9
months now in an acting, and now full-time capacity. So, I will
go back to Ms. Field's comments.
I think there needs to be a realization that we are
approaching kind of facility criticality maybe from the wrong
angle in the Department. We have typically looked at mission-
critical facilities, and in resource-constrained environments,
the bias is to put resources towards the most critical
installation facilities.
The reality is, the introduction of a single sailor,
service member into a facility makes it, by definition,
mission-critical. The fact that these are their homes makes it
mission-critical.
So, in a resource-constrained environment, I think our
overall approach to how to apply resources--those that we apply
ourselves, those that the Congress, thankfully, has helped us
with--there needs to be a clean-eyed look at that.
The second part is standards that Ms. Field hit on, yeah,
there are 13 technical standards. Sometimes we use all 13;
sometimes we use 10, 9, et cetera. This is a conversation we
just started with OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense]
since the GAO report came out. You know, there needs to be a
standard for livability, right? There needs to be a plain-eyed,
clear-eyed view of what the standard is for this place to be
dignified, safe, and comfortable.
So, I do think we have taken our expertise in facilities
and just moved it right on over into, essentially, barracks,
and then we expect that to serve us well there. And again, even
if we trained everyone, even if we had consistency in
application, I think we are still missing something there in
terms of the fundamental, technical----
Mr. Bacon. I have got about a minute left. I just want to
let Mr. Moriarty also speak.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bacon. And I will yield.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Moriarty. Chairman Bacon, I'll go quickly. I think the
Air Force, we did lose the bubble. We used to have a dorm focus
fund when you and I served in USAFE [U.S. Air Forces in Europe-
Air Forces Africa]. We went away from that. And when we
centralized a lot of our installation management, when we put
all the money together, we went to a worst-first, or, then went
to a condition-based thing and prioritized everything together,
looking at the best.
We have gone back now, back to the past, and we now have a
focus fund, if you will, where we set aside the amount of funds
we think we need to keep the dorms good and accelerate that.
So, they do compete within there from the top line, but then
they compete amongst themselves. So we can target our
investments at our worst dorms first and where it is needed in
the portfolio.
So, I will keep it at that, Mr. Chair, and----
Mr. Bacon. Yes, well, I just want to--when I was the
commander at these two installations, I had four-stars walking
around our dorms. If I would have had it that way, I would have
got fired. I just don't understand what happened over 10 years,
12 years, where this fell off the radar. And we have got to put
it back on the radar, and it is mission-critical and essential.
But, with that, recognizing Ms. Jacobs, who is serving as
the ranking member.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all for being
here.
First, I wanted to actually follow up on a question I had
asked Ms. Field. Why was GAO unable to find out if the services
were meeting the 5 percent requirement of using FSRM for
barracks?
Mr. Thompson. I will go. Yes, I took a note to myself. We
definitively within the Department of the Navy know that we are
meeting the 5 percent minimum investment floor of the plant
replacement value for the facilities. I think, Navy and Marine
Corps combined, that is a little over $360 million, admittedly,
modestly above the 5 percent floor. So, that information is
available strictly from a restoration, modernization, and
sustainment perspective. And so, how that wasn't made available
through the Department and to Ms. Field, I take that for
action.
Ms. Coulson. And I agree, we also have done our homework
and our calculations. And I think there was between the
military departments a little bit of a difference of opinion on
how we define plant replacement value. I don't know that we
ever came to any conclusion. But the Army feels, also, that we
have met that requirement and have provided that information to
OSD.
Thank you, Ms. Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Okay. Thank you. And, you know, one of the
things we hear is that part of the problem is that this funding
is competing against other FSRM funding. Would it be helpful if
Congress mandated this funding be fenced off only for barracks?
Or, I guess, why has the Department been unable to actually
just do that themselves?
Mr. Moriarty. Yes, I would start with, for the Department
of the Air Force, personally and professionally, I like the
flexibility within the O&M [operations and maintenance] account
to be able to lean into barracks when we want to. I don't think
it would help us to put it in, like, say, the housing account,
where that is also restricted and it is competing against
housing.
I think leaving it where it is allows us the flexibility
within the departments to do that. There may be difference of
opinion in the Department, but I think for max flexibility for
us, we like that.
And I would just like to say that we do know what our 5
percent floor is. We are meeting that within the Air Force.
Ms. Jacobs. Okay. Well, we all like flexibility, but I
think we are, clearly, seeing that the barracks are not being
invested in. So, maybe flexibility is not the only priority
here.
Ms. Coulson. Thank you for that question. I do have a
couple of comments.
As I allude to, we are looking at how we might fund
sustainment in the future. Should we go to a higher percentage,
we will definitely issue guidance to the field that tells them
how to spend those dollars.
I also would like to say that, within our program, you
might not see a lot of projects that are military construction
projects for barracks. We primarily use MILCON [military
construction] for deficit, for additional spaces that we need
for things like stationing actions.
But I will say that about 75 percent of our restoration and
modernization program is already dedicated to barracks. As a
matter of fact, if you talk with the Army G-3 [Plans and
Operations office], their concern would be more along the lines
of having dollars available to take care of readiness
facilities.
So, it is very much a balance and how we work within, in my
case the Army, to ensure that we are able to balance quality-
of-life requirements with those with modernization, as well as
readiness. But we already have a significant contribution to
quality of life for barracks.
Mr. Thompson. Yeah, Congresswoman, I will go quickly.
To your point, flexibility to do what, right? Flexibility
to run barracks that result in what the GAO found.
So, I think the threshold or a floor that the Congress has
put in place is helpful. My personal experience has been that
absolute fencing can be problematic, not from a decision space
perspective, but I think folks kind of back off of fenced
accounts and don't challenge themselves or assumptions with
what is in those appropriations.
And lastly, to the point about privatized barracks, you
know, that essentially commits us to a ``should fund'' for what
``right'' looks like, and by definition, becomes a ``must
fund'' in the MILPERS [military personnel] accounts, which
produces the outcomes that Ms. Field saw in the privatized
barracks.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And really quickly with my last 40
seconds, Mr. Thompson, I know the Navy has a process in which
you issue letters of concern to housing partners. How many of
these letters have been issued and have any of them resulted in
cure notices or defaults?
And, Mr. Chair, I would like to enter into the record two
articles about some of the issues we are having in San Diego
following more than 50 lawsuits taken out by military families.
Mr. Bacon. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to is retained in the committee
files and can be viewed upon request.]
Mr. Thompson. Yeah, Congressman, I will answer quickly.
To my knowledge, there has been one such letter of caution
issued to date, and I am not aware of a removal action based on
it.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Ms. Jacobs.
I will recognize Mrs. Kiggans.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just wanted to ask a
couple more questions about the privatized family housing. And
just reading the GAO report, so we have 99 percent of our
family housing is now privatized. So, we are almost all the way
there. So, it has come a long way.
And what were the biggest challenges of implementation when
we made that decision of we are going to go privatized? I think
it has been a work in progress, and I have only been here a
limited time really paying attention. But what did that look
like, that transfer, that transformation?
Ms. Coulson. Well, I will jump in, Congresswoman, and go
first.
This was a long time ago for the Army. Our projects are now
approaching 20, 25, even 30 years, in length. And our oldest
project is Fort Carson.
But the transition goes along the lines of moving an owned
inventory to a privatized housing provider, putting in place a
ground lease. Some of those original ground leases that we have
still exist. So, we are just now in the process of looking at
changing the ground leases to include the statutory guidance
that was provided back in 2020, to include things like
enforcement provisions, as well as things like the Davis-Bacon
Act provisions.
So, we are looking now at strengthening these ground
leases. We have learned a lot in the last 25 years. We have
learned, for example, that perhaps we didn't get it right in
the beginning with respect to the amount of equity that we put
into these projects.
And our projects are structured all a little bit
differently. Ours are more similar than the Air Force. But we
did in the very beginning attempt to provide an inventory to
that provider that was a healthy inventory. However, we have
19,000 legacy homes that are older, older housing stock that
are still out there that we need to take a look at how we
renovate, how we recapitalize.
I will turn this over to you.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, yes, I will go, I will go quickly.
I think, consistent with what Ms. Coulson said, I think the
first period was marked with the actual effort of taking the
government-owned inventory, getting the land leases done;
essentially, a significant recapitalization effort of those
houses.
I will go back to the GAO reports. I think what we found
was, once that effort was done and they were now in the hands
of the private companies, there was almost a sentiment that
they had been outsourced at that point, and hence, maybe the
lack of oversight that was required. And again, GAO highlighted
that several years ago, and I think we will talk today about
much of the progress we have made since then.
I do just want to offer, as we talk about privatized
housing, and then the possibility of privatized barracks, that
we have learned lessons about not disconnecting and maintaining
our oversight and accountability. I think we apply those today
in the unaccompanied barracks, and I think the scale is a
completely different issue as well--several tens of thousands
of homes versus currently four buildings, and, ideally, a lot
more.
Mrs. Kiggans. Yes. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Moriarty. Congresswoman, I would say that our later
projects, we applied the lessons that we learned on our earlier
ones. We did it over a decade span or so. And the problems that
we are having now financially with our projects are the earlier
projects, where they were just poorer deals for a bunch of
reasons.
I think a lot of the lessons we learned could be applied to
any future privatization. I would agree with him that, when you
privatize, I think commanders took the eye off the ball. We
have worked to strengthen our commander involvement. And to
Chairman Bacon's point, we have a four-star, twice-a-year
gathering where we look at or we have a housing council at the
four-star level with them looking at it. We have a two-star
level.
We also empower our installation commanders through
training. We give them what we call an HP101 [Housing Plan 101]
and we hold them accountable. I think, for the most part,
commanders felt like it wasn't commanders' business anymore,
and that was made clear in the 2018-2019 business.
So, what did we learn? We learned that, you know, by
financially financing these things, doesn't mean you can walk
away from the deals. You still have a part.
Mrs. Kiggans. And also, reading the GAO report, there are
14 private housing companies, then, that provide this
privatized family housing. Does that work okay? Is it
disjointed at all? Is there enough standardization? Is that a
good model, where we have lots of different companies doing
different things?
Because I just want to take our lessons learned from this
decade that we have learned good things and apply it to
unaccompanied housing and how we can, you know, if we do go
that route, implement it correctly.
Ms. Coulson. I think there is more standardization now than
there was previously. There is an organization, the Military
Housing Association, that tries to pull these providers
together and get them to see things the same way.
We are working right now on a quality assurance/quality
control plan--they are, with us--to use across our six. The
Army has got six providers. So, we are looking.
It is important to standardize and we are looking to do
that in a better way. And I think the legislation from 2020 on
has helped.
Mrs. Kiggans. Okay. My time has expired.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mrs. Kiggans.
I will recognize Ms. Strickland from Washington State.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you. And Ms. Jacobs pointed out to me
that our two Dons are Don Davis and Don Bacon, ``Davis-Bacon.''
[Laughter.]
Ms. Strickland. So, thank you to our witnesses for being
here today. And I especially want to thank Ms. Coulson. You
have been so accessible with my office and my staff for the
issues on JBLM [Joint Base Lewis-McChord]. So I want to commend
you for your leadership and just always having an open door and
being there for us.
So, I want to talk a bit about being creative in how we
address the housing supply. So, regarding to solutions to
addressing the housing backlog at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, I
think that creativity is important here.
And one idea that I'm starting to hear about is the
enhanced use lease [EUL]. So, if you could, number one, explain
in layman's terms what that means? And then really answer the
question, if the garrison identified some land for an enhanced
use lease for housing development, is it required for the
military housing provider to develop the project or can another
private developer use that lease?
Ms. Coulson. Thank you for that question, Congresswoman
Strickland. And I enjoy working with your staff as well very
much.
I would like to talk about EULs. We have never used an
enhanced use lease for housing.
Ms. Strickland. Okay.
Ms. Coulson. But it is a real estate--the statute is 10 USC
2667--it is a real estate statute. We have--if we have got
property that is not excess to a military department, to the
Army, but we don't have necessarily immediate use for it, we
can use that property for other purposes.
So, we have to take a look at that property. We have to
understand the environmental condition of the property. We
would have to do--we would have to comply with NEPA [National
Environmental Policy Act], and then we would look at what we
might be able to use that for.
It is not necessary that we would use the privatized
housing provider that serves JBLM at this moment. We would
compete. We would be able to compete for the use of that
property. And then, we would receive in-kind consideration for
the use, as part of an enhanced use lease. So that is the way
it works.
We do have several. The Air Force has many and may be able
to help inform this discussion.
But if you have got any other questions, I would be happy
to sit down with your staff and run through this with them.
Ms. Strickland. All right. Well, Mr. Moriarty, can you talk
a bit about what the Air Force is doing and how that has worked
out?
Mr. Moriarty. Yes, ma'am. So, typically, you are right.
Typically, our clauses say we don't compete with them. But in a
market like that, it would work. We have enhanced use leases
like down at Eglin [Air Force Base], where we have mixed use.
So, we might have apartments on top development.
We are working one right now in F.E. Warren [Air Force
Base], it will be another mixed use. It is in the process of
negotiations, but that would produce housing.
The win there is, while we are not involved in who gets
assigned there and how it works, it would be a market-driven
rent, right? But it helps in those communities, too, where,
especially at F.E. Warren, where they lack available,
affordable housing, it is a win/win for the community and it.
And so, I would be glad to share more information, as you
would like, ma'am. But that is a possibility to increase
housing availability where there is a developer that can do it.
Most of the time, what we found at Altus Air Force Base, is
where the State and the city put money aside for developers,
they have been able to create affordable housing that our
airmen would want to live in, but they had to put money into it
to make that development happen.
That wasn't on our land, but it is similar to what you are
talking about. In most of these deals, we can offer land. We
have to get fair market value.
Ms. Strickland. Yes.
Mr. Moriarty. And we have to compete it. But that is not a
very high bar, quite frankly. A lot of our land where we are,
unlike the Navy, is not what I would call expensive land in
those areas comparatively. Over.
Ms. Strickland. No, great, and I love--as a former mayor, I
love the idea of a mixed use because you are often building
housing and the new building amenities with it as well. So, it
improves the quality of life. So, our office is definitely
interested in learning more about that.
And thank you for your testimony.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Ms. Strickland.
I recognize now Mr. Alford from Missouri.
Mr. Alford. Thank you, General Bacon. I just want to say,
first off, how much I am honored to be on this panel. I just
think this is long overdue. And I'm not a veteran, but I have
been to Fort Leonard Wood. I have seen the barracks there. I
have seen the issues. Ms. Coulson and I talked about this
yesterday on the phone. We have got to get this right.
I don't know about you, General Bacon, but I have
constituents calling me now. It is like we are heading towards
a shutdown. Our military is not going to get paid, but we are
still going to fund and pay the Ukrainian military.
And this report comes out of the GAO this week with these
horrible pictures of living conditions that our service men and
women are living in. It is just not right. And I am so glad
that we are concentrating on bringing up this quality of life,
so we can instill pride once again in our military and boost
our recruitment numbers. So, thank you all for being here
today.
I want to wrap my head around something, because I noticed
the 2021 NDAA housing reform provisions, section 2818, requires
the Department to expand the Uniform Code of Basic Standards
for privatized military housing. I am proud to say that we
worked with Senator Hawley's office in getting $50 million for
Fort Leonard Wood for privatized housing.
There are some very big needs there. And as you know, that
base trains 80,000 personnel a year. So, it is very important
for these families to have some sense of pride in where they
live. We are not building the Taj Mahal, but we are building a
nice place where families can have each other over and invest
in community with one another.
Is there not a standard for barracks right now, Ms.
Coulson?
Ms. Coulson. We do have standards. All of us have
standards. Our standards may be different, however.
Mr. Alford. Why? Why are there different standards?
Ms. Coulson. Well, I think, left to our own devices,
Congressman Alford, we will do what we feel is best for our
military department.
And I will give you an example. We have just established a
new construction standard that is great. It is four bedrooms,
two bathrooms, a full kitchen, a full living room.
I don't know what the construction standards are for the
Air Force and the Navy, my counterparts. But this is a decision
that Army leadership made, and we would like to be able to
provide that level of standard to our soldiers, our single
soldiers.
So, we all have standards. And we can sit down and talk
about what our standards are. I think that there is--the HASC-R
[House Armed Services Committee Readiness Subcommittee] is
undertaking a look during this NDAA that is being discussed
right now at asking us to standardize across the military
departments. I am an advocate for that.
Mr. Alford. I would like to see that as well.
You say we need or you need a billion dollars a year to get
this right. How many total buildings are we talking about? You
said 6,700. Is that the total number of barracks there are in
the DOD?
Ms. Coulson. So, for the Army--and I can only speak for the
Army--it is a matter of scale. I think the memo that you
received last night said there were 9,000 barracks buildings.
The Army has 6,700 of them.
Mr. Alford. Okay.
Ms. Coulson. And 3,900 are training and the rest are
permanent----
Mr. Alford. So, of those 6,700, what percentage is not up
to a standard that you would want to live in?
Ms. Coulson. We consider 23 percent of that number to be in
poor and failing condition.
Mr. Alford. And currently, there are service members living
in 23 percent of the 6,700 barracks that are below standard or
failing?
Ms. Coulson. I don't know--I don't know that they are
livable or habitable, and many are collective training. The
ones that--well, Representative Escobar is not here, but those
that she talked about, for example, at Fort Bliss that are used
by the Army Guard, the Army Reserve, during annual training.
So, for permanent party--permanent party, if I can just
talk about that, the number is smaller. It is 18 percent of our
permanent party barracks are in poor and failing----
Mr. Alford. So, at a billion dollars a year, if we came up
with this money, how long would it take, considering the
deferred maintenance on these other buildings we are going to
dip down into the substandard category, how long will it take
to right the ship?
Ms. Coulson. Well, we already spend over a billion dollars
a year on our barracks. When we looked at--and this is data
from modeling--when we looked at what it would cost to
recapitalize our permanent party inventory that I just
described, the bill for that inventory alone is $6.5 billion,
in addition to what we are already----
Mr. Alford. I am almost out of time.
At the rate, though, of a billion a year, how long would it
take to right the ship, to get it right, no substandard
housing?
Ms. Coulson. So, we look across the POM [Project Objective
Memorandum] 2025-2029, it would take about an additional $6.5
billion--and that is just from a modeled number--to be able to
restore and modernize our inventory to 100 percent.
Mr. Alford. I have gone over. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Alford. We only have the room for
about 5 more minutes. So, I will try to wrap up.
But I just saw the headline just came out from Stars and
Stripes: ``Sewage, Rats, and Crime: Our Service Members Deserve
Better.'' Not good. And I hope our service chiefs are taking
this personally. They need to. To me, it is a leadership
problem and a funding problem. I get that. We are part of the
solution here. But it is unacceptable to have that kind of
headline. That is what our people are reading today all over
the country.
I have got a request, but not to be answered today. I would
love to sit down with whoever the experts are to understand how
do we determine housing allowance. I have had more feedback
from people that it is a mystery. You know, it sounds like some
people with ``super calculators'' behind a closed door. But it
seems like it works in some of our areas, but other areas it
appears to be woefully underestimated, like in Washington, DC,
area, as an example. I have heard the same in Hawaii and San
Diego.
So, I would love to just understand it better to see if we
can put a better oversight on that or not. I just don't know if
there is an issue there.
And maybe one last question from me. How would each of you
describe, if you do it briefly, characterize the financial
health of your housing, military housing projects? How many of
them you have had to refinance by bringing in additional
funding? If you just give us a little sense how each service is
doing there, I would be grateful.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, Chairman. For the Department of the
Navy, I think our overall financial health across the partners
is healthy. We do have a few challenge projects, particularly
our Marine Corps projects down in the Carolinas, largely as a
result of Hurricane Florence and some of the effect on the
inventory there and occupancy. But the bottom line is we have
had none that have gone to refinancing or restructuring.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you.
Ms. Coulson. Just very quickly, I think we are happy with
the short-term financial viability of our projects. It is the
long term. It is, what do we do over the next 25 years to
address the needed recapitalization of our privatized inventory
that we struggle with?
Mr. Bacon. We welcome your feedback in how we can assist
there. That is another area that we have got to look at.
Mr. Moriarty.
Mr. Moriarty. Sir, every year we do a financial check of
our projects. Based on this year's, with the BAH rates and
costs and all, 12 of our 31 projects are going to require some
kind of restructure.
We have put money in, starting in 2022, in our budgets to
get after those, so that we can have good debt coverage, 100
percent sustainment, and at least 70 percent reinvestment.
There are some things that cap us we would love to talk to you
more about.
Scoring was mentioned earlier. There is also other
restrictions in law that allow us to put even more money to fix
those projects.
The last thing I would leave you with, Mr. Chairman, and
for our distinguished Congressmen and women, is, you know, for
the Air Force, none of our members should be living in a room
that is substandard. We have a smaller problem. We only have
about 700, 800 between our [inaudible] and our--our numbers are
smaller, but none of our airmen or guardians should be living
in a room. Every commander has the ability and responsibility
to move that airman out of that room, or guardian, if it is a
problem.
We have dorms that need work and need money, but there
never is an excuse from the Air Force side. Our leadership from
the Secretary to our two Chiefs would not, they would not allow
that. So, our installation leadership should know that. I just
want to leave that with you, that that has not changed in our
Air Force.
Mr. Bacon. Well, we appreciate you being here today and
taking our questions and giving us feedback.
When we started this, my assumption was that we were going
to hear primarily about the 15 percent or so of our military
that could qualify for SNAP [Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program], food insecure. So, when we were going to bases, I
expected that to be where I would hear the most concerns.
And actually, it was about housing. I have heard more from
our military members and spouses or, you know, the family
members--it has been more about the housing, the quality of
housing, the housing allowance if they are living off-base.
And so, I have surely have become educated and informed by
the feedback of those on the ground and what they are going
through. And it appears to me that Congress has an important
role here. With the military housing, it was our injects that
helped do a course correction here. I think we are going to
have to do the same thing when it comes to our barracks.
So, we are going to put a lot of focus on this. We are
going to put a spotlight on it. But the services have also got
to tell us what they need. To underbudget and us put more in
than requested, and still have a deficit, there is something
not right there. It does not add up.
So there is an urgent need for DOD to implement oversight
of our housing--right now, primarily our unaccompanied
housing--and continue steadfastly in their mission to ensure
military families in privatized housing are taken care of.
So, with that, thank you for your time and thanks to our
fellow members here.
With that, we will close the hearing. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:33 a.m., the panel was adjourned.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

September 27, 2023

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

September 27, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

September 27, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON

Mr. Bacon. As of October 1, 2023, how many unaccompanied housing
facilities in your respective military department fail to meet service
standards for health, safety, privacy, configuration and/or general
suitability? How many personnel currently reside in these substandard
facilities? What is the estimated cost to remediate these substandard
facilities to bring them up to service standards? Of this total
estimated cost, how much did your service request in the FY24 budget
request to bring these facilities up to service standards?
Ms. Coulson. The Army has approximately 19% of the Army's permanent
party barracks buildings (390 barracks) in poor (Q3) and failing (Q4)
condition and a 15% shortfall (deficit) exists in available barracks
bed spaces. The Army currently has an estimated modeled maintenance
backlog of $6.5B above the FYDP24-28 requirement for all Permanent
Party barracks. The backlog of required work for Permanent Party
barracks has increased resulting in a corresponding decrease in
Facility Condition Indices. In PB24, the Army requested $1.3B for
Permanent Party Barracks Restoration, Modernization and Sustainment. A
lack of reliable assignments' data does give us the ability to comment
on how many soldiers are residing in the 19% of barracks buildings that
are in poor or failing condition. A data call will need to be conducted
to provide that information with any accuracy.
Mr. Bacon. As of October 1, 2023, how many NEW unaccompanied
housing facilities do you assess are needed by your respective military
department to meet service mission requirements? How many personnel
would be served (housed) by these NEW unaccompanied housing facilities?
What is the total estimated cost to construct these NEW unaccompanied
housing facilities? Of these NEW unaccompanied housing facilities
required, how many projects, and for what amount, did your service
request funding in the FY24 budget request?
Ms. Coulson. The Army is short about 25,000 permanent party
barracks spaces. An additional $4.3B is required (modeled number) to
build out the deficit to meet 95% of the barracks space requirement.
The Army MILCON requested in FY24 $287.5M for 5 barracks projects to
address deficit. These projects provide an additional 746 modern
permanent party barracks rooms.
Mr. Bacon. As of October 1, 2023, how many unaccompanied housing
facilities in your respective military department fail to meet service
standards for health, safety, privacy, configuration and/or general
suitability? How many personnel currently reside in these substandard
facilities? What is the estimated cost to remediate these substandard
facilities to bring them up to service standards? Of this total
estimated cost, how much did your service request in the FY24 budget
request to bring these facilities up to service standards?
Mr. Thompson. NAVY: The number of personnel housed below DOD and
Navy assignment standards for configuration/suitability fluctuates due
to ship movement, unit deployments, and permanent change of station.
There are roughly 5,000 Service Members living in approximately 500 UH
facilities that do not meet DOD and Navy assignment standards. The
estimated cost to improve and expand the current UH inventory to meet
all existing standards exceed $5B if the Navy solves the issue using
standard new construction or renovation. The FY24 Facilities
Sustainment Restoration and Modernization (FSRM) budget for UH is about
$165M, with no MILCON funding.
USMC: The Marine Corps currently operates 658 barracks buildings
worldwide, with an average of 87,600 occupied bed spaces. Overall, 112
(17%) are assessed as being in poor/failing condition, but these are
not all due to life, health, and safety (LHS) issues. As of 17 October
2023, Marine Corps conducted 2,089-bedroom inspections, of which 88
bedrooms (4%) failed due to LHS issues.
To bring facilities up to service standards across the enterprise,
the Marine Corps' Barracks Recapitalization plan includes investing
$200M/year in restoration. In FY24, $221M is planned for restoration
and modernization projects.
Mr. Bacon. As of October 1, 2023, how many NEW unaccompanied
housing facilities do you assess are needed by your respective military
department to meet service mission requirements? How many personnel
would be served (housed) by these NEW unaccompanied housing facilities?
What is the total estimated cost to construct these NEW unaccompanied
housing facilities? Of these NEW unaccompanied housing facilities
required, how many projects, and for what amount, did your service
request funding in the FY24 budget request?
Mr. Thompson. The Navy estimates the need for 14 new facilities,
with an estimated $5B MILCON requirement, to house approximately 13,500
enlisted Service Members Due to higher mission priorities, the FY24
President's Budget request did not include additional MILCON funding
for Unaccompanied Housing (UH).
The Marine Corps included one project in the FY24 President's
Budget request for replacement barracks at Marine Barracks Washington
($132M), which will house 258 personnel. Since FY18, the Marine Corps
has committed $1.452B to barracks MILCON worldwide. The Marine Corps is
assessing its overall inventory to identify the right number of
barracks needed, which will inform requirements for new construction,
renovation, return-of-excess, and demolition plans.
Mr. Bacon. As of October 1, 2023, how many unaccompanied housing
facilities in your respective military department fail to meet service
standards for health, safety, privacy, configuration and/or general
suitability? How many personnel currently reside in these substandard
facilities? What is the estimated cost to remediate these substandard
facilities to bring them up to service standards? Of this total
estimated cost, how much did your service request in the FY24 budget
request to bring these facilities up to service standards?
Mr. Moriarty. The DAF does not allow health, and safety waivers for
airmen or guardians to reside in dorms. The DAF has one privacy waiver
allowing two persons per room due to a renovation project scheduled
through FY27 at McConnell AFB. Based on the current DOD Performance
goal of 90% of permanent party bed spaces being in adequate condition
(Facility Condition Index score of 80 or greater)--99% of the DAF
permanent party dormitories assess as adequate. Additionally, 99% of
technical training dormitories assess as adequate. No Airmen or
Guardian should be living in dormitories that are substandard.
The DAF develops and utilizes an Air Force Dormitory Master Plan
that provides a holistic look at how well a dorm functions and shows us
where additional investment is required to keep dorms good by
addressing systems and components that degrade over time. This plan
evaluates bed space requirements as compared with current assets,
assesses the condition of the facilities, and identifies project
requirements for sustainment or new construction. This plan is
accomplished every 4 years and investment needs are refreshed annually
and informs the basis of our investment. DAF continues to program
projects to sustain, replace and build new facilities for unaccompanied
members to ensure unaccompanied housing is well maintained and free of
health and safety concerns.
Facilities Sustainment, Restoration and Modernization (FSRM)
funding is a lump sum appropriation used to fund various missions and
operations for the DAF. The DAF is committed to complying with the FY22
NDAA, Sec. 2814 requirements for the FY22-26 FYDP. This equates to an
investment of approximately $1.1B on permanent party dorms. The DAF
plans to invest $230M for 33 projects in FY24.
Mr. Bacon. As of October 1, 2023, how many NEW unaccompanied
housing facilities do you assess are needed by your respective military
department to meet service mission requirements? How many personnel
would be served (housed) by these NEW unaccompanied housing facilities?
What is the total estimated cost to construct these NEW unaccompanied
housing facilities? Of these NEW unaccompanied housing facilities
required, how many projects, and for what amount, did your service
request funding in the FY24 budget request?
Mr. Moriarty. Based on the current plan's military construction
schedule for FY25-FY31, there is an approximate facility deficit of 23
facilities to support permanent party requirements for approximately
3,500 members. DAF estimates the cost for 23 facilities to be
approximately $1.4B.
In FY24, there is one MILCON dorm project at Royal Air Force
Lakenheath for permanent party personnel. This project will construct a
144-bed enlisted dormitory for the influx of airmen due to arrive with
a potential new mission and bed down of two F-35 squadrons. The working
estimate is $50 million.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Ms. Houlahan. I understand that DOD policies allow for
installations to obtain waivers to DOD health and safety standards for
barracks, as well as privacy/configuration standards. What did you
learn during the course of your review about how many waivers are in
place?
Ms. Field. GAO was not able to determine precisely how many waivers
are currently in place, in part because DOD guidance allowing the
services to waive minimum standards for barracks does not stipulate any
requirements for documenting and tracking waivers. Specifically, DOD
guidance does not require the services to document the reasons for
granting waivers or to track how many waivers are in place. In
addition, it does not specify time limits for waivers approved by
military department secretaries. We determined that, as a result of
limited guidance, the services vary in, and have limited documentation
of, their use of waivers.
For example, both the Army and the Marine Corps consider their own
service-level standards, which are below DOD standards, to effectively
waive their barracks from meeting DOD standards. Therefore, neither
service issues waivers to exempt individual barracks from DOD
standards. However, the Marine Corps does issue waivers when individual
barracks do not meet its own standards, such as when three service
members have to share a bedroom. The Navy issued a blanket waiver to
DOD standards, which has remained in place since 2002, as a temporary
solution to ensure service members assigned to ships could live in
barracks while in port. Despite this blanket waiver, the Navy also
issues waivers for individual barracks that do not meet minimum privacy
standards, but not when barracks fail to meet configuration standards.
Finally, Air Force officials told us all Air Force barracks at least
meet DOD standards. We observed permanent party barracks at one
installation that provided kitchenettes when they were supposed to, but
these kitchenettes included minimal equipment for preparing and storing
food. For example, they did not include stovetops for cooking, a common
complaint from barracks residents. In March 2023, Air Force officials
informed us that two installations had recently requested temporary
waivers to privacy standards, indicating that the service may issue
waivers in at least some instances when individual barracks do not meet
DOD standards.
While it has been difficult to determine the specific number of
waivers in place given limited documentation of waivers by the
services, we did obtain information from Navy and Marine Corps
officials indicating that about 5,000 sailors and 17,000 Marines lived
in barracks that do not meet DOD minimum adequacy standards as of March
2023. However, as we noted in our September 2023 report, these figures
are likely underestimated because these services only issue waivers in
certain circumstances. Across the services, additional service members
may be living in substandard barracks for which no waivers are
currently in place.
By not setting clear requirements related to waivers, the Office of
the Secretary of Defense (OSD) does not have full visibility into the
extent to which service members are living in substandard barracks.
This is why we recommended that the department set clearer waiver
requirements, including specifying requirements for tracking and
documenting waivers and time limits for waivers.\1\ Implementing this
recommendation, such as by establishing requirements to document the
reason an installation needs a waiver, the number of barracks and
service members, as well as the estimated cost for bringing barracks up
to standards, could help both OSD and the services make risk-based
decisions on where to prioritize resources. In addition, setting clear
requirements regarding time limits for waivers would prevent the
military services from establishing waivers in perpetuity, as has
occurred, and encourage progress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Military Barracks: Poor Living Conditions Undermine
Quality of Life and Readiness, GAO-23-105797 (Washington, D.C.: Sept.
19, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Houlahan. For years the military departments have chosen to
take risk by underfunding facilities sustainment accounts and barracks
have been hit particularly hard by this risk-taking. Given that this
problem is years in the making, what are views on the best ways to make
meaningful progress quickly to ensure that our service members are
living in acceptable conditions in barracks?
Ms. Field. It will take years of sustained oversight and attention
to reverse the neglected maintenance and chronic underfunding that have
led to poor conditions in barracks. In January 2022, we reported that
DOD had a backlog of at least $137 billion in deferred maintenance
costs as of fiscal year 2020, and that lower-priority facilities--such
as barracks--are chronically neglected and experience increased
deterioration.\2\ We recommended that DOD improve its implementation of
the Sustainment Management System to better deal with the sustainment
backlog.\3\ Improving barracks conditions specifically and addressing
the quality-of-life and morale issues associated with poor conditions
will require DOD to take actions in multiple areas. We believe that
fully implementing all 31 recommendations in our September 2023 report
will position the department to better address these challenges.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Defense Infrastructure: DOD Should Better Manage Risks
Posed by Deferred Facility Maintenance, GAO22-104481 (Washington, D.C.:
Jan. 31, 2022).
\3\ GAO-22-104481.
\4\ GAO-23-105797.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For example, we recommended that the department should clarify
guidance related to minimum standards for barracks and how the services
should conduct condition assessments of barracks facilities. It should
also update guidance to require that OSD and the military services use
regular surveys to collect information from service members on the
effects of barracks conditions on their quality of life and readiness.
In addition, the department and services should develop processes to
track and report complete and reliable information on the funding they
need and have used to improve barracks conditions. The services should
also reevaluate policies related to barracks programs, such as policies
that provide exemptions to typical requirements to live in barracks and
those that define the personnel structures for barracks manager
positions. Finally, OSD needs to increase oversight and facilitate
collaboration across the services to improve barracks conditions.
Fully implementing all of our recommendations will enable the
department to: 1) better identify substandard barracks and the effects
they have on service members' quality of life and readiness; 2) make
more informed and targeted budget and funding decisions to improve
conditions; 3) improve readiness and morale by improving quality of
life for those required to live in barracks; and 4) better identify and
address long-standing challenges in barracks conditions across the
services. DOD concurred with most of our recommendations, but they only
partially concurred with 8 of our recommendations. As mentioned, these
problems are many years in the making and addressing these challenges
will take long-term commitment and effort of the department and the
military services. Continued Congressional oversight and focus on the
department's efforts will help ensure implementation of our
recommendations and that all service members are living in acceptable
barracks.
In the meantime, installation leaders can also work to identify
critical service member needs and take immediate actions to improve
day-to-day life in barracks at their installations. For example, at an
Air Force installation we visited, a barracks manager administered an
ad-hoc survey for residents in one barracks facility to gather the
perspective of residents on needed improvements. Air Force officials
took immediate steps to respond to service members concerns, such as
adding personal storage lockers for pantry and kitchen items in the
communal kitchen. At an Army installation, officials told us they
invested in adding cooktops to barracks kitchenettes because service
members had identified the need for better cooking facilities as a
significant concern. Service members reported improvements in quality
of life as a result of these efforts. Such actions alone will not
rectify the poor conditions in barracks resulting from years of
underfunding and neglected maintenance; however, they could help make
targeted improvements to service members' morale and experiences in
barracks while the department works to fully address all our
recommendations.
Ms. Houlahan. What observations can you share with us about the
level of oversight that OSD is providing to the military services when
it comes to barracks?
Ms. Field. In September 2023, we reported that OSD does not provide
sufficient oversight of housing programs for barracks.\5\ DOD guidance
has not established an oversight structure that gives officials within
OSD responsibility for creating and standardizing policies and
processes regarding government-owned barracks. While OSD does conduct
annual programmatic reviews of barracks, we found that these reviews
are generally limited compared to OSD's quarterly programmatic reviews
of privatized family housing. We identified a number of key areas in
which OSD's oversight of barracks is limited.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO-23-105797.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, OSD officials told us they were unaware of challenges
related to substandard barracks and that OSD does not monitor the
number of barracks in substandard conditions across services because
OSD does not have a role in military service waivers of DOD minimum
standards for barracks. Second, OSD does not track complete budget
information on the full scope of barracks and barracks-related funding.
For example, budget materials used to support OSD's annual reviews of
barracks do not identify budget information related to Basic Allowance
for Housing for service members in the United States who would be
living in barracks if not for condition or space issues--an amount
totaling $1.3 billion in fiscal year 2022, according to our analysis.
Third, OSD does not have complete information on the effects of
barracks conditions on service members. For example, while the services
are supposed to provide information to OSD on how they measure tenant
satisfaction for barracks residents, OSD has not directed them to
provide robust information on the results of those assessments--
information without which OSD's ability to identify long-standing
challenges in barracks conditions across the services is limited. In
addition, OSD has not facilitated collaboration across military
services to jointly improve barracks conditions.
OSD officials acknowledged that they have not been as focused on
strengthening oversight of barracks as they have privatized family
housing, in part because of limited staffing resources and
congressional focus on privatized family housing in recent years.
Service officials also told us that increased oversight from OSD could
result in improvements to barracks conditions. As noted above, one of
the recommendations from our September 2023 report related to
strengthening oversight; we believe that implementing that
recommendation will help the department address decades-long challenges
with barracks conditions.
Ms. Houlahan. DOD officials insist that, despite the problems we've
seen over the last few years, privatizing the military family housing
program was the right thing to do because it allowed the government to
improve the condition of the housing in less time and for less money
than if DOD used the traditional military construction process. Has GAO
ever validated that assertion?
Ms. Field. GAO's work in the early years of the Military Housing
Privatization Initiative (MHPI) sought to assess the validity of the
assumption that leveraging private sector financing would allow DOD to
eliminate inadequate housing more economically and faster than could be
achieved through traditional military construction financing. A number
of complicating factors made doing so difficult. In 1996, for example,
GAO reported that because DOD was using new construction standards to
assess the condition of military-owned housing units, many housing
units that DOD classified as inadequate were not dilapidated, but only
lacked modern amenities, such as a separate utility room or a
carport.\6\ In other words, there was no reliable baseline with which
to compare the condition of the new, privatized housing to the old,
government-owned housing. Further, in 2000, we reported that, because
no projects under the program had been completed, there was little
basis for evaluating the effectiveness of the program in eliminating
inadequate housing more economically and faster than could be achieved
through traditional military construction financing.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Military Housing: Privatization Off to a Slow Start and
Continued Management Attention Needed, GAO/NSIAD-98-178 (Washington,
D.C., July 17, 1998).
\7\ GAO, Military Housing: Continued Concerns in Implementing the
Privatization Initiative, GAO/NSIAD-00-71 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 30,
2000).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, we were able to evaluate DOD's estimated cost savings.
When GAO analyzed the complete life-cycle cost estimates that DOD had
prepared for individual projects, we found that, overall, the cost
savings were likely to be more modest than predicted. For example, in a
1998 analysis of two privatized housing projects, GAO's review showed
that although privatization was less costly for each project, the
overall estimated cost savings to the government were considerably less
than the military services' estimates--about $54 million less, or about
7 percent, at one of the two installations, and $15 million less, or
about 10 percent, at the other. GAO also found in a subsequent review
of 12 projects that privatization, on average, should cost the
government about 11 percent less than military construction financing.
For 10 of the projects, we calculated that the estimated savings ranged
from 38 percent to 5 percent. For the remaining two projects, we
estimated that privatization would cost more than military
construction--about 9 percent and about 15 percent more, respectively.
In recent years, questions about whether privatization was the
right policy choice have transitioned to questions about how
privatization is working, including questions regarding the long-term
cost effectiveness and condition of privatized housing. As such, GAO's
work has focused on assessing the financial health of privatized
housing projects and DOD's oversight of the condition of the housing.
For example, in March 2018, we reported that DOD could improve its
assessments of the long-term financial sustainability of privatized
housing projects.\8\ In April 2023, we reported that OSD and the
military departments could improve their oversight of the condition--
and therefore quality--of privatized housing, such as by ensuring
inspectors have the training necessary to assess the condition of these
homes adequately and consistently.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ GAO, Military Housing Privatization: DOD Should Take Steps to
Improve Monitoring, Reporting, and Risk Assessment, GAO-18-218
(Washington, D.C.: Mar. 13, 2018).
\9\ GAO, Military Housing: DOD Can Further Strengthen Oversight of
Its Privatized Housing Program, GAO-23-105377 (Washington, D.C.: Apr.
19, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Houlahan. The 2020 NDAA created the Military Housing
Privatization Tenant Bill of Rights and authorized every military
installation a Privatized Housing Resident Advocate position to assist
residents in the identification and resolution of housing challenges.
However, personal statements indicate that some installations are still
without a Privatized Housing Resident Advocate, leaving them beholden
to the privatized housing office without a voice. Can you provide
metrics on your current resident advocate manning and provide insight
on your plan to ensure each of these positions is filled as quickly as
possible?
Ms. Coulson. The Army's privatized housing portfolio consists of 36
housing projects comprised of 51 installations. Each installation has
an Army Housing Manager, which is the designated Housing Resident
Advocate, as outlined in Pub Law 116-92 Sect 2894 (b)(4).
Fort Belvoir is the only Army privatized housing installation that
has created a position that serves as an Ombudsman in addition to the
Army Housing Manager. The Ombudsman serves as a Housing Management
Specialist under the supervision of the Deputy Garrison Commander and
advocates for service members and families mediating landlord/tenant
disputes when requested by the resident.
The Army works at all echelons collaboratively to ensure that the
installations have proper manning and that the key roles are filled.
Ms. Houlahan. GAO's latest report on MHPI states DOD has all of the
authorities it needs to hold private housing companies accountable if
they engage in misconduct, to include major fraud. And yet, DOD has
never terminated a privatized housing project, even when one of the
primary partners admitted to major fraud. Why? What would it take for
you to decide that it was no longer in the government's best interest
to continue a privatized housing project?
Ms. Coulson. Although the project legal documents provide
mechanisms for terminating a privatized housing project, termination of
a project is an extreme step that would be immensely disruptive and
could, at least in the short term, adversely impact the Army's ability
to ensure military members and their families are provided safe and
habitable homes.
Without terminating a privatized housing project, the Army has the
authority to compel termination of any privatized military company
property management service provider that fails to properly maintain
safe and habitable housing and fails to cure its deficient performance
within a reasonable period-of-time. While there are housing issues that
have not yet been resolved, the Army currently believes that all
housing service providers are making substantial progress in resolving
the issues that remain at their respective projects. As a result, there
are currently no plans by the Army to compel termination of any
privatized military housing property manager contract. Previously,
however, the Army did take action resulting in the termination of a
property management company servicing the Fort Belvoir, Benning, Irwin
and Presidio of Monterey Projects; in that case, upper-level management
of the company was directly implicated in fraudulent behavior.
In addition to compelling the termination of a property manager,
the Army may terminate privatized housing projects when the project
company has failed to comply with the terms of its lease with the Army.
Grounds for termination include failure to provide safe and habitable
housing, and failure to cure any non- compliance with the lease within
a reasonable period-of-time. Upon termination of a project, the Army
will own the project's housing and be immediately responsible for
operating and maintaining it. As the Army is neither staffed nor funded
to resume the operation of privatized housing, termination of a project
could be difficult to smoothly execute in the short term.
Ms. Houlahan. In the GAO report released earlier this month,
unacceptable health and safety conditions like mold, broken windows,
sewage overflows, and others were mentioned across the board. How
prevalent are these unacceptable conditions across your respective
service and what are your plans to address the dire state of
unaccompanied housing for our service members now and in the immediate
future?
Ms. Coulson. These conditions are not prevalent in the Army. We
remediate and/or mitigate unacceptable health and safety conditions, as
described in the question, when they are identified. In FY23, the Army
executed a deliberate and comprehensive inspection of all barracks to
identify environmental, health, and safety conditions that would
contribute to reduced quality of life for residents. All identified
deficiencies were mitigated, remediated, or otherwise remedied. The
Army also is using the Army Maintenance Application which enables
service members to place and track service orders electronically. This
gives better visibility to leaders and Directorates of Public Works of
maintenance issues and their resolution.
The Army is investing more than $1B/year across its Future Years
Defense Program for the construction, renovation, modernization, and
sustainment of barracks. In Fiscal Year 25, the Army will attempt to
improve its posture for sustainment funding invested in all barracks
types. Fully sustaining barracks is key to reducing degradation and
ultimately maintenance backlog.
Ms. Houlahan. Can you tell me how many barracks facilities each of
your services operate and maintain that have in place a waiver to DOD
health and safety standards or privacy and configuration standards? How
long have these waivers been in place? What are you going to do to
bring those substandard barracks up to where they should be?
Ms. Coulson. No Army unaccompanied housing is under an active
waiver to the DOD standards. A previous waiver was put in place in
2012, but that has long since expired.
The Army continues to dedicate significant resources of over $1B/
year to unaccompanied housing investments, in additional to looking
closely at its policy and processes to improve management practices.
Ms. Houlahan. What can you share with us about the level of
attention and direction you receive at the OSD level? Do you think OSD
pays the same level of attention to barracks that it does to MHPI? Is
there any type of support that you would find useful from OSD?
Ms. Coulson. The Army continues to have open dialogue with OSD on
the unaccompanied housing program. OSD is very engaged in guiding and
supporting the Army's program as it matures and evolves. The Army is
appreciative of the interactive relationship and looks forward to
shaping and implementing future OSD-established minimum standards on
privacy, configuration and health and safety.
Ms. Houlahan. The 2020 NDAA created the Military Housing
Privatization Tenant Bill of Rights and authorized every military
installation a Privatized Housing Resident Advocate position to assist
residents in the identification and resolution of housing challenges.
However, personal statements indicate that some installations are still
without a Privatized Housing Resident Advocate, leaving them beholden
to the privatized housing office without a voice. Can you provide
metrics on your current resident advocate manning and provide insight
on your plan to ensure each of these positions is filled as quickly as
possible?
Mr. Thompson. All Navy installations provide housing services to
service members via our Navy Housing Service Centers (HSC). The HSCs
provide advocacy services to accompanied and unaccompanied military
members for a wide variety of housing issues. Resident advocacy has
always been a core service at the HSCs. All residents have access to
the HSC, and the HSC engages in continuous tenant outreach. In 2021,
the Navy hired an additional 183 positions to conduct oversight and
project management of the Military Housing Privatization Initiative
(MHPI). These positions are responsible for various tasks including
inspection of homes, follow up communication with residents after move-
in and after maintenance work, liaison between the resident and the
MHPI Project manager, and advocacy services.
The Marine Corps hired 113 personnel to supplement its Military
Housing Office (MHO) staff. The Marine Corps also understands the
importance of tenant advocacy and ensures military tenants are educated
on their rights (e.g., Plain Language Briefing), understands the
dispute resolution process (e.g., dispute resolution flyer), and is
provided points of contact to for assistance. Each installation's MHO
provides a Tenant Advocate/Mediator who is focused on tenant-landlord
dispute mediation; ensuring PPV adherence to the Fair Housing Act;
ensuring tenant's complaints are documented and processed; assessing
satisfaction surveys and implementing corrective action; and mediating
disputes between tenants.
Ms. Houlahan. GAO's latest report on MHPI states DOD has all of the
authorities it needs to hold private housing companies accountable if
they engage in misconduct, to include major fraud. And yet, DOD has
never terminated a privatized housing project, even when one of the
primary partners admitted to major fraud. Why? What would it take for
you to decide that it was no longer in the government's best interest
to continue a privatized housing project?
Mr. Thompson. The DON's ground leases and associated legal
agreements that comprise the project deal structures include
termination of the Managing Member (MM) for cause clauses that can be
exercised in extreme cases.
In the major fraud case, the DON decided to focus on actions by the
DON and Balfour Beatty Communities (BBC) to prevent future instances of
fraud rather than exercising the right to terminate BBC. Following
BBC's misconduct, they replaced all of the personnel responsible for
the fraud. Additionally, BBC's settlement established a robust
corporate compliance program under which BBC agreed to modify its
existing compliance program, including internal controls, compliance
policies, and procedures, in order to provide for effective detection
and deterrence of violations of U.S. anti-fraud law. The DON conducted
internal investigations with the Acquisition Integrity Office (AIO) and
determined that appropriate DON work order oversight measures are in
place to protect the DON's interests going forward.
The DON has increased MHPI company oversight and accountability by
ensuring DON personnel have access to electronic maintenance records,
hiring new quality assurance personnel to monitor maintenance
performance and data quality, and revising project performance
incentive fee metrics and withholding of fees until the data is
validated by the DON.
The DON has opted for the early termination and dissolution of MHPI
projects in the past as a result of declining military housing
requirements in the respective locations of the projects and low
military occupancy.
Ms. Houlahan. In the GAO report released earlier this month,
unacceptable health and safety conditions like mold, broken windows,
sewage overflows, and others were mentioned across the board. How
prevalent are these unacceptable conditions across your respective
service and what are your plans to address the dire state of
unaccompanied housing for our service members now and in the immediate
future?
Mr. Thompson. The Navy acknowledges that unacceptable health and
safety conditions exist in the total Unaccompanied Housing (UH)
inventory. However, no Sailor is living in Navy UH that has life,
safety, or health-related issues. The Navy takes buildings, or
individual units, off line when a life, safety or health-related issue
is identified until the health and safety condition is corrected. In
addition, the Navy implemented a standardized inspection program across
the enterprise to ensure UH assignment meets DOD and Navy health,
safety, and configuration standards. As of the end of FY22, 60% of Navy
Permanent Party UH bedrooms have a Condition Index (CI) of good or
fair. The Navy is developing a 10-year investment plan to recapitalize
and modernize our UH inventory.
The Marine Corps also acknowledges that unacceptable health and
safety conditions exist in their UH inventory. The Marine Corps
currently operates 658 barracks buildings world-wide, with an average
of 87,600 occupied bed spaces. Overall, 112 facilities (17%) are
assessed as being in poor/failing condition, but these conditions are
not all attributable to life, health, and safety (LHS) issues.
In the near-term, the Marine Corps is taking action to improve the
quality of life for Marines living in unaccompanied housing. In June
2023, the Marine Corps published its Unaccompanied Housing Guarantees
and Resident Responsibilities, which ensures Marines receive safe,
secure housing that meets health, environmental and safety standards;
has functional fixtures, furnishings, appliances, and utilities; have
access to common areas and amenities; and fast maintenance and repair
when something breaks. Additionally, following complaints about the
lack of air conditioning at Camp Pendleton barracks, the Marine Corps
is developing a systematic plan for installing new air conditioning
systems. Separately, there are 10 repair projects scheduled in FY23 and
FY24 that will improve barracks in poor condition. Further, the Marine
Corps has launched a pilot program to test a new phone application that
will allow Marines to quickly and easily submit service requests for
barracks issues and receive feedback automatically on their repair
request. Finally, in August 2023, the Marine Corps started its Sergeant
Without Dependents Basic Allowance for Housing Initiative, which
provides highly deserving sergeants with the allowance at a rate for
troops without dependents to live in homes outside of base.
For the long-term, the Marine Corps will institute a new approach
to barracks management that directly addresses Recommendation 28 of the
GAO-23- 105797 report. This new model will replace Marines with
civilian personnel to manage barracks. This new structure will
professionalize the management workforce and address systemic backlog
issues such as tracking inventory and maintenance. Additionally, the
Marine Corps will target its resources to rightsize its barracks
inventory, which requires the use of military construction,
restoration, and demolition funding levers.
Ms. Houlahan. Can you tell me how many barracks facilities each of
your services operate and maintain that have in place a waiver to DOD
health and safety standards or privacy and configuration standards? How
long have these waivers been in place? What are you going to do to
bring those substandard barracks up to where they should be?
Mr. Thompson. The Navy has implemented a standardized inspection
program to ensure UH assignment meets DOD and Navy health, safety and
configuration standards. Since 2011, the Navy waived the DOD privacy
and configuration standards to house E1-E3 personnel. Currently,
approximately 200 UH facilities have assignment standards waivers. In
order to support the Navy's Homeport Ashore Program (all shipboard
Sailors live ashore when in homeport), an additional 300 UH facilities
use an interim assignment policy (no more than 2 Sailors/room and 4
Sailors/bath) and, due to the interim nature, do not require a waiver.
The Navy is developing a UH optimization plan that will address
capacity shortfalls.
The Marine Corps has a waiver from the Assistant Secretary of the
Navy (Energy, Installation and Environment) regarding Marine Corps
Order 1100.22 and the maintenance of current Minimum Adequate
Assignment Standards, which relate to required barracks space
considerations by paygrade. As of October 2023, there are 90 buildings,
the vast majority of which were constructed prior to the institution of
new minimum space considerations by paygrade. The waiver was first
approved 22 Dec 2015 and is a permanent exception.
The Marine Corps' Barracks 2030 plan will improve barracks
management and raise our facilities to current industry standards by
focusing on:
1.  Barracks Management. We will professionalize and streamline
barracks management, improve responsiveness to resident's requests, and
provide basic allowance for housing to well-deserving Sergeants.
2.  Barracks Occupancy. We will repair rooms in-stride, reconfigure
and right-size barracks footprint, re-capitalize barracks, and explore
PublicPrivate Venture relationships to expand housing options.
3.  Improve Furniture Recapitalization. We will decrease the
average furniture replacement time to ensure adequate room amenities.
4.  Indoor Air Quality. We will conduct a pilot program with air
ionization systems to test its efficacy in barracks, and if successful,
include the specifications in barracks design standardization.
Ms. Houlahan. What can you share with us about the level of
attention and direction you receive at the OSD level? Do you think OSD
pays the same level of attention to barracks that it does to MHPI? Is
there any type of support that you would find useful from OSD?
Mr. Thompson. The DON appreciates OSD's attention and any direction
from OSD for all housing types. The DON has worked closely in the past
with OSD staff and leadership developing new initiatives and oversight
practices in regards to MHPI housing and has seen increased focus on UH
recently. The DON is prepared to continue utilizing this strong
relationship as OSD continues to increases its staff, with the goal of
quality of life for all service members and their families
Ms. Houlahan. The 2020 NDAA created the Military Housing
Privatization Tenant Bill of Rights and authorized every military
installation a Privatized Housing Resident Advocate position to assist
residents in the identification and resolution of housing challenges.
However, personal statements indicate that some installations are still
without a Privatized Housing Resident Advocate, leaving them beholden
to the privatized housing office without a voice. Can you provide
metrics on your current resident advocate manning and provide insight
on your plan to ensure each of these positions is filled as quickly as
possible?
Mr. Moriarty. The Department of the Air Force (DAF) established 60
Privatized Housing Resident Advocate (RA) positions. Currently there
are no vacant positions. Installations fill vacancies in accordance
with established processes and authorities. The roles and
responsibilities of the Privatized Housing Resident Advocate will
continue to be performed during any position vacancy.
Ms. Houlahan. GAO's latest report on MHPI states DOD has all of the
authorities it needs to hold private housing companies accountable if
they engage in misconduct, to include major fraud. And yet, DOD has
never terminated a privatized housing project, even when one of the
primary partners admitted to major fraud. Why? What would it take for
you to decide that it was no longer in the government's best interest
to continue a privatized housing project?
Mr. Moriarty. Up to this point in time, all the project owners have
worked with DAF to resolve our major concerns. The respective project
owners are working with DAF and have shown improvement. DAF will
continue to address challenges and take corrective actions when we
encounter project owner performance problems.
A decision to find the project in default is likely to result in
unintended consequences unless DAF purchases the project and pays off
any loans associated with the project. DAF would try to exhaust other
remediate efforts, to include encouraging a sale of the project to a
different owner prior to declaring default. Every DAF MHPI project has
a commercial loan/bond issuance that is senior lienholder in our
project, which could make decisions without DAF input. Generally, the
senior lender assumes control of the project in the event of an uncured
default, which would severely limit DAF options. The senior lender
could name a project manager and would control project cash flow. With
control of project cash flow, the senior lender might greatly constrain
the availability of funds to remedy any issues with the homes and not
have the same willingness to work with the DAF to develop long-term
solutions.
The negative consequences, of declaring a default, particularly
DAF's loss of control during foreclosure, would be carefully weighed
against assumed advantages of finding an MHPI project owner in default.
In the most extreme circumstance where a project owner refused to work
with DAF to resolve serious health and safety issues, DAF would
consider exercising more serious remedies that are available under the
legal agreements, even if faced with the possibility of a senior lender
taking control of the MHPI project. In those circumstances, the project
owner could attempt to sell the MHPI project and would be required to
work with DAF to find a qualified buyer to take over the MHPI project.
Ms. Houlahan. In the GAO report released earlier this month,
unacceptable health and safety conditions like mold, broken windows,
sewage overflows, and others were mentioned across the board. How
prevalent are these unacceptable conditions across your respective
service and what are your plans to address the dire state of
unaccompanied housing for our service members now and in the immediate
future?
Mr. Moriarty. The Department remains committed to ensuring we
provide safe and adequate dorms for our Airmen and Guardians and
continues to invest in the repair and/or replacement of our dorms and
their internal systems in accordance with asset management principles
and our dormitory master plans. We have investment plans in place to
ensure our dorms remain adequate for our members.
The DAF consider dormitories commander's business. Our full-time
Airmen Dorm Leaders (ADLs) offer daily oversight in our dormitories.
Commanders at all levels are expected to proactively address concerns
in dormitories so they can be remedied. While construction projects are
necessary, hands-on leaders' involvement is critical to our ability to
ensure members are living in safe and healthy environments and when
problems arise, they are promptly and properly dealt with.
Specifically, based on the current DOD Performance goal of 90% of
permanent party bed spaces being in adequate condition (Facility
Condition Index score of 80 or greater)--99% of the DAF permanent party
dormitories assess as adequate. Additionally, 99% of technical training
dormitories assess as adequate. These efforts ensure that issues raised
in the GAO report are not prevalent across the DAF portfolio.
For permanent party dorms, the FY22 NDAA, Sec. 2814, required the
Services to invest no less than 5% of the remaining service potential
over the FY22-26 FYDP. For the DAF this equates to approximately $1.1B
on permanent party dorms for FY22-26. We are focused on meeting the
NDAA requirement. In FY23 DAF funded 36 projects at $276M and plans to
invest $230M for 33 projects in FY24. Similar investments are in the
planning stages to occur through FY26. The DAF will optimize
investments and execute dorm projects aligned with the ``Air Force
Dormitory Master Plan'' and established service priorities.
Ms. Houlahan. Can you tell me how many barracks facilities each of
your services operate and maintain that have in place a waiver to DOD
health and safety standards or privacy and configuration standards? How
long have these waivers been in place? What are you going to do to
bring those substandard barracks up to where they should be?
Mr. Moriarty. The Department of the Air Force (DAF) does not
provide waivers to health and safety standards. Installation Commanders
actively utilize resources (First Sergeants, ADLs, residents, O&M
funding) to source feedback and address health and safety standards.
Regarding waivers to privacy standards, the DAF assignment standard
is one private room for each permanent party member, E-1 through E-3
and E-4 with less than 3 years of service. Based on the configuration
of the unaccompanied housing (UH) facility, a member is provided a
private bath or bath shared by not more than one other resident. These
assignment adequacy standards may be temporarily waived when mission
dictates; for example, accomplishing major maintenance and repair
project, military necessity, shortfall of existing bed spaces, etc. DAF
has one installation (McConnell AFB) with an approved privacy waiver
(Aug 23) to house two persons per room with shared baths due to an on-
going renovation project. The estimated renovation completion date is
FY27.
The configuration of DAF dormitories and construction standards
have evolved over 37+ years. The current UH inventory has several
configurations used to support UH requirement; all configurations are
considered adequate. DAF established policy related to minimum
assignment standards based on configurations of existing inventory and
focused on square footage, maximum number of service members per room
and maximum number of members sharing bathrooms. Since the standards
have evolved over 37+ years, not all dorm configurations have the
availability of kitchens and kitchenettes, therefore the DAF does not
consider this a reason to prohibit assignment of dormitory bed spaces.
The DAF designs consider kitchen or kitchenettes to provide
supplemental cooking/eating options for residents, but they are not
intended to replace dining facilities. However, DAF's newest
construction standard for replacement or new dormitory requirements
provides for kitchenettes as defined by DAF standards.
Ms. Houlahan. What can you share with us about the level of
attention and direction you receive at the OSD level? Do you think OSD
pays the same level of attention to barracks that it does to MHPI? Is
there any type of support that you would find useful from OSD?
Mr. Moriarty. OSD engages with Military Departments regarding all
aspects of DOD housing programs to ensure service members are provided
access to suitable housing on or off the installation. Specific to
Unaccompanied Housing (UH) the Department of Defense (DOD) policy
provides the responsibilities to the head of DOD Components to 1)
Establish criteria to determine which Service members are required to
live in military housing and which are authorized to receive a housing
allowance and may choose where to live; and, 2) Establish adequacy and
construction standards for DOD housing pursuant to law and based on
guidance from OSD. While adequacy and construction standards for DOD
family housing generally should be similar to private-sector housing,
the Heads of the DOD Components have more flexibility to establish
adequacy and construction standards for DOD unaccompanied housing (UH)
(permanent party and trainees or students).
OSD provides the Services and Installation Commanders flexibility
to administer and execute all aspects of housing within established
policy. DAF has established housing policy and program with defined
requirements, assignment standards and construction standards. DAF does
not believe additional OSD guidance is required.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. JACOBS
Ms. Jacobs. Why is it that each of the services have come to
different conclusions about the feasibility of privatized barracks? How
have each of the services conducted these studies, and how have they
used different methodologies that have led to inconsistent analysis?
Ms. Field. From 1997 to 2011, the military services conducted
several analyses about the feasibility of privatized barracks. In our
September 2023 report, we noted that these prior efforts to evaluate
the feasibility of privatizing barracks did not constitute a
comprehensive, department-wide analysis sufficient for decision
making.\10\ As a result, each service used different methods, such as
business-case and life-cycle cost analyses, and different assumptions
about how repairs and upkeep for housing would be funded, resulting in
different conclusions about the potential for cost savings from using
either privatization or the traditional government-funding military
construction approach. In summary, inconsistent methods resulted in
varying conclusions and actions, specifically:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO-23-105797.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Army and Navy. From 2004 to 2011, the Army and the Navy conducted
multiple analyses to assess the feasibility of privatizing barracks.
For example, the Army conducted a study involving different assumptions
about the number and pay grades of unaccompanied personnel housed on
and off installations, as well as the amount of money spent by the Army
to construct and sustain facilities. The Army also conducted a series
of business-case analyses for privatized projects at six installations.
The Navy conducted various analyses that considered multiple scenarios
based on data collected from site visits at two Navy installations. The
Army concluded that privatization is feasible but more costly in most
cases, while the Navy concluded privatization would be feasible in
certain locations. Both services moved forward with privatized barracks
projects at that time. In September 2023, we reported that both
services are considering additional privatized barracks projects.
Air Force and Marine Corps. From 1997 to 2002, the Air Force
conducted a series of analyses, beginning with a feasibility study,
including site visits at two installations selected in part because
both had housing shortages. The study concluded that privatization
would be less expensive than military construction at one installation,
but not the other. Another analysis found that issues related to unit
integrity, the scale of necessary government commitment of funds, and
difficulty conducting inspections in buildings not solely government-
owned would make privatization projects unfeasible. In 2008, the Marine
Corps conducted a feasibility study, which included a life-cycle cost
analysis, focused on one installation which lacked sufficient high
quality unaccompanied housing. The analysis found that privatizing
barracks would be more expensive than building new barracks through
military construction. Therefore, both services concluded that
privatization projects would generally not be feasible service wide. In
September 2023, we reported that the Air Force is considering a
privatized barracks project at one installation where unique market
conditions may make privatized housing a successful business model. The
Marine Corps is conducting a study to assess the feasibility of
privatized barracks at two installations but have no plans to move
forward with privatization.
OSD and service officials told us the idea of privatizing barracks
is appealing, but questions remain about the feasibility of doing so--
questions related to cost effectiveness, mandatory assignment,
complications due to deployments, and effects on unit cohesion. In an
effort to improve living conditions, a congressional committee has
encouraged DOD to look for innovative ways to improve barracks
condition, including privatization. As you are aware, the Secretary of
Defense was to provide a report to the House Armed Services Committee
on the feasibility of privatizing barracks across all military services
by July 2023.\11\ Through a comprehensive, department-wide report on
barracks privatization, the department could provide information that
may help weigh the pros and cons of privatization. However, as we
reported in September 2023, DOD did not provide this report to Congress
by July 2023, and officials were unable to provide an updated timeframe
for when they would do so.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ H.R. Rep. No. 117-397, at 377 (2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ms. Jacobs. Regarding privatizing unaccompanied housing, an earlier
GAO from 2014 report states, ``The Navy's evaluation of the developer's
proposed budget for 2013 noted that although the overall occupancy rate
for the San Diego project at the end of 2012 was about 96 percent, the
revenues being received were insufficient to sustain the project over
the long term.''
However, in a response to an RFI from our office to the DON on
September 22, 2023, DON explained that PPV barrack projects were more
cost effective for the following reason: ``a. No competition for
funding. MILCON and Restoration & Modernization Projects currently
compete with other Navy projects for funding that may have higher
priority. b. Life cycle analysis has consistently shown privatization
to be less costly than military construction. c. Studies have revealed
PPV as the most cost effective investment strategy for Homeport Ashore
and Jr Permanent Party Sailors. d. Sustainment and maintenance funds--
Degradation of government owned facilities outpace funding for
sustainment and maintenance resulting in decreased life expectancy and
condition of gov-operated unaccompanied housing. PPV relieves the DON
of maintenance and sustainment responsibilities of the privatized
assets.''
Does GAO still stand by its 2014 assessment? And how would GAO
respond to the RFI cited above?
Ms. Field. Our 2014 report conveyed information provided to us by
the Navy. Specifically, we reported that, according to Navy officials,
the Navy's San Diego project was intended to house mid-level
unaccompanied personnel (with ranks E-4 to E-6),\12\ but this target
population was not realized because of a general desire by service
members in this demographic not to return to on-base housing. As such,
the Navy decided to temporarily expand the target demographic for the
project to include more junior unaccompanied personnel and Homeport
Ashore sailors.\13\ This shift increased occupancy rates, but strained
revenues for the private developer, specifically because these more
junior sailors' partial basic allowance for housing (BAH) rates were
below the market rent for the new buildings. The private developer's
financial projections were based on that market rent. Therefore, in
September 2013, OSD approved a Navy request to increase the partial
rate of BAH for junior unaccompanied personnel residing in the
buildings.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO, Military Housing: Information on the Privatization of
Unaccompanied Personnel Housing, GAO-14-313 (Washington, D.C.: Mar. 18,
2014).
\13\ Homeport Ashore is a Navy program created to improve the
quality of life among ship-based junior sailors by moving them off
ships and into unaccompanied housing on shore while their ships were
docked in their homeport.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have not had the opportunity to review the Navy's full response
to the RFI. However, the Navy's statements referenced in the question
are consistent with statements made by department and military service
officials during the course of our recent work, specifically that
barracks projects do not compete well against other needed maintenance
or construction projects. As such, several officials stated that
``fenced funding'' would be beneficial to ensuring barracks funding
needs were met or that privatized barracks were appealing. However, our
broader work on MHPI has found that DOD needed to improve its
assessments of the long-term financial sustainability of privatized
housing projects--including assessing any risks to privatized project
revenues resulting from reductions in BAH.\14\ Further, as we recently
reported, DOD and the military services should examine the full scope
of funding requirements to house the barracks resident service member
population.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ GAO-18-218.
\15\ GAO-23-105797.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Navy stated in the RFI that privatized barracks would relieve
the Department of the Navy of maintenance and sustainment
responsibilities of the privatized assets. However, as noted in our
report, forgoing needed maintenance and construction may limit the use
of maintenance and construction funding, but may increase the amount of
military personnel funding--for BAH--needed to house service members
typically required to live in government-owned barracks. As such, we
reiterate our recommendation that DOD carefully track and report all
barracks-related funding. Without doing so, it will continue to be
challenging for DOD to weigh different options for funding barracks and
barracks-related needs, such as weighing the use of O&M, MILCON, or
Military Personnel--and specifically BAH--to meet housing needs.
Moreover, Congress will have limited visibility into the full scope of
funding requirements to house this service member population.
Ms. Jacobs. Can you please share the amount of investments your
service has made to improve unaccompanied military housing using FSRM
funds? Please include how this amount equals or surpasses the required
five percent of the estimated replacement cost of the total inventory
of unaccompanied housing.
Ms. Coulson. Army has requested $0.8B in FY 24 to improve
unaccompanied permanent party housing in FSRM funding. This includes a
portion of sustainment funding aimed at replacing building components,
whole building restoration & modernization projects, and military
construction for new and replacement barracks. This significant
investment is approximately 12% of the FY23 replacement cost defined as
remaining service potential in Section 2814 of FY22 NDAA. Army has
interpreted Net Book Value to provide the best correlation with that
definition. Note, if investments were just limited to the FSRM portion,
the investment would be 7.3%.
Ms. Jacobs. When your service places an MHPI housing partner on a
``performance improvement plan,'' is that public information?
Ms. Coulson. Any Performance improvement Plan (PIPs) issued by the
Army to an MHPI housing company can be obtained by making a request for
the plan pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). The plan is
releasable under FOIA except for those portions that contain trade
secrets, commercial or financial information that is confidential or
privileged and any information protected by the Privacy Act. Outside of
releasing pursuant to FOIA, the Army does not make PIPs available to
the public.
Ms. Jacobs. What concerns are severe enough to warrant a housing
partner be issued a ``letter of concern'' or be placed on a performance
improvement plan?
Ms. Coulson. A letter of concern is issued for immediate, wide-
spread, or systemic issues that violate the terms of a company's lease
or business agreements. Letters of concern are typically issued as the
prelude to more formal notifications such as notices of non-compliance
or default. Performance improvement plans are utilized when the issues
of concern are not immediately resolved or the Army lacks confidence
that the Project Company will comprehensively address the issues' root
causes.
Ms. Jacobs. How many and which housing partners have been issued a
``letter of concern'' or been placed on a performance improvement plan
in the past 5 years? Please provide a complete list, and this can come
back in CUI form if needed.
Ms. Coulson. Four formal letters of concern have been issued to
Army privatized housing providers over the past five years and are
summarized as follows:
July 2022--BBC--Fort Gordon (Eisenhower)--Notice of Non-Compliance
with Condition 13a--Failure to maintain Lessee Owned Housing located
within the leasehold in a safe condition.
April 2021--Corvias--Fort Liberty--Letter of Concern on doubts
about the adequacy of oversight by Corvias, and particularly at those
having a history of moisture-related issues.
June 2020--BBC--Fort Story--Letter of Concern regarding maintenance
of the historic Cape Henry House and compliance with the Programmatic
Agreement and VA (state) Historic Preservation Office for proper
preservation or demolition of the structure.
May 2020--Lendlease--Fort Campbell--Letter of Concern regarding
tenant complaints regarding potential LBP notices and LBP maintenance
and renovations.
Additional items of concern have been included in in other
correspondence to housing providers regarding issues associated with
survey results, comprehensive reviews, Ground Lease Compliance
Inspections, site visits and project reviews by Army leadership.
Ms. Jacobs. How are your services disseminating information for new
and existing residents in MHPI about their rights?
Ms. Coulson. The Army is committed to ensuring robust communication
with service members and families who live in privatized Army housing.
As part of these efforts, the Army provides a Plain Language Briefing
(PLB) to residents 30 days prior to signing a lease to ensure service
members and families understand all aspects of the lease and housing
managers can respond to any questions. The briefing, which is required
by the National Defense Authorization Act of 2020, provides the
resident a description of the rights and resources available to them
under their lease and the Tenant Bill of Rights. It also provides
points of contact for the Garrison's Army Housing Office as well as
privatized housing providers.
The Army plans to update the PLB and issue Military Housing
Privatization Initiative PLB Policy by 30 November 2023 and review
annually thereafter. This policy will codify roles and responsibilities
of the Army Housing Office with regards to providing the PLB and
required check-ins, as well as timelines for the delivery of those
touchpoints. This policy will require that Army Housing Offices check
in with residents 15 and 60 days after moving into a new home. This
requirement will also be part of the next update to the Army's
privatized housing guide--the Portfolio and Asset Management Handbook--
anticipated within the next six months. The Army will also issue
implementation guidance to address the requirements associated with the
Corrective Action Plan to resolve concerns identified in the GAO Audit
105377- Military Housing: DOD Can Further Strengthen Oversight of its
Privatized Housing Program.
Ms. Jacobs. When issues in private military housing arise and
residents need to go through the formal dispute resolution process, how
are you tracking dispute resolutions and their outcomes? What are your
services doing to ensure that residents know where to contact their
tenant advocates?
Ms. Coulson. The Army's Installation Management Command tracks all
dispute resolutions, both formal and informal, and their outcomes. To
date, the Army has informally resolved 45 of the 52 disputes initiated
across its privatized housing portfolio. The remaining seven cases were
addressed using the formal dispute resolution process. Concerns
reported to the GAO from residents on lack of information regarding the
process has driven the need for a corrective action plan to update the
Plain Language Brief (PLB), which is required by the FY 2020 NDAA, to
be provided to residents before they sign a lease with a housing
provider and again following lease signing. The briefing provides the
rights and resources available to the resident, as well as points of
contact for the Garrison's Army Housing Office (AHO) and privatized
housing providers.
The dispute resolution process, as a component of the Tenant Bill
of Rights (TBoR), gives residents a secure basis for negotiation with
the private housing provider. Further, by clarifying the
responsibilities of all involved, it reiterates the Army's role as an
advocate for the resident through on-the-ground support from the AHO.
This briefing includes information about the identity and contact
details of the Army Housing Manager, who is the Military Tenant
Advocate, ensuring that residents know where to reach out in case of
disputes or concerns.
The Army will also be creating informational tools and produce
handouts to offer residents additional material on TBoR, PLB, Dispute
Resolution, and contact information for the Army Housing Manager.
Ms. Jacobs. Would you consider eliminating barracks management as a
collateral duty? Additionally, would you consider an alternative plan
of building management certifications as part of training courses?
Ms. Coulson. With the opportunity provided to the Army to improve
its manpower posture within Permanent Party Unaccompanied Housing, we
would staff the barracks management team with either dedicated full
time military members or civilian managers. The Army is receptive to
requiring building management certifications as part of the training
courses.
Ms. Jacobs. Can you please share the amount of investments your
service has made to improve unaccompanied military housing using FSRM
funds? Please include how this amount equals or surpasses the required
five percent of the estimated replacement cost of the total inventory
of unaccompanied housing.
Mr. Thompson. NAVY: The Navy invested almost $550M in FSRM funds in
Unaccompanied Housing (UH) since 2019. The FY24 FSRM budget for UH is
$165M surpassing the 5% threshold. Navy UH minimum investment based on
the FY22 NDAA SEC 2814 language is $88M/year so the FY24 amount is
nearly double the minimum requirements.
USMC: In FY24, $221M is planned for restoration and modernization
projects. This amount surpasses the 5% threshold which is calculated at
$213M per year. The Marine Corps exceeds this requirement with an
average investment of $218M per year in sustainment, and restoration
and modernization projects
Ms. Jacobs. When your service places an MHPI housing partner on a
``performance improvement plan,'' is that public information?
Mr. Thompson. The DON's MHPI business agreements do not provide for
``performance improvement plans.'' Rather, when the Navy has concerns
or is dissatisfied with MHPI Partner's performance under the governing
business agreements, those agreements allow the DON to issue letters of
concern or dissatisfaction. In those letters, the Navy asks for the
Partner to provide a corrective action plan to remedy issue(s). In the
event the Partner does not correct the issue and their performance
continues to fall short of requirements, the DON can issue a Cure
Notice. If an issue is not cured, a Default can be initiated.
The DON cannot make any letters of dissatisfaction or cure notices
public, as they are business proprietary information. Unless the MHPI
Company approves it, the DON does not publicly release MHPI corporate
structures and relationships, key personnel, performance, technical
approaches, strategy, or financial and pricing data. Failure to control
information in a DON MHPI business agreement or otherwise obtained from
a MHPI PPV may violate the Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C.
Sec. Sec. 1905).
Ms. Jacobs. How is the Navy ensuring oversight of the project
owners when it comes to privatized barracks?
Mr. Thompson. DON oversight processes for Privatized Family Housing
and Privatized Barracks include similar robust oversight and leadership
engagement processes that are in place with Family Housing. The Navy
conducts various oversight activities of the privatized barracks
project owners. Using a monthly Monitoring Matrix, the Navy ensures
adherence to agreements. Examples include reviewing annual budgets and
incentive fee requests, and conducting Site Assessments. In addition,
Navy conducts tenant satisfaction surveys, reviews those results, and
monitors action plans to address tenant concerns.
One unique aspect of the Navy's Unaccompanied Housing (UH) MHPI
portfolio is that it consists of mid/high rise buildings which raise
structural concerns that low rise buildings do not. As such, last year
the Navy published guidance to the UH MHPI Companies to perform
structural inspections, and associated maintenance plans, to assure the
ongoing structural integrity and longevity of these facilities.
The Marine Corps does not have privatized barracks but is
conducting a feasibility study at various locations.
Ms. Jacobs. What concerns are severe enough to warrant a housing
partner be issued a ``letter of concern'' or be placed on a performance
improvement plan?
Mr. Thompson. Letters of concern or dissatisfaction are issued when
the Navy has other concerns or is dissatisfied with Partner's
performance as defined in the business agreements. Performance issues
are typically a result of persistent Asset Management or Property
Management issues that the Managing Member fails to address. Some
examples of issues that can prompt formal communication include failure
to prepare units for incoming residents, poor maintenance request
response/completion quality or timeliness, poor condition of homes, and
poor reporting quality and/or timeliness.
Additionally, after the conclusion of our annual tenant
satisfaction surveys, Property Managers who score below 70 must prepare
an Action Plan and report back to the DON on their progress in
remedying problem areas. Installation and Region DON housing oversight
personnel spot check issues on site
Ms. Jacobs. How many and which housing partners have been issued a
``letter of concern'' or been placed on a performance improvement plan
in the past 5 years? Please provide a complete list, and this can come
back in CUI form if needed.
Mr. Thompson. Below, please see the number of instances where Navy
or USMC issued a Notice to Cure or a Letter of Dissatisfaction to each
DON MHPI Partner in the past 5 years.

Hunt--13

Balfour Beatty--11

Liberty Military Housing--9

Lendlease--7

Landmark--3

Patrician--3

Clark--1
Ms. Jacobs. How will the Navy enforce their Bill of Rights &
Responsibilities for unaccompanied service members living in barracks?
How will complaints and successes be tracked? What standards will be
used for remediation?
Mr. Thompson. NAVY: The Unaccompanied Housing (UH) Bill of Rights
and Responsibilities (BoR&R) is a covenant between the Navy and the UH
resident. The resident acknowledges receipt of the BoR&R during check-
in. Residents can elevate their concerns to UH management and/or the
military chain of command for resolution without fear of retaliation.
The UH BoR&R is also a covenant between the UH resident and the
Navy. The Navy relies on the military chain of command to ensure
compliance with standards of cleanliness through the command inspection
program. The Navy measures performance monthly by the reduction in
number of complaints received and failed inspections. The Navy Housing
Service Center provides standardized dispute resolution services if
issues cannot be resolved by the Command or UH Management
Ms. Jacobs. How are your services disseminating information for new
and existing residents in MHPI about their rights?
Mr. Thompson. NAVY: The Navy Housing Service Center (HSC) has an
active outreach program. When a Service Member contacts the HSC to
apply for Public Private Venture (PPV) housing, the Tenant Bill of
Rights and Responsibilities and the plain language brief are provided
as part of the application process. The plain language brief provides
standardized and installation-specific housing information. The Tenant
Bill of Rights and Responsibilities is also provided to military
tenants by the MHPI partners as part of the universal lease and is
available on the CNIC Housing website. The plain language brief is
provided again 30 days after move-in.
The HSC contacts new residents 15 and 60 days after move-in to
discuss the move-in process, identify issues, and to educate the tenant
on the various services available to them through the HSC. The HSC
continues distributing information through public events such as town
halls, community meetings, and events to increase awareness of the
support provided by the installation and the HSC.
USMC: The Marine Corps, in conjunction with our PPV Partners,
utilize multiple communication channels to provide information to
tenants regarding their rights. Each resident receives the Plain
Language Briefing, a straightforward explanation of the MHPI Tenant
Bill of Rights, covering the entire leasing process, including lease
signing, move in/move-out, maintenance, rights as a tenant, dispute
resolution, local contact information, and more. Additionally, the
Military Housing Office contacts 100% of new tenants within 30 days of
move-in to verify satisfaction with the move-in process and ensure the
Plain Language Briefing is received and understood per recent
amendments to the MHPI. Finally, the Marine Corps provides and
maintains a tenant portal web site, places posters around the
neighborhoods regarding tenant rights under the MHPI, and conducts
Resident Advisory Boards and Town Halls to keep tenants informed and up
to date.
Ms. Jacobs. When issues in private military housing arise and
residents need to go through the formal dispute resolution process, how
are you tracking dispute resolutions and their outcomes? What are your
services doing to ensure that residents know where to contact their
tenant advocates?
Mr. Thompson. NAVY: Formal dispute resolutions and their outcomes
are tracked in enterprise Military Housing (eMH), the DOD's
authoritative data source for housing operations. The Navy uses an
informal dispute resolution process and, if necessary, uses the
prescribed Formal Dispute Resolution process.
The Navy HSCs at each installation are equipped to assist Military
Members with their housing issues to include issues with privatized
housing companies.
The Navy proactively provides information to tenants through
installation websites, MWR websites, Fleet and Family Service Centers,
and social media. The materials, such as flyers and social media
postings/graphics, describe services available to Military Members at
the HSCs. These materials are continuously updated. The HSCs
communicate at key milestones throughout PPV tenancy.
USMC: Each Marine Corps Military Housing Office (MHO) tracks formal
disputes through the enterprise Military Housing (eMH), which is the
DOD enterprise information management system and authoritative data
source for operations and inventory management of DOD housing.
Recently, eMH built and implemented Dispute Resolution Process (DRP)
data fields within the Complaints Module to assist in data collection
and the formal tracking of disputes. Per DRP Policy Letter 2-22 and the
DON PPV Handbook, the Marine Corps provides a report on dispute
resolution findings to the Assistant Secretary of the Navy--
Environment, Installations, and Energy (ASN(EI&E)) on a quarterly
basis.
Additionally, residents receive a Plain Language Briefing (PLB)
upon lease signing and 30 days after move-in to ensure they fully
understand the MHPI Tenant Bill of Rights, which includes DRP
information. The PLB lays out the informal and formal DRP and provides
points of contact to assist in the process.
Finally, the Marine Corps developed DRP Training and held sessions
on 2 and 9 November 2021 for over 150 MHO personnel. Roles and
responsibilities were clearly identified within the training. Further,
the Marine Corps is developing an MHO Job Aid to identify how the DRP
works and to communicate to MHO personnel roles and responsibilities of
the MHO during the process.
Ms. Jacobs. Would you consider eliminating barracks management as a
collateral duty? Additionally, would you consider an alternative plan
of building management certifications as part of training courses?
Mr. Thompson. Navy UH, except at austere locations, is managed by a
full-time civilian workforce. The Navy has an established training
curriculum for UH management and staff with courses offered, in person
or virtual, by the Navy Housing Learning Center in Jacksonville, FL.
The Navy continuously reviews the training curriculum to improve
performance. The Navy utilizes the Certified Defense Unaccompanied
Housing Manager Courses provided by the Military Housing and Lodging
Institute as part of our training curriculum.
The Marine Corps will institute a new approach to barracks
management that directly addresses Recommendation 28 of the GAO-23-
105797 report. This new model will replace Marines with civilians to
professionalize the workforce and address systemic backlog issues such
as tracking inventory and maintenance. A training framework for the
civilian workforce will be developed and include building management as
a core competency.
Ms. Jacobs. Can you please share the amount of investments your
service has made to improve unaccompanied military housing using FSRM
funds? Please include how this amount equals or surpasses the required
five percent of the estimated replacement cost of the total inventory
of unaccompanied housing.
Mr. Moriarty. For permanent party dorms, the FY22 NDAA, Sec. 2814,
required DAF to invest no less than 5% of the remaining service
potential over the FY22-26 FYDP. This equates to approximately $1.1B on
permanent party dorms for FY22-26. We are focused on meeting the NDAA
requirement. In FY23 DAF funded 36 projects at $276M and plans to spend
$230M for 33 projects in FY24. Similar investments are in the planning
stages to occur through FY26. The DAF believes this level of investment
is adequate to keep our dormitories good as in accordance with the OSD
standard.
Ms. Jacobs. When your service places an MHPI housing partner on a
``performance improvement plan,'' is that public information?
Mr. Moriarty. It is DAF's understanding that if a MHPI housing
partner company is placed on a performance improvement plan (PIP), DAF
can release the specific MHPI housing partner company name and their
respective installations but cannot release the specific Lines of
Efforts (LOEs) required to satisfy the PIP as they are considered
commercial confidential material and therefore not releasable to the
public.
Ms. Jacobs. What concerns are severe enough to warrant a housing
partner be issued a ``letter of concern'' or be placed on a performance
improvement plan?
Mr. Moriarty. It is DAF's understanding that if a MHPI housing
partner company is placed on a performance improvement plan (PIP), DAF
can release the specific MHPI housing partner company name and their
respective installations but cannot release the specific Lines of
Efforts (LOEs) required to satisfy the PIP as they are considered
commercial confidential material and therefore not releasable to the
public.
Ms. Jacobs. How many and which housing partners have been issued a
``letter of concern'' or been placed on a performance improvement plan
in the past 5 years? Please provide a complete list, and this can come
back in CUI form if needed.
Mr. Moriarty. Our transaction documents call for performance
improvement plans when there are severe systemic concerns with the
performance of a project owner. Since the inception of the MHPI
program, DAF has placed two of our privatized project owners on a
performance improvement plan. Those two project owners are Hunt
Military Communities and Balfour Beatty Companies. Between the two
project owners, they manage 19 of 31 DAF MHPI projects, representing 46
of 67 DAF Locations with privatized housing.
Both project owners were identified as requiring placement on a
performance improvement plan due to systemic operational and resident
satisfaction issues identified at multiple installations within their
respective privatized housing portfolios.
Ms. Jacobs. How are your services disseminating information for new
and existing residents in MHPI about their rights?
Mr. Moriarty. Per Department of the Air Force Instruction (DAFI)
requirements, Military Housing Offices (MHO) at each DAF MHPI project
installation are required to provide each incoming prospective Service
member tenant with an in-person new tenant briefing, including a plain-
language overview of the tenant lease, prior to the Service member
signing their MHPI housing lease agreement. The new tenant briefing
includes a review of tenant's responsibilities regarding the assigned
unit and surrounding common grounds, tenant liability and dispute
resolution process information, disclosure of environmental and safety
hazards, processes for reporting of maintenance and repair
requirements, and details in preparation for lease termination.
Oversight processes are in place to ensure no lease agreement is signed
by Service members until the unit has been inspected and approved by
the MHO for occupancy, and the incoming Service member tenant briefing
is completed. In addition, all MHPI housing residents are invited to
participate in town halls and resident councils led by installation
commanders or their deputy. These forums allow residents to raise
issues, request information on the Tenant bill of rights, learn about
installation resources available to address issues with their housing
unit, and understand actions underway within their MHPI communities.
Ms. Jacobs. When issues in private military housing arise and
residents need to go through the formal dispute resolution process, how
are you tracking dispute resolutions and their outcomes? What are your
services doing to ensure that residents know where to contact their
tenant advocates?
Mr. Moriarty. Per Department of the Air Force Instruction (DAFI)
requirements, Military Housing Offices (MHO) at each DAF MHPI project
installation are required to track all disputes, both formal and
informal within eMH (DAF housing system of record). On a quarterly
basis, MHOs are also required to send consolidated dispute resolution
statistics, to include resolutions and outcomes, through the
Secretariat level to ensure all relevant stakeholders have adequate
awareness.
The DAF MHO briefs residents regarding the dispute resolution
process and provides them the Resident Advocate and legal assistance
points of contact during the new resident move in brief. The MHO also
provides the Tenant Bill of Rights and Dispute Resolution brochure to
all new tenants. These rights are reinforced at Town Hall meetings and
with other information tools such as refrigerator magnets and on-base
signage. The DAF continues to incorporate lessons learned from past
formal disputes to provide greater clarity.
Ms. Jacobs. Would you consider eliminating barracks management as a
collateral duty? Additionally, would you consider an alternative plan
of building management certifications as part of training courses?
Mr. Moriarty. The Department of the Air Force (DAF) assigns
Unaccompanied Housing (UH) Managers/Superintendents, and Airmen Dorm
Leaders (ADLs) to manage daily operations of permanent party dorms as
their assigned duty (it is not a collateral or additional duty). There
are various courses these Airmen complete as an UH Manager/ADL.
ADLs are selected and assigned an Air Force Specialty Code of
8H000, per the Air Force Enlisted Classification. Military Housing
Offices work in concert with Installation Command Chief Master
Sergeants to ensure nominated members meet the quality force indicators
and leadership traits required of an ADL.
Currently, all UH staff members must enroll in the Unaccompanied
Housing Leadership (in-residence) course conducted by the Air Force
Institute of Technology upon assignment selection for the UH position.
In addition, these individuals complete the on-line Air Force Civil
Engineer Center facility management course and attend the base-provided
facility management course. To ensure consistency and completion of all
DAF assigned duties, their roles and responsibilities are identified
and recorded on AF Form 797, Job Qualification Standard.'' DAF will
assess whether any further training or certification program is needed.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. STRICKLAND
Ms. Strickland. There is a growing body of research that indicates
a built environment can have physiological and psychological benefits.
``An increasing amount of evidence shows that wood has beneficial
effects in almost all parts of the indoor climate. It helps reduce
stress, blood pressure and heart-rate as well as allowing for more
creativity and productivity in the workplace. Wood is also an important
part of what's called biophilic design; our desire to be connected with
the natural environment.'' (https://mithun.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/
12/MassTimberSchools_Rep ort.pdf)
To what extent has the your service considered the Biophilic
benefits of mass timber construction? Does the Department offer any
contracting preferences for construction materials that offer these
types of benefits that would therefore increase the quality of life of
our servicemembers? If not, what would the Department need in order to
include Biophilic benefits in contract consideration?
Ms. Coulson. The Army plans to pilot the use of mass timber in a
single soldier housing (barracks) project at Joint Base Lewis McChord
with the intent to use lessons learned from that project to expand use
of mass timber if economical to do so.
We have surveyed academic research sources and have met with
university researchers to identify actionable data on the biophilic
benefits of wood in the indoor environment. This research is ongoing.
These findings will be augmented with the occupant outcomes and user
satisfaction data collected from our mass timber pilot project.
Based on the results of the pilot project and our ongoing research,
the Army and the Corps of Engineers will seek to balance definable
quality of life benefits with any added costs from mass timber
construction premiums. One of the objectives of the pilot project is to
provide this type of actionable data.
Ms. Strickland. There is a growing body of research that indicates
a built environment can have physiological and psychological benefits.
``An increasing amount of evidence shows that wood has beneficial
effects in almost all parts of the indoor climate. It helps reduce
stress, blood pressure and heart-rate as well as allowing for more
creativity and productivity in the workplace. Wood is also an important
part of what's called biophilic design; our desire to be connected with
the natural environment.'' (https://mithun.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/
12/MassTimberSchools_Rep ort.pdf)
To what extent has the your service considered the Biophilic
benefits of mass timber construction? Does the Department offer any
contracting preferences for construction materials that offer these
types of benefits that would therefore increase the quality of life of
our servicemembers? If not, what would the Department need in order to
include Biophilic benefits in contract consideration?
Mr. Thompson. The DON is currently investigating a range of
innovative and sustainable building techniques to incorporate into
future pilot projects to focus on keeping people comfortable, not the
building itself. Features like passive mechanical systems, natural
lighting, multi-zone heating and cooling, integrated designs, and
natural features (green walls, roofs, etc) can increase comfort levels,
as well as physical and emotional well-being, for personnel working and
living inside our facilities, as well as making systems more efficient
and easier to maintain.
In addition, in accordance with section 2861 of the FY22 NDAA, the
DON is executing a Sustainable Building Material Pilot Project (Project
P-1334, Child Development Center at Naval Support Activity Hampton
Roads, VA) in FY24. While still in the initial phases of material
selection and design, the DON is considering a wide range of
sustainable materials such as mass timber, brick and phenolic siding,
synthetic composite slate-like tile shingles, and fiberglass window
frames. Lessons learned from this pilot project will be incorporated
into future design criteria to ensure a more sustainable shore
portfolio.
Ms. Strickland. There is a growing body of research that indicates
a built environment can have physiological and psychological benefits.
``An increasing amount of evidence shows that wood has beneficial
effects in almost all parts of the indoor climate. It helps reduce
stress, blood pressure and heart-rate as well as allowing for more
creativity and productivity in the workplace. Wood is also an important
part of what's called biophilic design; our desire to be connected with
the natural environment.'' (https://mithun.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/
12/MassTimberSchools_Rep ort.pdf)
To what extent has the your service considered the Biophilic
benefits of mass timber construction? Does the Department offer any
contracting preferences for construction materials that offer these
types of benefits that would therefore increase the quality of life of
our servicemembers? If not, what would the Department need in order to
include Biophilic benefits in contract consideration?
Mr. Moriarty. The DAF continually reviews the costs and benefits of
material selection to balance health, energy, life-cycle costs, and
mission effectiveness of its selections. The DAF has not considered or
evaluated the Biophilic benefits of mass timber construction. However,
the Air Force is currently evaluating projects as candidates for mass
timber to meet the requirements highlighted in Section 2815 of S.2226
and anticipated in the final Fiscal Year 2024 National Defense
Authorization Act. No decision has been made on which project(s) will
be proposed.
Additionally, the DAF does not offer any contracting preferences
for mass timber or similar construction materials. The DAF remains
committed to allowing contractors to provide innovative solutions and
concepts for consideration to meet our Military Construction
requirements.
We promote the use of alternate material selections by allowing
contractors to offer value engineering proposals in the design-build
process. The use of timber has not made broad gains in areas such as
dormitories, child-care centers and other QoL facilities due to its
lower strength-to-weight ratio, higher flammability, and vulnerability
to wood boring insects and rot. However, timber remains the most
utilized resource for family housing construction.

[all]
