- [H.A.S.C. No. 118-12] SENIOR ENLISTED LEADER PERSPECTIVE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-12]

SENIOR ENLISTED LEADER PERSPECTIVE

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 9, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-803              WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

JIM BANKS, Indiana, Chairman

ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CORY MILLS, Florida                  STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada

Dave Giachetti, Professional Staff Member
Ilka Regino, Professional Staff Member
Alexandria Evers, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Banks, Hon. Jim, a Representative from Indiana, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel.............................     1
Kim, Hon. Andy, a Representative from New Jersey, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel.............................     2

WITNESSES

Bass, CMSgt JoAnne S., USAF......................................     7
Black, SgtMaj Troy E., USM.......................................     9
Grinston, SGM Michael A., USA....................................     4
Honea, MCPO James M., USN........................................     6
Towberman, CMSgt Roger A., USSF..................................    11

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Banks, Hon. Jim..............................................    45
Bass, CMSgt JoAnne S.........................................    69
Black, SgtMaj Troy E.........................................    81
Grinston, SGM Michael A......................................    49
Honea, MCPO James M..........................................    62
Kim, Hon. Andy...............................................    47
Towberman, CMSgt Roger A.....................................    97

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bergman..................................................   109
Mr. Moylan...................................................   116
Mr. Waltz....................................................   111

SENIOR ENLISTED LEADER PERSPECTIVE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Military Personnel,
Washington, DC, Thursday, March 9, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jim Banks
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM BANKS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
INDIANA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

The Chairman. The hearing will now come to order.
I want to welcome everyone to this hearing of the Military
Personnel Subcommittee.
Today's hearing is focused on the health and welfare of the
Enlisted force and their families from the perspective of the
Service Senior Enlisted leaders.
I want to thank our witnesses for being with us today, for
their service to the Nation, and for their continued daily
support and advocacy of our Enlisted service members and their
families.
I personally owe a debt of gratitude to all of the Enlisted
service members I served with and that have helped me along the
way during my Navy Reserve career.
I also want to thank the thousands of Enlisted service
members--Active Duty, Reservists, and Guard Members--who are
serving this Nation around the world as we speak here this
morning. We ask all of you to put your trust and confidence in
us to provide for you and your families. And as always, you
have answered the call and put service before self.
But what I would like to know is whether we are doing
everything that we can to support our All-Volunteer Force--an
All-Volunteer Force that has placed the covenant of trust in
our military leaders. Trust is a tricky thing because we
oftentimes can't see it; yet, we know it exists. Trust is
embodied in the spirit of the service member that is willing to
sacrifice for their unit and their country because they have an
abiding belief that their leaders will take care of them.
But when I see the stories in the press about poor barracks
and housing conditions, access to healthcare challenges, food
insecurity, high suicide numbers--and the list goes on--I
wonder if there has been an erosion of trust within the
military and whether that can be restored. Actually, it must be
restored to ensure that we have the men and women we need to
serve in the best military in the world.
And that is the focus of today's hearing, an unvarnished
assessment from the top Enlisted leaders of each Service on
whether the Department of Defense and each individual Service
has lived up to this unbreakable contract with the All-
Volunteer Force. This is a contract of trust that is critical
to recruiting and retention. I submit that they have fallen
short in many areas, several of which we will explore here
today.
Our witnesses have the pulse of our Enlisted service
members and know what service policies affect their decisions
to join, to stay, or to go. What I would like to understand
today is whether the services and the Department of Defense
have not lived up to their responsibilities. Is it pay?
Healthcare? Childcare? Assignments? Social policies? Food
access? Housing? Other benefits? The answer is likely some
combination of all of these things.
Secretary Austin reiterated, again, in a March memo to the
Force that, quote, ``People are the bedrock of a strong
national defense,'' and that, quote, ``We made significant
investments to improve the quality of life for our service
members and their families.''
And yet, despite this rhetoric, we find out that, through
Department of Defense's [DOD's] own survey process that ``45
percent of spouses of service members in pay grades E-1 to E-4
are food insecure'' and that some ``25 percent of military
members overall are food insecure.''
This is clearly and completely unacceptable and a further
erosion of trust with our service members. Remember, this is an
All-Volunteer Force. This is certainly a recruiting issue. How
do you get people to enlist if this is what they will face?
So, for this hearing, I want to hear from our witnesses on
their views of where the stressors are on our Enlisted service
members and their families, and where the Department and the
Services need to change policy or to address funding. I think
with aggressive oversight from this committee, we can prompt
quick action to keep the faith with those that we ask so much
of.
So, I now want to welcome our witnesses: Sergeant Major
Michael Grinston, Sergeant Major of the Army; Master Chief
Petty Officer James Honea, Master Chief Petty Officer of the
Navy; Chief Master Sergeant Joanne Bass, Chief Master Service
of the Air Force; Sergeant Major Troy Black, Sergeant Major of
the Marine Corps; Chief Master Sergeant Roger Towberman, Chief
Master Sergeant of the Space Force.
But, before hearing from our witnesses, let me offer
Ranking Member Kim an opportunity to make opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Banks can be found in
the Appendix on page 45.]

STATEMENT OF HON. ANDY KIM, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW JERSEY,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON MILITARY PERSONNEL

Mr. Kim. Yes, thank you, Chairman.
It has been quite a few years since we have had the Service
Senior Enlisted leaders testify, and I look forward to hearing
from you about the issues that matter most.
I want to just thank the Chairman for your framing today in
terms of what we are trying to deal with and what it is that is
the core of this. I think your distillation there of talking
about it in terms of trust is really at the heart of this.
Right now, we recognize that we are asking a lot of our
service members. We ask them to risk their lives, be able to
protect our country. And the promise that we make back to them
is that we will have their backs; that we will support them and
their families, especially in their time of need. And honestly,
as the Chairman mentioned, we don't always live up to that, and
we need to make sure that we are doing better.
One example of that that I face constantly when I talk to
service members at Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, in my
district, is the challenge about suicide and mental health;
that there is recognition that people that I talk to, they
struggle to get the care that they need, even when they are
asking for it. So, this is something that we need to work
together on to be able to address and ensure that our service
members don't just get adequate care, but they get the best
care that our country can provide.
As several of you alluded to in your testimonies, you may
recruit the Soldier, the Sailor, Marine, Airmen, or Guardian,
but to retain them, you must retain the family. So, ensuring
access to quality healthcare, safe housing, affordable child
care, and the right pay and benefits package is critical to
sustaining the health of the Force.
Military compensation is a combination of various pay and
allowances, some of which are taxed and others not. While
Congress was able to deliver a 4.6 percent across-the-board pay
increase to all service members, I believe it may be time we
consider reevaluating whether there are additional ways that we
could help deliver important support to our service members and
their families.
I'm looking forward to the findings from the Quadrennial
Review of Military Compensation, which kicked off in January,
although I admit the results could be delivered faster. In the
meantime, I had been optimistic that short-term solutions would
have an impact on the financial challenges faced by some
service members. Yet, I was disappointed to see so few service
members are eligible for the Basic Needs Allowance provision in
last year's National Defense Authorization Act [NDAA]. We can
and must do better.
Like most of my colleagues, I am gravely concerned by the
findings of the Research and Development [RAND] Corporation
report about food insecurity that the Chairman mentioned,
problems approximating 25 percent of Active Duty service
members struggling when it comes to food insecurity. I
appreciate that more research is needed to identify root causes
of this problem. Is it a pay issue, a money management issue,
an access-to-food issue, or some combination of all of the
above? I'm looking forward to reviewing potential concrete
actions that the soon-to-be-released fiscal year 2024 defense
budget includes to address this urgent issue.
I'm also grateful we are having this hearing today, so we
can address the pressing recruiting challenges faced by the
Services. Over the last 10 years, we have seen that steady
decrease in the eligible youth population to serve without a
waiver. And while waivers have become increasingly common among
recruits, ineligibility to serve due to multiple reasons is the
predominant disqualifier.
In addition, we continue to see a decrease in young adults
who have close ties to the military or basic knowledge about
what Services look like. Perhaps, as we celebrate the 50th year
of the All-Volunteer Force, we should be asking ourselves if
the tools we are using are the most effective for the
generation that often has different perspectives and priorities
when approaching the question of what kind of work and career
that they seek.
Lastly, we must address the multitude of quality-of-life
issues that impact our service members and their families. As I
mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, healthcare, housing,
childcare, and pay and benefits are critical components of a
ready and healthy Force. And I am confident we can find common
ground across party lines to do what is right for the most
important military asset, which is our people.
I yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Kim can be found
in the Appendix on page 47.]
The Chairman. I thank the Ranking Member.
I ask unanimous consent to allow members not on the
subcommittee to participate in today's hearing and be allowed
to ask questions after all subcommittee members have been
recognized.
Each witness will have the opportunity to present his or
her testimony, and each member will have an opportunity to
question the witnesses for 5 minutes.
We respectfully ask the witnesses to summarize their
testimony in 5 minutes or less. Your written comments and
statements will be made part of the hearing record.
With that, Sergeant Major Grinston, you may make the
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SGM MICHAEL A. GRINSTON, USA

Sergeant Major Grinston. Chairman Banks, Ranking Member
Kim, distinguished members of this subcommittee, thank you for
the invitation to speak on behalf of your All-Volunteer Army.
And I would like to, again, thank my fellow Senior Enlisted
advisors a lot. I talk a lot about my squad and having more
than one squad, and I am proud to be a part of this squad that
is here testifying today.
I am even more proud of the soldiers in your Army. Right
now, more than 23,000 Soldiers are supporting combat operations
in places like Africa, Iraq, and Syria--not just training and
advising--combat. What started as a no-notice deployment of the
82nd Airborne Division to Europe, their fourth in 3 years, now
includes 17,000 additional troops to the region.
And then, last spring, the 1st Armored Brigade Combat Team
of the 3rd Infantry Division had just returned from a 9 month
rotation in Korea when they were called for a no-notice
deployment to Europe. Seven days later, they were doing a live
fire exercise in Germany. I challenge anyone, any nation, to
see who could do that. And in 36 years, I have never seen
anything like it.
America's Soldiers are lethal, effective, and ready to
surge when called upon in times of crisis. That doesn't just
happen overnight. It doesn't happen without the support of this
subcommittee. That means modernizing and becoming the Army of
2030.
Last year, we were awarded contracts for the XM5 and the
XM250 as eventual replacements for the M4 and the M4-249. These
weapons, paired with a new rifle control system and a 6.8
millimeter ammunition, make our close combat force more lethal
with its proven accuracy and increased energy on target.
We are also looking at ways to augment those forces with
robotics. Last summer, Army Futures Command led the largest
ground combat robotics experiment to date. By connecting
Soldiers with scientists and engineers at a critical
development juncture, just one Soldier touchpoint helped save
billions of dollars and saved years off the potential fielding
timeline.
That means preparing Soldiers to make a difference through
specialized training, access to relevant certifications, and
advanced education.
We increased infantry One Station Unit Training from 14
weeks to 22 weeks, putting greater focus on building a lethal
ground force.
We combined the testing of common Soldier tasks with expert
badges, resulting in a 9 percent increase in pass rates for all
Soldiers and a 353 percent increase in expert Soldier and field
medical badges awarded.
These are the kinds of Soldiers who make up your Army, not
someone else's army. Your support means investing in the
Command Assessment Program to select the right Battalion and
Brigade Commanders and Command Sergeant Majors who build
positive command climates at echelon.
It means understanding the Army life and never forgetting
about our families, who endure the stress of a loved one away
or uncertainty of them leaving at a moment's notice.
It is investing in barracks, dining facilities for our
single Soldiers, meaningful spouse employment, quality housing,
and available child care for our families, and better access to
healthcare for all.
And it is a direct action from our elected officials to
address pay. No Soldier, Airman, Guardian, Sailor, Marine,
Coast Guardsman should join the military, and then experience
economic food insecurity, period.
Recruiting and retaining the best begins with reminding
every American the Army provides an opportunity to be all you
can be.
Polling shows that propensity for military service is 9
percent, the lowest in 15 years, and the qualification rate for
military service among 17- to 24-year-olds has decreased from
29 to 23 percent.
Young men and women want to be a part of something larger
than themselves. They want to gain new skills. They want to
make a difference in the world around them and provide for
themselves and their families.
We need a national call to service, a dialog that service
to our Nation does anything but put your life on hold, as
recent polling suggests. Unless we have the full support of
this committee behind them, the call to service only goes so
far.
Before I close, I request that each of you encourage young
Americans to consider public service, either as a teacher, a
first responder, a civil servant, in the military, or any other
way. Help us remind people you can jumpstart your life,
contribute positively to our society, and be all you can be.
Thank you for this opportunity to be here today, and I look
forward to our conversation.
[The prepared statement of Sergeant Major Grinston can be
found in the Appendix on page 49.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Master Chief Honea.

STATEMENT OF MCPO JAMES M. HONEA, USN

Master Chief Petty Officer Honea. Chairman Banks, Ranking
Member Kim, and distinguished members of this subcommittee, I
am grateful for the opportunity to appear before you and
discuss the quality of life of our Sailors and their families.
During my tenure, I want to do all that I can within my
sphere of influence to improve the quality of naval service and
remove barriers that impact readiness, so that we can remain a
dominant naval force to deter conflict, keep the sea lanes open
and free, and when called upon, decisively win our Nation's
wars.
In an era of strategic competition, if we are to maintain
trained and equip a combat-credible Force, we owe our sailors
and their families stability in their pay, access to timely
healthcare and services, as well as opportunities to develop
personally and professionally.
Their individual success and the Navy's collective mission
accomplishment rely on ability to provide an environment that
promotes inclusiveness and a sense of value to the team, that
ensures recruiting and retaining the talent our Nation
requires.
In the 6 months of being Master Chief Petty Officer [MCPO],
I have traveled to our fleet concentration areas to hear
directly from our Sailors and their families about their
concerns.
Access to adequate medical care and services, and timely
care, is a top concern. In places like the Pacific Northwest,
there have been two naval hospitals that were downgraded,
requiring our Sailors and their families to drive an hour or
more to seek military medicine and specialized care.
Obtaining access to care isn't just a problem for our
service members, though. It also includes our Department of
Defense civilians and their families. In some of our overseas
locations, they face medical care challenges because they are
unable to access military medical treatment facilities due to
the care priority.
Our Department of Defense civilians are a part of our total
military family and work directly alongside our military teams.
As it stands, we will begin losing some of these employees that
are mission-critical.
To prepare our Sailors for combat, we must ensure each of
our members of our team is resilient. Mental health is a
warfighting readiness necessity, and we are facing significant
mental health challenges.
TRICARE has partnered with some telehealth programs.
However, Active Duty members must still make an appointment
with their primary care provider for a referral. This increases
the wait time; therefore, missing the intent of more accessible
healthcare. I ask for your continued support in these programs.
If our team is to remain a dominant naval force, we must
continue focusing on the factors that influence our recruiting
and retention efforts--assessing situations that impact our
All-Volunteer Forces' propensity to serve and build a stronger
national call to service.
Every Sailor is a recruiter, and we ask for your support to
influence those around you to consider public service as an
opportunity to be part of something bigger than themselves.
This year's pay increases were a historical milestone for
our military compensation package, and we are very grateful.
However, our Sailors are still facing challenges to meet basic
needs in their economies. Affordable housing, food cost, and
finding adequate childcare remain enormous stressors within our
high-cost fleet concentration areas.
If we want to retain our professional and qualified service
members, and give tangible incentives to sustain a military
career, I ask Congress to look at pay increases and
compensation, and retention bonuses, to ensure that we
appropriately keep them compensated.
We are asking our men and women to be the best and most
skilled warfighters to defend our Nation, and the risk of
losing these talented Sailors will have dire consequences on
our future fighting force.
The United States Naval Community College reinforces our
warfighting advantage and enhances operational readiness by
providing world-class naval-relevant education to a globally
deployed force. This program is partnered with colleges
throughout the United States to provide degree and professional
certificate options. This empowers our enlisted force to
succeed in complex and uncertain situations they will face in
future conflict and serves as a force multiplier that will be
the advantage over our adversaries.
I am honored to be here today and to appear before you on
behalf of our 390,000 Sailors, their families, and our
civilians deployed across the globe.
I am committed to removing barriers from service that
prevent them from having a safe and secure place to live and
work in the execution of their Oath of Enlistment. Military
service is one of the hardest things our Sailors, Marines,
Soldiers, Airmen, and Guardians will ever be asked to do. With
your continued support to our Navy and our families, you enable
us to remain ready for any situation.
I thank you for your time this morning, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Master Chief Petty Officer Honea
can be found in the Appendix on page 62.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass.

STATEMENT OF CMSGT JOANNE S. BASS, USAF

Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Good morning. Chairman Banks,
thanks for your service, sir. Ranking Member Kim, thank you for
your support. And to the distinguished members of this
subcommittee, thank you for your continued interest and support
in the quality of life of the men and women who serve our great
Nation.
I am honored for this opportunity to join my brothers in
arms and speak with you specifically on the issues impacting
your Air Force and the lives of our airmen and their families.
Right now as we speak, there are 16,021 Airmen deployed
across the globe, conducting operations to defend our homeland,
build strong alliances and partners, and ensure the rules-based
international order remains unchallenged.
We find ourselves at a critical point in the trajectory of
our great Nation. For the first time in modern history, we are
facing challenges from two strategic competitors: China and
Russia. And while China might be our most significant pacing
challenge, we cannot ignore the acute threat that Russia also
plays.
I am here to tell you that, more than any platform, more
than any system, more than any program, it is our service
members who will, who are, and always will be our biggest
competitive advantage.
As the Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force, I have the
distinct privilege to meet and get to know our Airmen, hear
their stories, talk with their families, and listen to their
concerns and the unique challenges that they face as members of
our Force.
They are the Airmen who are serving in your districts, and
I am honored to be their voice. They answer our Nation's call
without hesitation and without fail. Therefore, it falls upon
us to ensure that the Airmen of today have the resources
required to serve in the highest trained, best-equipped, and
best-led Air Force this world has ever seen.
In order to be the Air Force that our Nation needs, we must
prioritize both the quality of life and the quality of service
of our Airmen and their families. The over 689,000 total force
Airmen who I represent have afforded me a unique perspective on
the direction our Air Force needs to go.
Over the past year, I have seen examples of our Airmen
working extremely hard to get after the operational imperatives
and accelerate the change that our Air Force needs to build a
future operating concept that maintains our dominance, even as
China attempts to close that gap.
They understand that rapidly evolving challenges, new
domains of warfare, and near-peer competitors will define
future-state operations. And we must continue to provide our
support to them as they faithfully support and defend this
great Nation.
I met one of those airmen this week, in fact, Master
Sergeant Aaron Cordroch, who is stationed at Hurlburt Field,
Florida. He was at the Warfare Symposium I was at to highlight
a project that he created to identify cyber threats to our
maintenance systems. What impressed me most, in his words, that
he is doing all of this to make our Air Force better--all the
while serving alongside his Active Duty wife and raising their
son. They are truly an example of the dedication and
professionalism that we see in abundance in our United States
Air Force.
And how we recruit; how we train and develop; how we
compensate, retain, and care for our Airmen are key to our
success and they are key to our readiness. We have a strong
modernization strategy and we will need your help.
As we continue to move forward and focus on the Air Force
of 2030 and beyond, there is much to be done. We will continue
to develop the Airmen that we need and create an environment
where every single one of them can thrive and be their very
best.
We need our Airmen to remain focused and committed to
defending the homeland, and we cannot have them distracted by
whether or not they can find quality and affordable housing,
spouse employment opportunities, or other challenges such as
healthcare, childcare, inflation, and food insecurity. When
these are not readily available, our ability to accomplish the
military mission and to deter our adversaries is absolutely
degraded.
We also have to acknowledge that the scope of
responsibility of our enlisted force has never been greater.
However, we will be challenged in retaining and recruiting the
talent that we need if we are not able to appropriately
compensate them.
For 50 years, every single service member has willingly
raised their right hand and accepted a life of service to our
Nation, and we must ensure that the care and welfare for them
and their families remains an undisputed priority. These things
are integral to who we are and imperative to our future
success. Taking these issues on demonstrates our commitment to
our service members and their families, and ultimately, builds
their trust in our great institution.
As we work with you, our willing partners, in developing
actionable solutions to build that trust and care for our
Airmen and our families, we have to fundamentally understand
that quality of life directly impacts quality of service. It
also impacts our ability to recruit and retain high-end talent
that we need to build the future Force.
Our Airmen are America's sons and daughters, serving at one
of the most complex times we have ever known. They are an All-
Volunteer Force ready to fight tonight, and they are ready to
defend our Nation. These are Americans who are not just content
to sit back and watch history unfold; they are making it. If we
accept these challenges that they face as a cost of doing
business, it becomes a cost that is borne by our service
members and our families.
The work that we do with this subcommittee absolutely
matters. So, thank you again for your continued support for the
men and women who wear this uniform. Thank you in advance for
the help from each of you that you will provide to help ensure
that we have timely authorizations and appropriations.
We cannot afford to degrade our readiness. We cannot afford
to spot China any more time. That will be a cost that is borne
by all Americans.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Chief Master Sergeant Bass can
be found in the Appendix on page 69.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Sergeant Major Black.

STATEMENT OF SGTMAJ TROY E. BLACK, USM

Sergeant Major Black. Chairman Banks, Ranking Member Kim,
and distinguished members of the Subcommittee, I'm honored to
speak to you today on behalf of your United States Marines. And
thank you for your time in allowing me to provide you with the
state of your Marine Corps.
I will also echo the previous members, and I know I will
speak on behalf of the Chief Master Sergeant of Space Force,
now in saying we are proud to be part of this squad, as the
Sergeant Major of the Army has spoken to a moment ago.
We represent your entire enlisted force. The bottom line
upfront is that your Marines are ready to fight and win. The
technological enhancements and the paradigm of how we fight has
evolved to better prepare us for the uncertain future, but a
certain foe. For those, we must thank our people, our Marines,
who are the greatest strategic advantage over any foe.
The American people know that service is not a given in our
society, and this issue rests on the shoulders of all of us in
this room today. Today, I ask that we refocus our attention on
the five pillars of the All-Volunteer Force, so that we may
preserve our force of a noble group of motivated warfighters:
the connection with the American people that drives propensity;
equitable real income pay and compensation; quality-of-life
standards; adequate medical care, and long-term retirement
benefits that retain our most experienced, capable warfighters.
As we approach the 50th-year anniversary of the All-
Volunteer Force, it is time to redress the issues that affect
these pillars, starting with the eroding connection with the
American people. Negative depiction and conversation about our
service members in the media, social media, pop culture have
all become unbalanced, inaccurate, and quite frankly, they are
unjust. We must challenge the misconceptions and make bigger
strides in valuing our service members publicly. We need
immediate action if we are determined to increase the
propensity to serve our Nation.
I have the privilege of access to the entire Marine Corps
in my nearly 4 years as the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps.
I have toured buildings, flight lines, hangars, ships, and, of
course, the barracks and the chow halls where our Marines live,
work, and reside.
It is clear to me that we must increase our investment in
the quality of life of our Marines. Many of our barracks are
more than 30 years old and in dire need of renovations, about
one-sixth of which the Marine Corps has, they are poor or they
are failing. I visited a barracks in Camp Pendleton just a
couple of weeks ago that has had deferred maintenance for over
12 years, and Marines live there.
Along with a quality home, our Marines and families require
quality care. Although the Defense Health Agency is currently
undertaking the largest revision of healthcare in our history,
this transformation has not yet fully satisfied the
expectations of our families or service members, in particular,
those in overseas locations. Currently, in Japan, a military
service member does not have access to emergent care in a
military facility and the local economy does not provide such
care--in addition to a lack of mental healthcare for the same
reasons. This is unsustainable for our force.
Suicide and harmful behaviors remain Corps-wide concerns,
as well as all the services, and have lasting negative effects
on all of us. We know as a society that mental healthcare is
lacking, more so in our services because the additional
healthcare that is provided in the military treatment
facilities no longer exists in abundance. We need help here.
Our Marines serve with honor, courage, and commitment, and
we will continue to do so with respect for human life. The
lifeblood of our unit cohesion and esprit de corps and respect
to each other is what keeps us a close, cohesive family.
We will continue to remain committed to prevention of
sexual assault, sexual harassment, and other poor behaviors.
Offenders will be held accountable.
There is a waitlist at some of our child care facilities.
We will address those conversations in the upcoming testimony,
for our biggest problem with child care provision is being able
to pay an equitable fee to those who provide that care. We have
vacancies.
Lastly, I thank this committee for your 4.2 percent pay
raise last year. However, we must pay our Enlisted Marines and
service members wages that move them far away for qualifying
for any federal assistance.
If Enlisted wages continue to lack in terms of real income,
one of the foundational pillars of the All-Volunteer Force will
be at risk and will continue to challenge recruiting and
retention. We look forward to the upcoming review, or results
of the Quadrennial Review to see how those things are
addressed.
Lastly, today, as always, we have more than 30,000 Marines
forward-deployed who are well-trained, lethal, and capable.
They are forward-deployed in locations in 45 countries across
the world. Every Embassy and Consulate is guarded by Marines.
Your Marines are currently conducting, or have conducted,
23 real-world operations, either in the air, on amphibious
ships, on land, in space, or in special forces. They have
conducted three amphibious operations, eight large-scale
exercises--and the list goes on. Your Marines, as well as the
rest of the services, are forward-deployed protecting our
Nation.
I am thankful for this committee's attention and the
consideration of these issues that we face today--with
barracks, pay, healthcare, childcare, and other issues that the
All-Volunteer Force must address before it is too late.
I look forward to working with each of you and the rest of
this testimony. Thank you, sir.
[The prepared statement of Sergeant Major Black can be
found in the Appendix on page 81.]
The Chairman. Thank you.
Chief Master Sergeant Towberman.

STATEMENT OF CMSGT ROGER A. TOWBERMAN, USSF

Chief Master Sergeant Towberman. Chairman, thank you.
Distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank you for
everything you do for our Guardians, their loved ones, and your
Space Force. Thank you for your service to our country and your
steadfast leadership in support for our service members; also,
your willingness to make a difference.
I am honored beyond words to speak on behalf of our
uniformed and civil servant Guardians around the world. On
behalf of all of them, I thank you all for what you do and your
time here today.
I would also like to extend my sincere thank you to our
deployed Guardians around the world ensuring space superiority
for the joint and coalition fight and the nearly 75 percent of
our force who know and live the reality of 24-hour-a-day, 7-
days-a-week, employed-in-place missions, which enable not only
military operations, but modernity itself.
Without question, our greatest weapon system lives and
breathes. Our service members set us further apart and more
definitely apart than any other weapon system, technology, or
strategy ever has. I can think of no more fitting way to mark
our 50th anniversary of All-Volunteer Force than to discuss the
recruitment, readiness, and quality of life with you here
today.
As regularly as I can, I visit our Guardians and their
families around the globe, hearing what is on their minds and
in their hearts. I try hard to hear what they say and even more
so what they don't. My commitment to represent their voice
could not be stronger, and I work hard to get truth from all
levels. Every connection and every story matters, and I am
honored to spend as much as I possibly can hearing those
stories. Every single Guardian matters to us and to me
personally.
Our leaders in the field also do their best and we empower
them to do so--to see what could be missed; to ask hard
questions, and to find out what is going on. Recently, one of
our Senior Master Sergeants took that empowerment at Schriever
Space Force Base and stepped in when policy failed to find
solutions and keep one of our most talent guardians who
otherwise would have separated. Thanks to Sergeant Cherish
Dempsey.
These individual acts matter in a small service. It is one
person, but it matters to the Space Force. The culture we are
unleashing, the guardian spirit we are amplifying is changing
lives as we change the world.
Your Guardians represent some of America's most highly
technical professionally skilled and talented cohorts, which
makes them at times difficult to recruit and difficult to
retain. As I mentioned earlier, nearly 75 percent are employed-
in-place. They have unique challenges to their resilience and
quality of life.
Imagine spending your day providing missile warning to
people on the other side of the planet, and then, punching out
to go home to play ball with your child, while the news reports
on the lives you helped save, but you can't talk about it. It
is not a normal military life, and the better we understand and
address these unique challenges, the better our hope to
maximize their skills, talent, and experience which are
critical to our mission--a mission that grows more complex and
more complicated by the day.
When we first stood up the Space Force, we tracked 1,500
spacecraft and 25,000 objects in orbit. Today, that number is
7,000 spacecraft and 50,000 objects. Robotic arms, direct-
descent threats, hypersonic glide vehicles--the list goes on.
There is no question our domain has never been more congested,
more contested, or more competitive. And finding and retaining
the most talented Guardians possible is a matter of national
security.
Young Americans value choice, and the young Americans this
country needs in the Space Force have many. Recruiting and
retention challenges are real, even for our small force. We
must do what we can to remain an employer of choice and an
institution of trust--focused on the future, focused on their
future; delivering a value proposition commensurate with the
talents and abilities so critical to our combat readiness and
continued ability to win.
President Roosevelt once said, ``Happiness lies not in the
mere possession of money; it lies in the joy of achievement, in
the thrill of creative effort.'' There's no doubt an important
key to our Guardians' proposition is the work. They want to be
on the cutting edge. They want to explore, to analyze, to solve
difficult problems. They value autonomy and they invite
challenge, and there is no shortage of challenges.
We will continue to do what we can to amplify their spirit
and allow them to use their exceptional talents in ways that
matter to them, but happiness is not only in meaningful work.
Their skills, expertise, and talent are compensated well
outside the military. We must, at a minimum, provide their
families and them enough compensation to take worry off the
table.
I look forward to helping the Office of the Secretary of
Defense with the Quadrennial Review, as has been previously
mentioned.
Thank you in advance for continuing your help to improve
their lives and strengthen their value proposition. I know it
is not lost on any of us in this room how important this is.
I thank you for your leadership. I thank you for your
opening comments, sir, and I look forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Chief Master Sergeant Towberman
can be found in the Appendix on page 97.]
The Chairman. Yes, thank you to each of you--such powerful
testimony. Each of you has done a great job today representing
the men and women who make up the Enlisted force of your
Branch. And I appreciate it very much.
I will begin with questions. And I want to begin with the
obvious question. The 50th anniversary of an All-Volunteer
Force; yet, we are met with a recruitment crisis that we have
never seen before.
And all of you have discussed this already in your
testimony, but I want you to be more succinct and be as candid
as you can possibly be because it could make a big difference
today in helping guide our work to make a difference for the
men and women that serve under your command.
What is the biggest obstacle to recruitment of the Enlisted
forces? Is it quality of life, trust in the military, social
issues? Are men and women questioning whether or not service is
the best path to a successful career? Or is it the slimming
pool of recruits that we are asking to join and serve today?
And what do you want us to do about it? We will start with the
Army.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Chairman, thank you for the
question.
As we surveyed our future candidates for the United States
Army, we asked them this very question: `What is their Number 1
barrier?' And we found that the Number 1 barrier for those that
we surveyed was they would be putting their life on hold.
And I challenge that every day when I say I don't think my
life was on hold. I would not have met my wife without being in
the military. I got degree through going to the night school.
So, I continued to further my life as it went on from the first
day I got into the military, and that is the No. 1 reason, when
we asked, about putting their life on hold.
What I would ask for the committee to do is to be the
advocate for the military and talk to someone that does not
have a service man or woman that they have served with in the
past. They don't know about our Army. We found that about 83
percent of those serving in the military have a parent, a
grandfather, or someone that was in the military. We don't want
the Army to be, you know, a family business. We want it to be
an American business. We need every man and woman eligible to
do that.
So, if there were two asks that I could add, it would be
the second is increase the propensity for those that want to
serve. Nine percent is not going to be a big enough pool for us
to sustain the All-Volunteer Force.
The Chairman. Navy?
Master Chief Petty Officer Honea. Chairman Banks, again,
thank you for your opening remarks. When you spoke about the
trust of our service members, it is very, very important.
Those that we are trying to recruit, as well as retain,
need to understand that we have their well-being in our
consideration, in all the decisions that we are making.
I'm going to allow for the Sergeant Major of the Marine
Corps to speak in greater depth about those five pillars that
he used in his opening comments.
But we should reexamine how well we are performing at those
five pillars that were founded in the Gates Commission on how
we were going to create our All-Volunteer Force.
So, we need to continue to find ways to make sure that
those that we are recruiting and those that we are retaining do
believe that we have their well-being into consideration. I
believe that serving in our military matches the values of most
of our Americans and many of our young people that have an
opportunity to serve. What I think that they probably find
missing is whether or not their well-being will be taken into
consideration. There is way too much rhetoric out there about
serving in the military would be dangerous to their life in a
way that their well-being wasn't being taken into
consideration.
And they see the issues with adequate compensation, as all
of us spoke about in our opening comments.
So, that is what I would ask for us to continue to do, sir.
The Chairman. Air Force?
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Chairman Banks, thank you for
that question.
In addition to what my colleagues mentioned, I would say
all of it that you mentioned is the biggest challenge that we
have; specifically, the service piece.
What we also are finding out is, again, that narrative
piece cannot be understated. There is a narrative that, if you
join the United States military, you are going to be hurt or
injured, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), et cetera. And
I would say that is where we could really use help with that
narrative.
There is a narrative that you could join the United States
military and you will be sexually harassed and/or assaulted.
And I would say that, as a mother of two children, and as a
mother of two daughters, I trust that my children, especially
my daughters, joining into the United States military--I feel
more comfortable with them joining the military than possibly
going to some of our colleges and our universities, and that is
not a knock on our education system.
But it is that narrative that we would appreciate your help
with. We of the Air Force, the Department of the Air Force, in
fact, have a working group that is focused on what are the
barriers that we can do internally to help make sure we don't
have artificial barriers that are keeping our people from being
able to join. We have started executing some of those, but we
will overall need help with the narrative, and also, the
quality-of-life challenges that we mentioned in our opening
statements.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Very good.
Marine Corps?
Sergeant Major Black. Chairman, sir, thank you for the
question. I thank the committee for taking on these challenges.
The Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy mentioned the
Gates Commission. I think it is worth a good read. I'm sure
everyone has read that. I have intently.
There are pillars to the All-Volunteer Force that are non-
negotiables. And I mentioned them in my verbal statement.
It is the connection with the American people, right? We
don't want to be a family business. Otherwise, you lose that
connection. The ability to recruit and retain talent; equitable
real income and compensation that is commensurate with
inflation rates and the cost of living, right? There is
quality-of-living conditions, whether that is housing on bases
or installations, access to bases or our barracks, and a couple
of other ones. But those are the three primary ones that I like
to focus on.
And I will narrow that down to just one. We will talk about
many challenges here today that we need assistance with in our
Services.
But if the American people don't have a desire to serve in
uniform, we can do all the things we need to do. And I think
the majority of the challenge we have right now, in my
understanding of it, is how we speak about service in our
military to the people we are trying to attract and bring into
the service.
I made a joke last week in testimony. I won't repeat it,
but I would challenge anyone to find any positive story about
the military. And if it is, it is buried on page 6. The front
page is all negative.
There was a report of our testimony last week where we
spoke about propensity to serve in the military, the joy of
serving. I'm married to a retired Marine. We have raised
children. They have gone to school. They are successful. Our
family has been successful. We have served the course in
combat; all of us here have. But the story did not focus on
that. In the middle, in bold print, in all caps, with
parentheses and quotation marks, it was `negative, negative,
negative, negative, negative', and it ended with ``And we need
to get people to join the military.''
Whether that is a national leader, it is in media, pop
culture, in social media, it is irrelevant; it is always
something negative. Until we reverse that--until we reverse
that--it doesn't matter how qualified someone is; just have to
have a desire to serve.
We can reduce and lower the qualifications, but we will
still have to tap into the--the point that the sergeant made,
that the Army made, was nine percent propensity. That is desire
to serve your Nation; raise your hand to defend the
Constitution in these United States. That is a national
challenge.
Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Very well put.
Space Force?
Chief Master Sergeant Towberman. Yes, sir. To save time, I
won't repeat everything my teammates have said, though we feel
as passionately about them as they do.
I would say maybe two things a little bit from our
perspective, which is really about quality of recruiting. Our
numbers are small; we meet our numbers. But the quality has to
continue to be good.
We need access to schools. And anything that anyone can do
to help us partner with the Department of Education and with
schools writ large, not just high schools, but universities as
well, so that we are working together, not just on recruiting,
but on this nationwide mobilization to serve in some way.
It is really important to us as a Nation, and certainly, we
are willing to partner with anyone to talk about serving; and
also, the importance of science, technology, engineering, and
math [STEM], which, again, is certainly very important to us on
the Space Force.
So, anything that we can do, any help that we can get from
the Subcommittee to work in a whole-of-government approach to
really mobilize this Nation to care about science, technology,
engineering, and math; to make sure our children are focused on
the right things, and then, to have the access to schools
throughout, so that they can see the benefits of military
service, the benefits of any service, I really think that that
might help in this propensity-to-serve conversation.
And then, everything else everyone has already said. Thank
you, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you to each of you.
I yield to Ranking Member Kim.
Mr. Kim. I am actually going to start by yielding to
Representative Strickland.
Ms. Strickland. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Enlisted service members are the backbone of the military,
and a lot of people don't even know that 40 percent of the
people who are Enlisted are people of color. If they don't
thrive, the military doesn't thrive, and our national security
suffers.
Since coming to Congress, I have focused on the issues that
I hear most from Soldiers and Airmen and their families that I
represent at Joint Base Lewis-McChord. And my family went to
Washington State because of Fort Lewis.
And the issues that arise are not news to us: housing, pay,
food insecurity, and child care. That is a really big deal.
Now, I have several questions that apply across all the
Services, but because of my limited time, I am going to start
with you, Sergeant Major Grinston. And if any other witnesses
want to jump in, feel free to do so.
So, last year, I was pleased that my Basic Allowance for
Housing Calculation Improvement Act was included in the defense
policy bill. And this language directs the Department to
evaluate how it would create a more transparent and modernized
approach to calculating Basic Allowance for Housing [BAH].
I hear from my constituents all the time about how their
housing allowance doesn't keep up with the cost of housing. And
in the market that I represent, we have a housing shortage and
we get emails and calls all the time to my office about ``I'm
coming to Joint Base Lewis-McChord [JBLM] and we can't believe
how expensive it is to find housing.''
While this report is not due until December of this year,
how do you think that we can update the way we calculate Basic
Allowance for Housing, so that it is more responsive to the
reality that service members are facing to find adequate
housing? And when I say, ``adequate housing,'' I mean housing
that is affordable, that is habitable, and that is safe.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congresswoman, thank you for the
question.
And I concur that every Soldier or every service member
should have adequate and quality housing, family housing. But,
to address your specific question about the Basic Allowance for
Housing, I would actually be proud and tell a little bit of the
story about the power of this group.
Almost about 18 months ago, this group got together and
challenged the Basic Allowance for Housing, and we had a
meeting with Office of Secretary Of Defense [OSD] and said,
``We have to change right now what we are doing for the Basic
Allowance for Housing.'' And it was a very heated discussion
with the Office of Personnel and Readiness [P&R]. And the power
of this group, we saw a change in that year in an out-of-cycle
Basic Allowance for Housing. And that is what we need.
Doing a survey one time a year, it ends in August, and
then, the survey comes out in January. It is late to the need
for our service men and women. And we have advocated, this
whole group up here has advocated multiple times that
calculation needs to be done faster. In this day and age, with
all the things that we have, we can do better, and that is what
we have challenged Office of the Secretary of Defense. And that
is how I would recommend that we go forward with the Basic
Allowance for Housing. We can't do it once a year and expect
that to meet the needs of our service members.
Ms. Strickland. All right. Master Sergeant Bass, did you
want to join in?
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Absolutely. Thank you, ma'am.
You know, what I might offer is we have got to--and what we
have pushed is--we have got to be responsive in our ability to
look at and assess Basic Allowance for Housing. And how we
assess, to the Sergeant Major of the Army's point on an
assessment, written assessment, is probably not the best way in
2023 that we might be able to look at how we can keep up with
housing costs across the Nation, to include overseas. And we
have been pretty vocal on that.
What I would say, it is a challenge that we have across the
Nation. It is, when we increase Basica Allowance for Housing,
everybody knows. And so, as such, you have a lot of landlords
who are also, then, increasing what they are costing. So, it is
a cycle that we are really in, which is why I think you have
heard from every single one of us we need a holistic look at
military pay and compensation, period. We still need to be
responsive to Basic Allowance for Housing, but it really is
that holistic look of military compensation all together.
Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Strickland. Great. Thank you.
According to the Department of Defense's 2021 Survey of
Active Duty Spouses, 45 percent of Junior Enlisted service
members' spouses reported facing food insecurity. And this was
mentioned in opening remarks, E-1 through E-4. Given this need,
what is the Army doing to encourage people to seek help and
lessen the stigma among lower Enlisted families? What
suggestions do you have to remove barriers to food and
nutrition support?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congresswoman, again, thank you
for the question.
So, first of all, we have added financial counselors. So,
you could see: `Here is the pay that you have and how are you
managing that money'. So, that is Number. 1, is how you manage
your money. And I will jump on that we have to pay our service
men and women adequately, and then, we have to teach them how
to manage that money that they have.
But there have been several initiatives and some of them
have actually come from the Secretary of Defense. And one of
those is getting a larger benefit in the Commissary, especially
for those items like milk, cheese, meat, and reducing those
prices, so that there is a benefit when they go to the
Commissary. So, they will actually save money when they shop
there, as opposed to going to another grocery store.
But it is product with two things. We have to pay our
service men and women equitably, and then, we have to teach
them how to manage their money. And we are making great
strides, then, to do that.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I yield five minutes to Representative Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of our Enlisted leaders for joining us
today.
I agree with you that a narrative about service is really
at the heart of the issue here.
But just to do a quick kind of walkthrough, just 2 years
ago, we had the first-ever African American Secretary of
Defense order a service-wide stand-down because of the growing
threat of White supremacy within our services. Yet, then, a
year later, the study showed only 100 service members out of
2.5 million--it is a fraction of a fraction of a percent--are
actually participating in extremism.
I think we are doing a much better job of talking about
sexual assault. But, to your point, Sergeant Major Bass, or
Master Sergeant Bass--excuse me; that is my Army in me,
right?--parents aren't going to want their kids to join a
military if they are a family of color if they believe it is
overrun with White supremacy; if they believe their daughters
are going to be sexually assaulted; if they believe their kid
is going to come out and want to commit suicide because of
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).
And on the flip side, as I hear from my constituents who
don't want their kids to join if, for example, they go to the
Air Force Academy and they are told in their orientation,
``Don't say, `mom and dad'; say, `parent.' Don't say,
`boyfriend/girlfriend'; say, `partner.''' And if you have a
seminar at West Point talking about to cope with your white
rage.
And so, I want to submit for the record, Mr. Chairman, a
poll by the Heritage Foundation that is showing that 68 percent
of Active Duty members are concerned about the politicization
of the military.
The Chairman. Without objection.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
Mr. Waltz. Another 68 percent are saying the politicizing
of the military is impacting their advice to their children of
whether to join or not--negatively.
And to your point, Sergeant Major Grinston, I think we are
at--what?--80-90 percent of current recruits come from military
families. So, you are getting a double-hit there. You are
getting a retention problem and you are getting a future
recruitment problem.
So, my question--I will just start with you, Sergeant Major
Grinston--is the military a meritocracy and should it be?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman, thank you for the
question.
I think, even by your comments, ``Are we politicizing the
military?'' it almost feels like we are politicizing the
military. We support and defend the Nation and the Constitution
of everybody, and that is kind of how I feel about it. And we
will leave the policies up to the elected officials and the
Secretary of Defense and the President, and then, we execute
those. And that is what good Soldiers do.
That is what we swore, that we would defend the
Constitution of America.
Mr. Waltz. No, I'm sorry, not to cut you off.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waltz. Just for the matter of time, I 100 percent agree
with you. The Army I came up with, you leave your politics at
the door. You leave all of that at the door. It is about taking
care of the men and women to the left and the right. It is
about achieving the mission. The color you are worried about is
red, white, and blue. The enemy's bullets don't care about any
of this stuff.
And I'm determined to get us back to that warrior
mentality, focused on being the best and having the best
pilots, having the best Soldiers that we have, regardless of
where they come from, because that is what our Nation is going
to need to win wars.
To that end, Sergeant Major, we, Senator Cotton and I, had
language in last year's National Defense Authorization Act. The
language established gender-neutral fitness standards and made
the fitness standards dependent on the job, right? Obviously, a
different fitness standard to be an infantry man or woman than
it is to be a cyber warrior. Can you just give me a quick
update on implementation of those gender-neutral standards?
And again, this is on the premise that the artillery round
doesn't care what race, religion, sexual orientation,
socioeconomic background, and neither do the enemy's bullets.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman----
Mr. Waltz. Sure.
Sergeant Major Grinston. ----thanks for the question.
As you know, the National Defense Authorization Act gave us
180 days to report back. We have been looking at this for quite
some time for the language. The language, I believe, said: the
Secretary of the Army shall implement Military Occupational
Specialty [MOS]-specific standards. But when we look at AR 611-
21, there actually are Military Occupational Specialty-specific
standards, and it defines things like--and I will give you just
one example--11 Bravo [infantryman] occasionally drags a 268-
pound person 15 meters while wearing their equipment. And that
is what the regulation already says, and it doesn't say
anything about anything other than you have to execute this
task. And those are the tasks that they are graded on in the
One Station Unit Training, when they graduate to be 11 Bravo.
But we acknowledge the task and we understand that we have
180 days----
Mr. Waltz. I will look forward to that update.
I agree with--two questions just in my remaining time. The
Army has, the Chief Marketing Officer of the Army has had some
different data and polling than what this Heritage poll found
out. Do any of the other services have actual data of active
duty members, recruits, their influencers, their parents, of
the decisions that they are making that they could share with
this committee?
Because we all have our narratives and our opinions on the
narratives, but does anybody have, do any of the services have
any data behind it?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman, like you said, other
than the Army, I'm assuming? Because, yes, we do have that.
Mr. Waltz. I will take that. Thank you.
And in my few seconds remaining, I agree with your call to
national service. If you could answer for the record, send me
back for the record, if you believe expanding the Junior
Reserve Officers' Training Corps [ROTC] programs in secondary
schools would help introduce students to the military or help
promote defense of public service?
The Chairman. So, please submit that for the record.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I yield five minutes to Representative Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And, gentlemen and ladies, I really appreciate your time,
too.
Having been born on a naval air station, having been a
dependent for about 17-18 years of my life, and then, having
served myself, everything that you talk about is really
resonating with me.
I want to drill down on a couple of things that are about
quality of life. And the first one is that we were able to
successfully get through the National Defense Authorization Act
12 weeks of parental leave, both for fathers and mothers, in
the 2022 National Defense Authorization Act. And that has been
rolled out with each of your services.
So, I was wondering, with the two and a half minutes of my
time, if you could share how you are sharing that information
with your service men and women, such that it is a benefit that
they are aware of, and hopefully, one that they will,
therefore, be more likely to stay as a result of.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass, please.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Representative, thank you so
much. Thanks to your service to the United States Air Force as
well.
I will tell you, that was a good news story that came out,
and our Airmen and their families were excited for that. We
published articles communicating that this was an added benefit
through both kind of traditional ways of pushing those things
out; we have also posted them on social media, and then, we did
it the traditional way through chains of command by our Air
Force Manpower and Personnel Staff [A1s] pushing that out to
our major commands. And so, we are very confident that our
Airmen are well aware.
Thank you for your support on that.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you.
Sergeant Major Black, please.
Sergeant Major Black. Congresswoman, thank you.
I will echo the Chief Master Sergeant on the Air Force's
comments.
There's a couple of things you don't have to worry about
people getting the word for, right? It is their pay increase
and they get more time off. And I am not meaning to be flippant
with your answer.
But before we had even began to actually release through
official chains, the Services' social media accounts were just
exploding with people being aware of this expansion of parental
leave, ma'am.
Ms. Houlahan. That is fantastic.
Anybody else want to contribute before I move to my next
question which is related?
My next question has to do with the action that your
respective Branches are taking to increase recruitment of
female service members. I think the Service right now is
something around 20 percent women. But, depending on the
different Service Branch, it is lower. It is as low as 10
percent in some of the Branches, and particularly, in the
Enlisted service.
Are there ways that you can think of, and resources that we
can set aside, to specifically target outreach to women? Have
your Branches increased the proportion of recruiters who are
women and who increase their visibility at recruiting events?
And if I could go with Chief Master Sergeant Towberman--is
that correct?--for that.
Chief Master Sergeant Towberman. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Houlahan. I know you don't, apparently, have an issue
with recruitment, but interested in whether or not we are
focusing on women.
Chief Master Sergeant Towberman. Yes, ma'am.
Well, we are focusing on talent, and certainly, young
ladies are talented. So, we are getting plenty, and we are
really happy about that.
And that is where our focus is, how do we get into these
conversations? I saw a study recently that said one in nine,
only one in nine, young ladies between 17 and 23 see themselves
in a Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math career. But
anyone that has served in the military knows that, even the
high-tech jobs, it is about a lot more, right? It is about
service--excuse me--it is about people. And so, how do we
correctly sort of advertise our brand, so that it is teachable,
learnable, knowable. And as we increase that denominator to all
people, the numerator sort of takes care of itself.
Ms. Houlahan. And, Sergeant Major Grinston, do you have any
ideas that we should be executing on or things that you are
doing already to increase the number of women recruits?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congresswoman, thank you for the
question.
I would just say we just have a really great example. We
have the Secretary of the Army, and I will even highlight one
woman that I saw on the TV yesterday. And I was extremely proud
when I saw Lieutenant General Donna Martin, the first Inspector
General of the Army to be a woman. And I think that speaks more
volumes than any other recruitment we can have. It is not just,
you know, saying, ``This is what we want.'' We just have those
leaders that are out there exhibiting those examples.
But, to specifically recruit, we just recruit talent. We
need all men and women to serve that are capable of serving in
the United States Army.
Ms. Houlahan. Yes, you certainly can't be what you can't
see. And I think that it is helpful to be able to see that.
And I know that, Chief Master Sergeant Bass, you had
something you wanted to contribute?
And then, I will go to Master Chief Honea.
Go ahead.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Yes, ma'am, if I can just offer
real quick: you know, we have done really a good look at, even
upon entry into the United States military, how are we
assigning people and are we ensuring that we are assigning all
possible recruits operational career fields, and things like
that.
But one of the things that I am probably most proud of is,
we have a barrier analysis working group that is called the
Women's Initiative Team, the WIT. And that team is looking at
all the barriers that perhaps are not helpful to us being able
to keep the talent, especially our women. And they have had
numerous wins.
But one of the wins is we had written policy where, if you
were pregnant, you were not even able to apply for Officer
Training School, right? Like how much sense does that make? We
could delay when you go to Officer Training School. But that
was one of those things that, you know, from the Women's
Initiative Team, we were able to identify some barriers to help
us.
Thank you.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, and I have run out of time. And I
apologize, Master Chief. If you have something to add, please
do add it to the record. I appreciate you.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I yield five minutes to Representative Mills.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is great, first off, as a Non-Commissioned Officer
myself, to see no Officers in here, which means we will get
things done.
Now, I want to start out with the fact that you talked
about key things for me that I can understand, which is pay,
the barracks standards, quality-of-life, healthcare, childcare,
food insecurity. But, also, I want to talk about morale and
priorities of recruitment.
I have seen over the coming years--you know, I went back in
with the original ``be all you can be'' days. And back then, we
were really focused on things like increased lethality and
readiness.
I have seen where, in some regards, the prioritization of
Critical Race Theory [CRT] and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
[DEI] became something that was above the actual ability to
maintain standards, instead of lowering standards, to meet
actual numbers. And that was concerning because we know that
the adversaries that we are going to face in the future are
going to be much different than what we have been facing.
So, in knowing that, the cost of living and inflation takes
a massive hit. In my opinion, the 4.6 percent increase, while
that sounds great, is nothing whenever you are talking about a
10 to 13 percent increase in cost of living in inflation. It is
actually an invisible defunding of our military, is what it
really is.
And when you can't actually feed your families, and you
can't have the ability to go and train and fight, knowing that
your spouse and your children at home are being taken care of,
that takes our priorities away.
You know, I would love to see something where we are able
to put a bill on the Floor that allows us to tie our rate of
increase from our military salaries to the rate of increase of
our inflation, to guarantee that no one could actually be
invisibly defunded again. And I think that that is one of the
things that we should be working on.
In going over this and knowing that we are having the
access-to-care challenges, and knowing that I can remember in
Fort Bragg when we were sitting in World War II barracks with
black mold, and everything else, and you just kind of drive on.
What do you think, personally, outside of pay, is the No. 1
issue for a lot of the people with regards to the deficit and
morale? Any of you can start.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman, thank you for the
question.
I will say that the retention in the United States Army has
been exceptionally well. We are at the highest level of
retaining our Soldiers than we have in a long time. And we have
been consistent in the last 10 years of retaining those
Soldiers. And that is how I meter morale. It is not 100
percent, but it is a good indication that, once they join the
team, they actually want to stay on the team. So, we have seen
our retention stay steady. It is about accessions. It is about
getting new recruits into the military.
And so, we have consistently met every requirement that the
United States has asked us to do in lethality. And our soldiers
actually want to execute those missions, and then, they want to
stay with the team.
So, to answer your question specifically on morale, I just
look at retention, and our retention numbers are consistently
high.
Mr. Mills. And in understanding that retention is,
obviously, key, we are also going to face a time period whereby
retirement age and retirement capabilities are going to
overturn and our recruitment numbers wouldn't be able to
maintain and keep up with that. That is just a harsh reality.
And I know that our messaging--you know, I can remember
when I would go into the recruitment station, I wanted to see
the Ranger video where they were kicking doors, jumping out of
planes, and doing real cool stuff. Now, all of a sudden, it is
about how do we address our fellow Soldier, Airman, and what
pronouns we are utilizing, which, in my opinion, wasn't exactly
the quality for me.
So, knowing that the Marine Corps prides itself on being
first to fight, have you seen an increase by chance--and this
kind of ties into the morale perspective--have you seen an
increase branch-wide with regard to an increase of Article 15s
or utilization of disciplinary actions?
Sergeant Major Black. Congressman, sir, thank you for the
question. The simple answer to your question is no. If
anything, it is normal, based upon whatever those actions are
that Commanders are taking to maintain discipline, sir.
Mr. Mills. Thank you so much.
And just in my last seconds, understanding that our Armed
Forces and our Non-Commissioned Officers are really the core of
our Armed Forces, this is exactly what every one of our
adversaries continues to strive to achieve, is to get to a Non-
Commissioned Officer Corps like we have, like no other country
has. They are a lot of times top-down. They don't have the
actual backbone that we have.
And so, any recommendations that you guys can submit later,
whether it be in writing or otherwise, to continue to support
our Non-Commissioned Officers Corps; how we can strengthen our
military, and how we can continue to contribute to our Armed
Forces, I would love to be able to receive that in my office.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
I yield five minutes to Representative Horsford.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Ranking
Member, for this important hearing.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass, in your opening testimony, you
state how recruitment, training, development, compensation,
retainment, and transitioning are key parts to readiness. I
agree with you.
My district is home to Nellis Air Force Base, Creech Air
Force Base, the National Test and Training Range, and the
Hawthorne Army Depot. And while we don't have a shortage of
missions coming out of our district, we do have a shortage of
housing, especially at Creech Air Force Base. What was once a
modest installation now hosts over a 3,000-strong workforce and
it sustains around-the-clock, overseas contingency operations
against global terrorism.
Currently, there is no on-base housing at Creech Air Force
Base, and Airmen who are stationed at Creech have to commute
over 45 minutes to Nellis for basic needs, such as housing,
medical, and childcare.
So, Chief Master Sergeant Bass, I am just curious when you
were last at Nellis and Creech, and what you think of the
housing situation there. And are there any areas that you have
identified as needing immediate attention?
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Congressman, thank you for that
question. Thanks for your support, and especially for your
staff for spending time with those leadership teams out there.
I did get an opportunity to talk with them.
I have not personally seen the housing that is at Nellis,
but upon my discussions with our Airmen who live in those
housing, I will tell you, by and large, the housing operator
there does a really good job in taking care of the houses that
are on Nellis proper. The challenge is, as you mentioned, we
don't have enough of them, and nor do we have any housing on
Creech proper.
And so, there are hundreds, about two to three hundred,
families that live on Nellis and do get bused back and forth to
Creech every time. When I talked to the Command team there,
what they shared with me is their work with the community, and
their continued work that they are going to have with the
community, on trying to get safe, affordable places for our
folks to live.
They were very appreciative of the Basic Allowance for
Housing increase that they got at Nellis, which was extremely
helpful, but it still is not helpful when the surrounding areas
around most of our installations are just not the places that
we typically want our service members to be in.
Mr. Horsford. Well, I extend a personal invitation to have
you come and to see, firsthand, both the needs in and around
Nellis and Creech.
You also mentioned in your testimony that the Air Force
plans to spend approximately $235 million in the fiscal year
2023 Facility Sustainment, Restoration, and Modernization Fund
to repair and improve the condition of the current inventory of
dormitories. But I would like to know how the Air Force plans
to assess which installations need the funds.
I have been working for some time now to get additional
money for dormitories at Nellis. And for whatever reason, it is
on their priority list, but it never seems to make the
Department's priority list. And I vote for the funding and it
is not making it to the base and to the service members and
their families in my district.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Yes, sir. So, as you mentioned,
the majority of all that money is going toward dorm funding.
And so, we have got a Dorm Master Plan across our United States
Air Force, where we prioritize that, based on the facility
conditions, forecasts, and really, the needs of the
installation. And the Commanders do that.
And so, I will tell you that there are two dorms at Nellis
that are on that prioritization list. We also have renovations
that are going on in Nellis proper for fiscal year 2023, and we
look forward to those. But we are managing those, sir, based on
the dorms.
Mr. Horsford. Well, I hope they stay on the priority list.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Yes, sir.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Thank you.
Mr. Horsford. Finally, in fiscal year 2022, the National
Defense Authorization Act requires the military departments to
invest 5 percent of their total facility's sustainment budget
into the maintenance and renovations of barracks and
unaccompanied housing. Have you seen any evidence of those
increased investments across your Services, and if yes, is that
effort making an impact in prioritizing these needs?
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Sir, I would offer, absolutely,
it is, anytime we can have funds that are going toward things.
I would also tell you, they are going to make future needs. We
have got 39 dorm projects that are on the way in fiscal year
2024, and we look forward to those.
Thank you.
Mr. Horsford. Well, I look forward to working with members
of this Committee, Chairman Banks and Ranking Member Kim, and
their leadership. Housing, in my view, is one of the most
critical things. Service members and their families should not
have to worry about having a safe and adequate housing.
And I agree with the Chairman's opening remarks about the
unconscionable nature that so many of our service members and
their families indicate that they are food insecure. It is just
unacceptable, and I look forward to working with my colleagues
on both sides of the aisle on this committee to make sure that
that is a priority.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I yield five minutes to General Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thanks to all of you for being here, and thanks for
continuing to be the example, not only for the young men and
women who would desire to serve, but those influencers who
would make every attempt to enable them to achieve a dream that
they may not have dreamed for a long time, but it could be
something that just happens quickly.
In fact, as I walked in, I heard more than one of you, I
think, use the term ``propensity.'' And so, my favorite app on
my phone is my Webster's Dictionary. I'm a little old school
and it is much lighter to carry it here. But, in Webster's
definition of propensity, it is ``an often intense natural
inclination or preference.'' That is the definition of
propensity. But the key phrase there ``intense.''
And when you think about the age at which your recruiters
are beginning to engage these young men and women, that means
in a lot of cases high school. Would you care to offer any
thoughts on how recruiter access to the public school system--
let's start there--is and the welcoming nature, or not, in the
high schools for your recruiters?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes, sir, thank you for your
service, and thank you, Congressman, for the question.
I would be remiss if I--or I think we would be fooling
ourselves if Corona Virus [COVID] and all the schools being
shut down didn't have some kind of impact with access to high
schools.
Mr. Bergman. Let me go right to the heart of the matter.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes.
Mr. Bergman. I don't want to talk about Corona Virus. I
want to talk about the welcoming of your recruiters by
everything from the board of education to the school
superintendent, to the principal, to the guidance counselors,
to the coaches, the teachers, the influencers that those kids
are with 7 or 8 hours a day.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes.
Mr. Bergman. That is where I want to focus this. We are not
talking about Corona Virus.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes.
Mr. Bergman. And I have to cut you short because time is
clicking.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Absolutely. We have to have
access. If you don't have a recruiter that walks in the hallway
and you don't see----
Mr. Bergman. I guess my question is, are you getting it?
And if you all want to take this for the record? By the way, I
only have, roughly, 40 years, not that I have been looking at
this for a while. But I could tell you the study the Marine
Corps authorized in 1985 in Chicago about access to the school
systems. I was part of that study. Okay?
And I am trying to look at, as well as others here, what
has changed; what has stayed the same. Because we need--we can
talk about food insecurity. We can talk about training
standards. We can talk about a lot of things all day long. But
if we don't have access, your recruiters, those ambassadors
that wear your uniform, we are not going to be able to
intensify the intensity that they already have that being in a
uniform of sorts would make them a better man or woman and make
them a better functioning adult. So, that is kind of where I am
going here.
So, I guess maybe it would be best if you would take this
for the record. I would like to have a written answer on the
access to the schools.
Mr. Bergman. Now, time goes fast here. I would also like
you to take, for the record, the following--because you are all
in leadership roles. And if the answer is you decide not to,
okay.
Would you be willing to submit a list, for the record--or
privately, your call--of current Department of Defense policies
that inhibit your ability, whether you as a Senior Enlisted in
a unit at whatever level or the Commanding Officers' ability to
lead? And are there policies--because we do policy; we do some
law here, but we do mainly policy. And we are trying to figure
out here, are there policies that are countering the positive
efforts, and we still have on the books, that you are expected
to comply with?
And that could be touchy, but the point is, I thank you.
And by the way, rather than saying, ``Thank you for your
service''--I know some of you may already know that I have been
kind of being scorched in the media for this, but introducing a
resolution that says, instead of saying that, say, ``Thank you
for our freedom.'' So, thank you for our freedom.
I yield back.
The Chairman. I yield five minutes to Representative
Escobar.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much. I would like to express my
appreciation to the Chairman and Ranking Member for this
important conversation.
And many thanks to our panelists, not just for your
participation, but for your Service, of course.
I represent Fort Bliss, Texas. And in my community of El
Paso, Texas, we are very, very proud to be in an Army Strong
Community. It is the second-largest military installation and
the largest Joint Mobilization Force Generation Installation in
the Army.
And in my duration in Congress, I have served on the
Military Personnel Subcommittee because quality-of-life for our
service members is so critical.
And I am really proud, also, of the work that my team and I
have done for military spouses, because we know that the family
serves when the service member serves. And included in last
year's National Defense Authorization Act was my bill to help
support military spouses who own small business who move, to
make sure that they have the resources necessary when they make
those moves; that they take their entrepreneurial spirit and
can ensure that it benefits another community, but that we do
our best to help support that effort as well.
And so, if I have time, I actually want to ask an issue
about spouses. But I, first, really want to focus on food
insecurity because it is something that we have seen has
increased, especially post-pandemic, as many resources have
gone away and food banks have been extra stressed during this
period of time.
And I would like to focus my question, really, with
Sergeant Major Grinston. My first question about food
insecurity is, I'm wondering what the Army is doing to mitigate
the effects of inflation on costs of food for our service
members, and what can we, as Members of Congress, do to help
support those efforts?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congresswoman, thank you for the
question.
Like one of the things I already alluded to, what the
Secretary of Defense did with the cost of reducing the amount
that a service member would pay in those facilities that we can
control--you know, making the milk, the meat, and the eggs
cheaper in our Commissaries really helped those families out,
and controlling those costs and helping the servicemen or, in
this case, on Fort Bliss, the Soldiers and their families
reduce that cost.
And then, the second thing is what you have heard
consistently from the panel, and we are going to keep saying
it. We have to look at how we compensate our base pay or our
Soldiers and their family.
We have the QRMC, the Quadrennial Review of Military
Compensation. We need to take a hard look at that. And I agree
with the other panelists, it is that no Soldier should be able
to be eligible for those needs because our pay is just that
good.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much.
And now, a question for all of you about spouses. And
again, we know that when a service member serves, it is not
just the service member, but it is the entire family. And one
of the things I have heard consistently in my community is how
we have got to do more to help with that transition, which is
why I introduced the legislation for entrepreneurs who are
spouses. Our local Chamber of Commerce has really embraced this
as an issue as well.
But have you all seen some best practices during your
tenure or some gaps maybe that we, as Members of Congress, can
address?
And I only have one minute. So, anyone who might have a
burning desire to answer this question can go first.
Sergeant Major Grinston. I will go very quickly. We need
the state reciprocity for our spouses as they move over. You
know, the President kind of signed it into law, but each State
has to actually acknowledge that. So, when a spouse moves from
one location, they shouldn't have to redo their licenses again.
And that is incumbent on every State to go ahead and ratify
that.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you.
Sergeant Major Black?
Sergeant Major Black. Ma'am, I mentioned before in my
verbal comments that we have challenges in our Child Care
Development Centers [CDCs]. Directly to your point, a large
portion of our providers are spouses. But if a Marine's family
transitions from California to North Carolina, they have to
start the entire process of recertifying in that state with
their rules and regulations in order to be able to provide the
child care, be a child care provider. And our biggest shortfall
right now is in providers.
So, being able to continue, like the Sergeant Major of the
Army mentioned, being able to get those certifications to
transfer is a big help. And I won't speak for everyone, but we
are all shaking our heads north and south because that is the
number 1 key, ma'am.
Thank you.
Ms. Escobar. Can I just follow up on that real quickly?
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Escobar. You know, actually, yes, my time has expired.
I will follow up separately. Thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I yield five minutes to Representative Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to our witnesses here.
I was a product of the Junior Reserve Officers' Training
Corps program in my high school. And I am glad I did it
because, when I Enlisted in the Army, I got myself an extra
stripe. So, it got me a little extra pay. And I eventually did
the Reserve Officers' Training Corps program and went from
Enlisted to Commissioned.
But I really appreciate and I respect your positions, and
as I grew up, that really helped me move forward in my life.
I represent the district of Guam. And, of course, we have
this massive buildup going on right now because of our
situation in Pacific Command [PACOM]. The Marines, coming from
Okinawa, that is wonderful, and working really closely with our
Admiral there to ensure that transition is worked out.
And, Sergeant Major, I forget now, were you able to come
during the rededication there or the reactivation of our Camp
Ben Blaz?
Sergeant Major Black. Congressman, I was, and it is good to
see you again sort of comment on that, and I really enjoyed the
visit. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Moylan. I'm glad you were there and I hope to see you
again as well.
I have a few questions here. Okay. So, with the increase in
military presence on Guam over the next few years, what are the
Department's--let me rephrase that. Hold on.
The fiscal year of 2023 National Defense Authorization Act
mandated, by statute, a timeline to contract an independent
assessment of the much-discussed defense of Guam integrated air
and missile defense architect. The 60-day window for the
Secretary of Defense to enter into the contract to fulfill this
requirement was last week, and we have not seen a public
notification that this congressional mandate has been met. So,
please advise, if anyone can, of where we stand on this mandate
to date.
If not, that is fine; we can get back to each other. Is
there somebody willing to answer?
[No response.]
Okay. Let's move on.
One of our main concerns, of course, is for the morale and
the welfare of our troops on Guam and understanding in the
Indo-Pacific how expensive it is for our troops to live. There
was the situation with the Cost of Living Allowance [COLA]
being reduced. Do we have any recommendations, or are we seeing
a correction to be made to that? Please.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Congressman, thank you for that
question. Thanks for your care for our Airmen that are living
on Guam proper.
I will tell you that I spent some time talking to that
command team there, and I have spent time on the island myself.
Knowing that a carton of milk today in Guam costs $14 is just,
you know, a challenge that we do not want any service member to
bear.
And so, yes, the help that we have gotten with funding our
commissaries has been extremely important in reducing costs
almost 25 percent, but the challenge that we have in both Guam
and, also, Japan, and some of our other overseas locations, are
challenges to the supply chain and the Commissaries that have
empty shelves, which forces, then, our service members to go
off-base.
And so, that is a challenge that all of our command teams
are actively working. First Sergeants are working to make sure
that they are in tune with the support and the needs of our
Airmen, you know, providing some of that training. But we have
also really tapped into the Air Force Aid Society and them
giving hundreds of thousands of dollars of grants to our
service members to be able to help offset that cost. But we
have got some work to do on that.
And thank you, sir.
Mr. Moylan. I appreciate that. Thank you.
Also, with the increase in military presence on Guam over
the next few years, would you know or can you express what the
Department of Defense's plans are, if there is constructing for
new schools, or construction of schools? We have got the
military families coming on over. Is there any discussion about
the students?
Sergeant Major Black. Congressman Moylan, again, thank you,
sir, for representing Guam.
As you know, the Marine Corps has got a pretty long history
on Guam. In fact, I will make two really quick comments and
they are both about schools.
You mentioned Reserve Officers' Training Corps. There is a
fine retired sergeant major that is responsible for the Marine
Corps Reserve Officers' Training Corps at the high school
there, and that is a good thing.
Lastly, about the schools writ large, as you know, the
majority of the growth of the population, or the military
population on Guam is going to be Marines. And as we see the
expansion of the Marines start showing up there over the course
of the next several years, there is going to be additional
resources provided to that.
I would like to get back to you on the record,
specifically, what those things are going to be, because it is
more than just the schools in and of itself, sir.
Thank you.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you.
And just quickly, of course, we want the military, the
long-term relationship, and it is important that we continue
our cultural relationship and make everybody feel at home, too.
So, I hope you please continue to do so, and working with our
communities, working with our mayors.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, and I applaud you for your----
The Chairman. I yield to the ranking member five minutes.
Mr. Kim. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you again for all of you to come on out here today.
I have a couple of questions about mental health-related
issues, but I did want to just ask a very quick question, since
it is a topic that has come up several times in this hearing. I
want to just kind of quickly ask each of you, do you have any
reason to believe that Divesity, Equity, and Inclusion
initiatives are negatively impacting our recruitment, our
retention, or lethality of the Force?
Sergeant Major?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Ranking Member, as I have
previously stated, in our survey, that was not the Number 1, 2,
3, 4, or 5 reasons on how that would negatively impact our
soldiers.
Mr. Kim. Okay. Thank you.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Or our future recruits.
Mr. Kim. I appreciate it.
Master Chief Petty Officer?
Master Chief Petty Officer Honea. Ranking Member Kim, I
would echo the Sergeant Major of the Army's comments.
Mr. Kim. Great. Thank you.
Chief Master Sergeant?
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. I agree, sir. What I would say
is, back to the opening statements, I think the narrative that
we are focused on that more than warfighting is what is perhaps
hurting us.
Mr. Kim. Sergeant Major Black?
Sergeant Major Black. That we are focused more on
warfighting and protecting the Nation, I think we will probably
see those numbers increase.
Mr. Kim. Chief Master Sergeant?
Chief Master Sergeant Towberman. Yes, sir, I agree with my
teammates.
Mr. Kim. Thank you.
I want to just switch gears here, as we are thinking
through some of the issues. And I have raised this with you as
we were talking earlier.
One of the big things that I hear about from people in my
district is about mental health. We have had some tragic
suicides in our region.
I recently saw that the Suicide Prevention and Response
Independent Review Committee released over 125 recommendations
to reduce the rate of military suicide. So, I want to just get
your reactions to this in terms of what you are hearing, if you
had a chance to review any of this.
But, in particular, when I was looking through it, it felt
like a number of these types of recommendations are ones that I
think we have talked about already or ones that we have
understood in terms of how to have better healthcare access and
support for our service members.
So, I would also like you to just try to address, you know,
what is holding us back? Is there something that you need from
us? Is there something that we could offer, or other things
like that, that can try to help us make sure we close this
down?
Sergeant Major, it looks like you wanted to jump in.
Sergeant Major Black. Ranking Member, so thank you for the
question and, really, the interest.
I haven't read through, and I don't know if the rest of the
panel has, the Independent Review Commission's recommendations.
Let me first start by saying, thank you for the Review. But
if I were to challenge anything, it would be the following:
mental health, in and of itself, is not mutually exclusive of
other factors. Generally, it is a combination of things that
make someone have challenges. Mental health results in
potential suicide.
I think, occasionally, we get too wrapped up in a single
issue and forget the fact that human beings are very complex,
and there is more things to look at holistically. For instance,
what piece does spirituality fit into sense of worth, right,
when it comes to mental fitness? How do we think about social
fitness, how we interact with each other, right? How do we
think about our behavioral fitness? Obviously, we talk about
performance and fitness in terms of physical fitness a lot, but
that is also an aspect of it. And then, lastly, there is an
aspect of mental fitness.
That holistic view is a lot of what we found inside of the
Independent Review Commission, right, along with some quality-
of-life challenges, right? So, all of those things together are
wrapped up in a study labeled ``suicide,'' but a holistic human
performance and fitness look holistically, that is a new way to
look at solving the problem, rather than just one thing at a
time, sir.
Mr. Kim. Well, one thing I want to just kind of expand on
here, just in my final minute here, is: some of the
recommendations focused on issues about length of assignments,
greater flexibility in a career trajectory, more predictability
in unit training. Some of those, you know, certainly sound very
direct to this issue, but some of them, also, sound like these
are the types of things that we can be doing for recruitment,
retention, and just overall modernizing sort of how we
understand our workforce. Does that make sense to you? Is that
something that you would agree upon?
I guess maybe, Chief Master Sergeant Bass, if you don't
mind kind of speaking to this?
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Sir, thank you so much for
that.
Absolutely. Like I was actually really excited to read all
of the recommendations. And a lot of them we are already doing.
Some of those ones that you mentioned, though, with respect to
assignments, et cetera, those will draw budget requirements.
And so, those are some of the challenges that all of our
services have to face when it comes to Military Personnel
[MILPERS] accounts and things like that. We absolutely want to
do those things, but when you have a set amount of budget, it
will challenge our ability to get after some of those
assignment things.
Mr. Kim. Yes, and I will just say here to conclude, you
know, that is on us, too.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kim. So, you know, I very much want to engage with you
on what these best practices are, and then, make sure that the
Chairman and I, and this Committee, are doing everything we can
to fund it.
Thank you.
The Chairman. I yield five minutes to Representative
Alford.
Mr. Alford. Thank you, Chairman Banks, and thank you,
Ranking Member Kim.
Nine percent, that is a number that really jumped out in
the testimony and what was written that we were able to look at
beforehand--the number, the percentage of young people who are
actually interested in joining our Armed Services.
I, of course, am a freshman. I'm joined by my brothers here
in our freshman class who have served in our military. I never
served, but I gave up everything I have to run for this office
and to be here today, because I feel like we are very close to
going over the edge as a Nation. And I wanted to do something
to serve my Nation, and this was it.
I read a book from Simon Sinek. It's entitled, `Start with
Why'. And it was very instrumental in helping me form exactly
why I wanted to do this.
There are two ways to motivate people--one through
manipulation and one through inspiration. Typically,
manipulation involves some sort of fear. And we live in a very
dangerous time, as you all know--the threat from the Communist
Chinese government, the uncertainty with the war in Ukraine.
So, it would be very easy, I think, to try to motivate someone
through fear, the existential threats that our Nation faces.
We need to inspire young people to greatness. We need to
inspire people to the greatest of America. We need to let them
know that the American dream is alive.
I personally believe we have been sold a bill of goods that
our strength as a Nation relies on our diversity. I truly
believe the strength in our Nation relies on our commonality,
what we have in common. And that one thing we have in common is
we live in the greatest Nation ever known to man. And it is
worth serving. It is worth fighting for. It is worth dying for.
We had to get out on the House Floor and publicly denounce
socialism. I never thought in my wildest days that one of the
first things we would have to do in Congress, when I got here,
is to educate Americans and denounce socialism.
We live in the greatest Nation known to man, an experiment
in democracy, a republic with no equal, a beacon of hope, a
refuge for freedom, a land of opportunity. So, how do we get
our young people, without manipulating them through fear, how
do we, in their eyes, make America worth serving?
Sergeant Major Grinston, I will start with you.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Sir, Congressman, thank you for
the question.
I actually will go off what the Sergeant Major of the
Marine Corps already said. We have to tell our stories. We have
to share. We have to be out there and be an inspiration for all
those young men and women and just advocate that we are the
greatest country in the world, and we have the greatest,
strongest military the world has ever seen. Full stop.
And we are going to take care of our people. We have got
great programs. And we are hard on ourselves. Let's be honest,
that in our militaries, we go and we look at ourselves, and
sometimes we are overly critical and say, ``We need to do
better. We need to do better.''
But make no doubt, like I said in my opening comment, we
have the greatest Army the world has ever seen, and will see in
the foreseeable future. And I think that is what every
narrative has to be from every American, not just us in the
service.
Have you asked your kids, your cousins, your uncles, your
nieces, your nephews, and their parents, ``Why aren't your kids
joining the military?'' And it shouldn't be just those in the
military that do that. And then, `Are you advocating for us?'
Remember, we are your Army, your service.
Mr. Alford. We are about out of time, and I wouldn't want
to throw it to anyone else on our witness panel, not giving
them the justice of time to answer that question.
But I thank you for your service from the bottom of my
heart, and I will do all I can to fight for you, and to fight
for this Nation, in the time that I have left here.
Thank you so much. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
That completes our first round. I have had a request for a
second round. So, with the permission of the ranking member,
can we do a rapid-fire second round of questions for those who
would like to?
I will begin. Sergeant Major Grinston, you have referenced
an Army study a handful of times. The study was leaked to the
media, to an Associated Press reporter, but hasn't been made
publicly available. Why would the Army not be willing to
publish that recruitment report, make it publicly available?
Sergeant Major Grinston. I'm not sure, Congressman. We will
have to take that for the record and make sure we can get you
that. I don't control the survey, but we have an obligation and
will see what we can do.
The Chairman. You did talk about the results of the
survey----
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. ----in public testimony. Why not make it
publicly available? I mean, why wouldn't the Army be willing to
do that?
You also made strong comments to members of the Committee
suggesting that, because they are talking about the effects of
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion programs, that that is having
a more severe consequence on recruitment than the actual
programs themselves. If you are willing to say that in public
testimony, why wouldn't the Army be willing to make that report
public?
Can you take that for the record and have the Army get back
to me on that?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Yes.
The Chairman. I appreciate it.
And with that, I would yield to Ranking Member Kim.
Mr. Kim. Look, I just wanted to follow up on one more
question that I have. You know, we talked a lot about
recruitment. We talked a lot about the challenges that we are
facing here. I guess my question to you here, just to help me
think through this, is: what new tools or what new tactics are
you thinking about here? We were talking about school access
and we were talking about some of the narrative elements, and I
think those are certainly part of this.
But, as we are thinking through this kind of new paradigm
shift moment--and certainly a lot of new challenges out there,
not just for the military, but for every employer in this
country when it comes to workforce--I am curious if that has
pushed you to think through sort of new tools, new tactics,
things like that that would be helpful for us to know about
here in Congress.
Go ahead.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Ranking Member, if I can just
add, you know, for us, it is interesting, right, for those of
us who have been around when 9/11 happened, our bases, by and
large, were more open than they are today. And since that, they
were more closed off.
You know, our Chief of Staff of the Air Force pushed a note
to every one of our wing commanders saying, ``We've got to
figure out ways to some degree be able to open our bases back
up.'' So, you don't have Americans that live five miles down
the road and have no idea what is happening on our
installations and what we offer.
And so, we are opening ourselves up to partner with our
communities more than we ever have before. I would offer, when
it comes to recruiting, we have to start way left, even before
high school. You know, children, we have to start to inspire at
elementary school, middle school. And so, we are doing those
things organically by encouraging our airmen to spend time in
some of the schools with Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math programs and other things like that.
Thank you.
Mr. Kim. Yes, thank you.
And I just want to end here by just kind of reiterating a
point that I just thought, Sergeant Major Grinston, you made so
eloquently in your opening remarks about just that sense. I
wrote it down here. You talked about this national call to
service. And I want to thank you for talking about it in that
kind of way.
You framed it as saying that what inspires people to want
to join our military is that they want to be part of something
bigger than all of us. And I very much feel that as well. I did
not serve in uniform, but, in terms of what inspired me to
serve this country, it was very much in that same vein.
There are a number of us in Congress on both sides of the
aisle that are trying to develop up efforts that would build
towards a national service program, or something of that
nature, that would very much try to instill in people--whether
they decide to go into uniform or not, or non-uniform, or
government, or public service in a different way.
But I just want to thank you and everyone on this panel for
your patriotism, but, also, your belief that we can still turn
this ship around and make sure that we can inspire a new
generation to serve. And I would like to continue to work with
you to realize that.
Thank you.
The Chairman. I yield to Representative Mills.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just touching back on what I was mentioning earlier--and I
would love to hear each of you individually with a simple yes
or no, so we can kind of get through this--but do you feel
that, with the increased focus on pronoun training and
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion, that it has made us a more
increased lethal and ready force?
We will start with you, Sergeant Major of the Army.
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman, it is hard to answer
that with a yes-or-no answer.
Mr. Mills. Well, how about I will simplify it? Do you feel
that pronoun training translates into increased lethality of
our Armed Forces?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Again, it is really difficult to
answer that with `yes or no'. I can just say that we are
stronger and better the more inclusive we are, and it is a
testament to see the diversity of this panel.
Mr. Mills. So, when I served, I served with members who
were born in Cambodia, lived in California. I started with
people who had grown up in bad neighborhoods out of Brooklyn. I
had served with people out of Alabama. It was pretty diverse.
There was inclusion and we all considered ourselves to be able
to bleed red, white, and blue.
I'm curious, you know, because when I walk through
Arlington and visit friends of mine, I don't notice that our
headstones are actually lined up by race or gender, or by what
our religious belief is. It is by the battlefields that we were
all willing to fight and die together.
So, I'm curious as to, when I talk to people and say,
``Well, why aren't you looking to join the military?'' a lot of
them say, ``Well, the military has been over-politicized. Well,
the military has gone woke. Well, the military is now focused
on areas that it doesn't really focus on what I care about,''
which is being able to do the things that I said that brought
me in--the cool guy videos. You know, the 80 percent do stuff;
20 percent, how cool does it look? Kick doors, jump out of
planes, and increased lethality to be able to take it to the
enemy.
So, we are saying that this modification, and that this
idea that we now have the--because we don't see the recruitment
videos that we once saw whenever we, like, joined in the
military. We are seeing that this new focus, this new shift,
this new kind of woke ideology is not impacting recruitment and
not impacting our readiness and lethality? I have a hard time
believing that.
Does anyone want to just address a yes or no? And I know
you, Command Sergeant, you are more than welcome to go ahead.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Sir, I would offer you that the
Air Force does not have pronoun training.
And, sir, you know, you have asked where you can help us. I
would offer, Congressman Mills, where we could use your help is
by sharing that message that your Services are not focused on
any of those such trainings more than we are on warfighting.
That is a fact; I can assure you of that.
We have challenges when it comes to quality-of-life of our
airmen. That is not one of them.
Mr. Mills. And we have not lowered standards in any way to
include things such as Ranger school, where certain classes
wasn't even carrying the ruckster and the Mountain Phase, and
things like this? We have maintained standards at all times? Is
that what we are saying?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman, yes, we have
maintained our standards. And I would say that, when I looked
at it, there is one hour of Equal Opportunity Training in Basic
Training and 92 hours of Rifle Marksmanship Training. And if
you go to One Station Unit Training [OSUT], there's 165 hours
of Rifle Marksmanship Training, and still only one hour of
Equal Opportunity Training.
Mr. Mills. Well, I can tell you, from a person I had served
with, one of my first roommates who ended up going throughout
the Enlisted ranks all the way through to being a Major, he was
training over at West Point and he was teaching squad and
platoon tactics for infantrymen. And his class had got bumped
because they wanted to introduce a new class which was called
``Intro to Transsexuality.''
Now, I'm not really certain on how that is a priority over
platoon tactics, or how that in any way increased our lethality
and readiness. I can guarantee we have the ability to ``out-
pronoun'' every one of our enemies; no doubt about it. But if
you look at what China, Russia, and other folks are actually
doing right now, it is about increased lethality and being able
to take it to the West--economically, from resource
perspectives, militarily, and also, making sure that they now
have the largest navy in the world, not us.
Just for the rest of the members who haven't answered yet,
do you, on that same thing, feel that our priority had shifted
somewhat because of the politicization, and that we are as
ready now in lethality and readiness as we always have been?
Sergeant Major Black. Congressman, great question.
We are talking about words. There is a word that the
Ranking Member used that I haven't heard yet, except for him.
It is called patriotism. I will let that sink in in my verbal,
my oral statement, what everyone here has said about
propensity. Sir, if we want to focus on words, we probably
should focus on words like patriotism.
Mr. Mills. I agree.
Sergeant Major Black. Some of the words we have used here
are not words that we regularly use, right? And quite frankly,
until we figure out--well, Congressman Bergman brought this up,
his time in the 1980s serving on a certain panel and a study.
In the 1980s, we knew who the enemy was, right? Everybody
knew who the enemy was. We all talked the same about who the
enemy was.
Mr. Mills. That is right.
Sergeant Major Black. That had us who wanted to join the
military focused on what our mission was, and it was all based
on the protection of the Constitution, period. That is called
patriotism.
And so, we can figure out who meets standards; who does not
meet standards. But I can tell you this--and I won't speak for
everyone--but in the Marine Corps, we have not lowered a single
standard. We will not lower a single standard.
Mr. Mills. As it should be.
Sergeant Major Black. Whoever meets the requirements for
becoming a United States Marine will be a Marine, as patriots
protecting the Constitution, as we swear to.
Thank you, sir.
Mr. Mills. Thank you.
And with that, I will go ahead and yield back.
The Chairman. Do you have further questions?
Representative Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sergeant Major Black, if we can continue on where we left
off, I think we were discussing the military presence over the
next few years, and especially with the Marines. If you have
ideas, or what is the Department of Defense's plans with the
schooling for these families that are coming on out to Guam?
Sergeant Major Black. Congressman, as I had mentioned,
legitimately, I would like to take that for the record. Because
along with education for the increasing amount of military
personnel, Marines, in particular, are going to be arriving in
Guam as part of the Camp Blaz reactivation, sir. There is a
whole list of other things that we are really going to talk
about, assets to the community, sir. It would be worth talking
about offline.
Thank you.
Mr. Moylan. I appreciate that.
Another follow-up question is that, given the magnitude of
all the other Branches also expanding on Guam, I would like to
make this an open question for any of the witnesses. First, for
the many service members being stationed in Guam, it means
moving far away from home to a place that is culturally unique
within the United States. So, what programs or practices have
you found to help service members integrate with the host
community?
Sergeant Major Grinston. Congressman, thank you for the
question.
I'm assuming most of us already have one program that deals
with sponsorship of families as you move from one installation.
It doesn't matter whether you go to Guam, if you go to Germany,
if you go to Hawaii, or Alaska. All these moves are unique, in
and of themselves. You are joining a community. You are joining
a different culture that you might not have grown up in. You
know, I moved from Alabama to Washington State my first move.
And it is important for us to bring those families on as
they move. And we have had the sponsorship program for a long
time, since I have been in the Army. And that is how you bring
people into the community. You welcome them.
Most families want to look for two things, and it doesn't
matter where you go. `Are you going to have a place to live,
and, you know, are my kids going to be taken care of?' So, if I
can get that, then I can get to work and I can just focus on
the mission.
And we have several programs, one of those being the
Sponsorship Program for the Army.
Chief Master Sergeant Bass. Congressman, in addition to the
Sponsorship Program, we have base introduction briefs and
programs, where all of our installation Command teams welcome
our service members when they come onto the installation for
the first time. And it is, typically, during those briefings--
that is, you know, a day or two days long--where we introduce
them into the culture, to the community, and also, bring on a
lot of our folks from off-base onto our base to help
indoctrinate our service members.
Sergeant Major Black. Congressman, if I could, as I was
thinking about your question, I'm remiss, I didn't say, ``Hafa
adai [speaking in the Chamorro language]''
[Laughter.]
But the reason is, as a young Marine--and I think we can
all say this--if you are getting ready to get stationed in a
new country, and getting into a new community or a new society,
things like knowing that, when you get off the plane, people
are going to run at you and they are going to say, like,
``Aloha'' and ``Mahalo,'' if you go to Hawaii. If you go to
Japan, it is going to be, ``Domo Arigato.'' And you are not a
member of that community until you can also communicate with
that community.
That is one of the greatest benefits of service--to joining
and sitting in these uniforms that we sit in--is being able to
have those experiences.
And I have never been stationed in Germany, but everyone
who I know in the Army who has, they are like half-German,
because they are part of that community, right, and not in the
literal sense? But being part of the community is part of the
integration into the communities.
And just something as simple as saying, ``Half a day to
you,'' that is part of that.
Mr. Moylan. Hafa adai [speaking in the Chamorro language].
And thank you for that. I appreciate that, and I think we will
be working out just fine.
So, thank you for your service, folks.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Thank you to all of you.
Sergeant Major Black, this is a very patriotic committee.
We have a duty and a job to address a recruitment crisis in
this country. For the first time in 50 years of an All-
Volunteer Force, we have a crisis, and that is why we are here
today, to address it.
And, Sergeant Major Grinston, Diversity, Equity, and
Inclusion programs--accusing Members of Congress of talking
about issues and hurting recruitment, that is why we are here
today, to dig deeply into these issues, to come up with
solutions and guide the way for the National Defense
Authorization Act, to solve big problems and big issues that we
have that come to recruitment. That is the job of this
committee, and I take it very seriously.
But, with that, I want to thank all of you for your
service, for providing testimony, your feedback.
I want to close by requesting that you take the issues that
we have identified and discussed here today back to your
Service Personnel Chiefs and leadership, and let them know that
we will be asking them what concrete actions they intend to
take to mitigate the problems that we have identified in this
hearing, and how they intend to rebuild trust with our service
members.
With that, and there being no further business, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 9, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN

Mr. Bergman. Are your recruiters getting access to the
schools? Are the Boards of Education/Teachers/Counselors/
Coaches/Principles (influencers) welcoming recruiters into the
schools?
Sergeant Major of the Army Grinston. Under 20 U.S. Code
Sec. 7908, Army recruiters are gaining access to high school
students. Due to the pandemic, our recruiters used online
platforms more often to connect with high school students but
have now fully returned to a routine presence in the schools.
Obtaining access to the schools has not been an issue, but
rather strengthening relationships with those influencers to
solidify a message about the Army as a potential career path.
As such, United States Army Recruiting Command is working with
the Civilian Aides to the Secretary of the Army and community
partners to remedy any localized challenges.
Mr. Bergman. Would you be willing to submit a list of
current DoD policies that inhibit your ability to lead and are
there policies are countering the positive efforts that you're
expected to comply with?
Sergeant Major of the Army Grinston. I am not aware of any
DoD policies that inhibit my ability to lead nor aware of any
policies that are countering the positive efforts I am expected
to comply with.
Mr. Bergman. Are your recruiters getting access to the
schools? Are the Boards of Education/Teachers/Counselors/
Coaches/Principles (influencers) welcoming recruiters into the
schools?
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Honea. Navy
Recruiting Command (NRC) is required to report high schools
that deny access via the Recruiter Access to High Schools
database, maintained by the Defense Manpower Data Center. NRC
is currently reporting zero high schools on this list. However,
compliance is not the same as welcoming. The current law
requires visits comparable to colleges and other employers
which means some high schools only allow access no more than
once a year. We continue to enhance communication and
partnerships with local, state, and Federal education officials
and influencers to promote military service as a meaningful
post-high school pathway.
Mr. Bergman. Would you be willing to submit a list of
current DoD policies that inhibit your ability to lead and are
there policies are countering the positive efforts that you're
expected to comply with?
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Honea. When I took
the helm of the enlisted force as the Navy's 16th MCPON, I
identified my top priorities as warfighting competency,
professional and character development, and quality of life. I
am not aware of any DoD policies that inhibit my ability to
lead efforts to support warfighting readiness, enlisted leader
development and a culture of excellence in support of all
enlisted Sailors.
Mr. Bergman. Are your recruiters getting access to the
schools? Are the Boards of Education/Teachers/Counselors/
Coaches/Principles (influencers) welcoming recruiters into the
schools?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Bass. Our Department
of the Air Force recruiters are working with school
administrators in their areas to talk with students about
opportunities in the Air Force and Space Force. However, there
are varying levels of cooperation throughout the school
districts, based on their openness to military recruiters. We
train our recruiters to cultivate positive relationships with
schools and administrators; and use the prescribed process for
elevating school-access issues, and concerns, to their
leadership teams for increased communication with these schools
and school districts. Any help you can provide in this area is
greatly welcome.
Mr. Bergman. Would you be willing to submit a list of
current DoD policies that inhibit your ability to lead and are
there policies are countering the positive efforts that you're
expected to comply with?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Bass. The Department
of the Air Force maintains an open dialogue with Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD) and Congress on policies and
statutes that we believe require modification to best position
us for success. As this is a dynamic employment environment,
the list of legislative and policy change requests is ever-
changing. I very much welcome further dialogue on this, and all
topics of interest regarding the current state of our service
members, especially with your previous experience.
Mr. Bergman. Are your recruiters getting access to the
schools? Are the Boards of Education/Teachers/Counselors/
Coaches/Principles (influencers) welcoming recruiters into the
schools?
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Black. Our recruiters
are getting access to most schools throughout the Nation and
engaging with influencers through Center of Influence events
with educators, coaches, counselors, and boards of education.
The Marine Corps appreciates the continued support of
legislation from Congress that provides recruiters enhanced
access to high schools and student directory lists.
Additionally, we support efforts to incentivize schools
such as including military service in school accountability
plans in support of the Every Student Succeeds Act. This access
remains critical to recruiting quality applicants. Without it,
our Marine Recruiters would lose the most efficient and
productive means of conveying military service opportunities to
a diverse market. Maintaining access to high schools and
student directories remains a top priority for ensuring
continued success.
Mr. Bergman. Would you be willing to submit a list of
current DoD policies that inhibit your ability to lead and are
there policies are countering the positive efforts that you're
expected to comply with?
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Black. My commitment as
the Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps is to ensure we are
taking care of our Marines and their families. It's a key
element of overall readiness and our warfighting prowess.
There's no policy that prevents us from achieving readiness. I
would offer that while we continue to dial in on the
appropriate policies for our U.S. service members, propensity
to serve continues to decline. The conversations we hold in
public regarding the policies and practices we serve by affects
our ability to attract the young men and women who are needed
to defend our Nation and the Constitution. I trust that our
elected leaders will always put our people first, so we,
military leaders, may continue to attract, lead and retain a
healthy and professional fighting force.
Mr. Bergman. Are your recruiters getting access to the
schools? Are the Boards of Education/Teachers/Counselors/
Coaches/Principles (influencers) welcoming recruiters into the
schools?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Towberman. Our DAF
recruiters are gaining access to schools to talk with students
about opportunities in the Air Force and Space Force; they are
welcomed by the school's administration. However, there are
varying levels of cooperation throughout the school districts
based on their openness to military recruiters. We train our
recruiters to cultivate positive relationships with schools and
administrators, but if schools deny access, they use the
prescribed process for elevating these concerns to their
leadership teams for increased communication with these schools
and school districts.
Mr. Bergman. Would you be willing to submit a list of
current DoD policies that inhibit your ability to lead and are
there policies are countering the positive efforts that you're
expected to comply with?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Towberman. DAF
maintains an open dialogue with OSD and the Congress on
policies and statutes that we believe require modification to
best position us for success. The list of legislative and
policy change requests is ever-changing as might be expected in
a dynamic employment environment. We've been very successful as
a Space Force, under current policies, to find and retain our
best Guardians. Our approach to tailor solutions to maximize
individual talent and mission readiness is key to our success,
regardless of policy.''
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ

Mr. Waltz. I am working on a proposal to encourage public
schools to bring in active or retired military personnel to
speak to classes about, or help teach, civics and physical
education. Do you believe these sorts of interactions with
servicemembers will help young people consider a military
career?
Sergeant Major of the Army Grinston. The Department of
Defense (DoD) Office of People Analytics' Report State of the
Recruiting Market (prepared by the Joint Advertising, Market
Research & Studies (JAMRS) on January 2023) indicates that the
youth market has transitioned from being disconnected from the
military to mostly disinterested in the military. Establishing
value alignment to spark interest with youth is the first
hurdle for the Army. Making the connection between what the
Army has to offer and how today's youth view their career
decisions as interlinked with their personal values, via this
proposal in public schools, would enable youth to have
meaningful interactions with members of the United States Army.
Mr. Waltz.. I am working on a proposal to encourage public
schools to bring in active or retired military personnel to
speak to classes about, or help teach, civics and physical
education. Do you believe these sorts of interactions with
servicemembers will help young people consider a military
career?
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Honea. The Navy
welcomes the opportunity to review and comment on any such
proposal. Generally speaking, in today's difficult recruiting
environment, we are challenged by both propensity and
eligibility to serve that can benefit by encouraging schools to
enhance both civics and physical fitness programs. Active and
retired Service members can help create positive perceptions of
military service by sharing their positive experiences and the
benefits of their service. Helping our youth understand the
value of military service, both in terms of tangible and
intangible benefits, is essential to ensure the military
remains relevant as they consider their post-high school plan.
Schools are a priority setting for obesity prevention
efforts because they reach the vast majority of school-aged
youth, provide regularly scheduled opportunities for physical
activity, and can offer nutritious foods through school meal
programs. These efforts may reduce the prevalence of obesity
among young and provide a larger population qualified and
available for the opportunity of military service.
Mr. Waltz. The USS George Washington, which is undergoing a
long-term overhaul at Newport News Shipbuilding, has had eight
sailors assigned to the ship commit suicide in the last 10
months. After a string of three suicides in one-month last
April, the Navy determined that stress related to conditions
living on the ship contributed to at least one of their deaths.
This January, it was reported that another sailor assigned to
the ship committed suicide.
How is the Navy addressing this? What housing options be
provided as an alternative to living on a ship undergoing
constant construction?
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Honea. The Navy
mourns the loss of our shipmates. While the Navy is a resilient
force, we are not immune from the same challenges that affect
the nation that we serve. The Navy is working daily and
aggressively to ensure support and resources are available to
Sailors in the shipyards, at sea, and at home. The Navy shares
your concerns and has investigated these issues with an eye
toward making lasting change. We can and must do more.
The death of a USS George Washington (CVN 73) Sailor in
January is still under investigation by the Newport News Police
Department. The Sailor did not live in military housing but
maintained a private residence with his roommate, another
George Washington Sailor. In accordance with Navy regulations,
the Commanding Officer of the USS George Washington convened a
line-of-duty investigation to determine if the Sailor's death
was in the line-of-duty and whether it was due to his own
misconduct.
This investigation is still ongoing. Line-of-duty
investigations are limited in scope and affect survivor
benefits. It would be inappropriate at this time to speculate
as to the outcome of these investigations. It is known that the
Sailor was experiencing numerous life stressors unrelated to
military service and that he was receiving routine mental
health care and seemed to be improving.
The Navy continues to prioritize and promote mental health
care for our Sailors in the shipyard, and numerous Quality of
Service (Quality of Life + Quality of Work) initiatives are
ongoing to help improve the lives of all Sailors in the
shipyard. At the end of January, the Navy completed its
expansive review of issues and programs that affect Sailor
Quality of Service in the shipyards. The report is under review
by Navy leadership and will be made public in the coming
months. This review incorporated multi-disciplinary subject
matter experts from numerous stakeholders to identify program
areas that require increased attention, support, or resources.
Over the past year, the Navy has been working diligently to
immediately identify and solve problems as they arise. This is
directly aligned with the Navy's ``Get Real, Get Better''
(GRGB) campaign. Through the GRGB initiative, the Navy intends
to instill a culture in leaders to empower our people to find
and fix problems at the lowest levels and to raise issues to
leadership when they need help.
The Navy is meticulously working towards implementing a
number of immediate and long-term recommendations that were
outlined in the command investigation released on December
19th. Recommendations such as adding additional mental health
counselors and refining the process of how we welcome new
Sailors aboard ships has been implemented and have been well
received. The Navy's goal is to ensure every Sailor knows they
are a critical component of our Navy team, so improving our
team-building programs remains a priority. This includes
reviewing commands'sponsorship and mentorship programs to
ensure we are connecting with Sailors and providing them
avenues to seek help. Commands continue to promote that there
is ``no wrong door'' in the Navy for Sailors to get the help
they need. The Department of the Navy's suicide prevention
efforts are aimed at encouraging positive help-seeking
behaviors, eliminating stigma, promoting personnel safety, and
increasing visibility and access to critical resources.
Commands are using all avenues to inform Sailors, through
multiple methods (e.g., ship announcements, monthly magazines,
mental health pamphlets, resource fairs on and off ship, and
videos on closed circuit television) of current and new
resources to help promote greater personal resiliency.
The Navy has taken a programmatic approach to countering
individual destructive behaviors. The Navy's Culture of
Excellence focuses on a holistic, cross-program approach to
proactively build resilient Sailors in order to prevent
destructive actions. The initiative is a Navy-wide approach to
achieve warfighting excellence by fostering mental, physical,
spiritual, and emotional toughness; promoting organizational
trust and transparency; ensuring connectedness to every Sailor,
civilian, and family member throughout their Navy journey. The
Navy's Culture of Excellence programs proactively work to build
resilient Sailors with intervention strategies to prevent
destructive actions. The cultural champions network is a cross-
functional effort led by the command triad, designed to
streamline conversation and care for Sailors and encourage them
to stay connected to tools and resources to thrive in any
condition--psychologically, spiritually, physically, and
emotionally--throughout their career. Commands also have a
Command Resilience Team Human Factors Council (CRT-HFC) that
operates at a programmatic level to effect improvements for the
benefit of the command. The CRT-HFC focuses on helping
individual Sailors who have been identified as needing more
care and resources.
The Navy's recently released Mental Health Playbook is a
tool for Navy leaders to assist them in preventing, mitigating,
and addressing mental health concerns within their commands. It
provides a framework for commanders to approach issues related
to mental health, recognize mental health issues, and get
Sailors the care they need. By providing increased resources,
training, and tools to leaders and Sailors, earlier
intervention and awareness may result in lower demand for
skilled medical care. This will allow our skilled medical
providers to focus their attention on the most at-risk Sailors.
The Navy is committed to transparency and open to public
scrutiny. We will continue to share information with
congressional staff members to ensure these offices are kept up
to date with all matters affecting Navy readiness and Sailor
quality of life.
Four options exist to house Sailors off the ship:

LProvide a housing allowance to procure private
housing in the community.

LUnaccompanied housing.

LLeased housing.

LBerthing barge.
Navy relies on community housing where available to house
families and more senior unaccompanied Sailors. Statute
prohibits payment of a housing allowance to E3 and below
without dependents on sea duty. For junior unaccompanied
enlisted Sailors, Navy looks first to unaccompanied housing
(UH) at installations within a thirty-minute rush-hour commute
of the Shipyard. Where UH is not available, Navy relies on the
authority in 10 USC 8772 to acquire lodging accommodations
either through the Shipyard or through a lease with a local
community provider.
Housing the entire crew on a berthing and messing barge is
considered only as a last resort.
The Navy does make use of Duty Crew Barges to provide
housing for the Duty Crew in close proximately to the vessel to
provide for duty section emergency response to fire, flooding,
engineering casualty control, and security breaches. Duty crew
barges also provide administrative offices, food service, and
training facilities.
Mr. Waltz. I am working on a proposal to encourage public
schools to bring in active or retired military personnel to
speak to classes about, or help teach, civics and physical
education. Do you believe these sorts of interactions with
servicemembers will help young people consider a military
career?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Bass. These
interactions are not only welcomed but necessary to expand the
experiences of military service to our youth. In this
challenging environment, where we need young people with a
desire to serve, whether in the military or in their
communities, a consistent presence in our public schools is
imperative. Having active and retired military personnel
speaking to our students provides another level of authenticity
to the value of military service. I would ask Congress to
support our efforts by working with States and local
communities to expand and enhance programs like Purple Star
Schools, which not only provide critical support for our
military-connected children, but also build foundational
connections with communities to recognize and celebrate the
contributions of those who serve.
Mr. Waltz. I am working on a proposal to encourage public
schools to bring in active or retired military personnel to
speak to classes about, or help teach, civics and physical
education. Do you believe these sorts of interactions with
servicemembers will help young people consider a military
career?
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Black. Any increase of
public exposure and education provide opportunity and
awareness. Our recruiters offer these services now, however the
Marine Corps appreciates support from Congress to enhance these
efforts and increase the amount of access our Recruiters have
to public schools. As you know, those who have served in
uniform depart our ranks with increased professionalism,
maturity, leadership, and skills that translate well into the
civilian sector.
Mr. Waltz. Sergeant Major Black, my staff recently visited
Marine Basic training at Parris Island and I commend the work
done there to prepare these young recruits for their careers in
the Corps. However, one area that caught their attention was
the water survival training portion where a small portion of
recruits struggled. For some, this was their first time ever
being in a swimming pool and lacked some basic swim skills. The
swim instructors do an outstanding job in getting them ready,
but it does take time. Time that could be spent with the rest
of their training platoons to help acquire and develop the
other essential skills to be a Marine. The Army has a pre-boot
camp program that recruits can participate in to physically
prepare themselves for boot camp. Does the Marine Corps have
any similar programs and is basic aquatics part of it? If not,
do you think the Marine Corps could benefit from such a
program? What can this committee do to help?
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Black. The Marine Corps
has a delayed entry program (DEP) designed to prepare and
motivate applicants for shipping and recruit training. The
goals of the DEP are to: mentally and physically prepare
applicants for recruit training with the objective of reducing
Marine Corps Recruit Depot attrition and maintain and enhance
the motivation of applicants while they are in the DEP and to
minimize DEP attrition. The DEP does not include an aquatics
portion aside from an applicant that may self-profess a need
for improvement or familiarization in the water. Most
applicants do not have access to a pool or funding for pool
memberships or lessons. The Marine Corps is exploring options
for providing discounted or free-swimming lessons to applicants
that self-profess a lack of basic swim skills.
Mr. Waltz. I am working on a proposal to encourage public
schools to bring in active or retired military personnel to
speak to classes about, or help teach, civics and physical
education. Do you believe these sorts of interactions with
servicemembers will help young people consider a military
career?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Towberman. These
interactions are not only welcomed but necessary to expand the
experiences of military service to our youth. In this
challenging recruiting environment, a consistent presence in
our public schools is imperative. Having active and retired
military personnel speaking to our students provides another
level of authenticity to the value of military service. I would
ask Congress to support our efforts by working with States and
local communities to expand and enhance programs like Purple
Star Schools, which not only provide critical support for our
militarily connected children, but also build foundational
connections with communities to recognize and celebrate the
contributions of those who serve.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOYLAN

Mr. Moylan. With the increase in military presence on Guam
over the next few years, what are the Department of Defenses
plans with constructing new schools?
Sergeant Major of the Army Grinston. This question would be
best addressed by the Office of the Secretary of Defense.
Mr. Moylan. What issues have enlisted personnel on Guam
reported regarding commissary use in Guam? Are they
experiencing shortages of goods like baby formula, and do
barriers exist on Guam preventing service members from
accessing necessary goods that my office should be aware of?
Sergeant Major of the Army Grinston. The Army has a
relatively small number of enlisted personnel in Guam. The
larger service components on Guam are Navy and Air Force. To
highlight, the Army Active Component is 198, U.S Army Reserves
is 490, and Army National Guard is 1,154, totaling 1,842. The
feedback received from soldiers of the 94th Army Air and
Missile Defense Command were minor concerns regarding the
commissary on Andersen Air Force Base (AAFB). The majority of
these soldiers shop at the AAFB commissary (rather than the
Naval Base Guam commissary which is larger and has a greater
selection of goods) as the formations are tenant units at the
AAFB. Non-dairy milk products or alternatives to real milk as
well as pre-packaged/pre-made salads are frequently out of
stock; both can take one to two weeks to be resupplied.
Soldiers have noticed a trend that when the AAFB commissary
displays include enforcing signage ``limiting purchase to x2
per household'', stocks of meat and fresh produce stay on the
shelves a lot longer and do not experience shortages. However,
soldiers also reported hoarding or over-purchasing for these
products when signs are not displayed; this has been observed
from retirees and/or locals accompanying someone with
commissary access.
Mr. Moylan. With the increase in military presence on Guam
over the next few years, what are the Department of Defenses
plans with constructing new schools?
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Honea. The
Department is currently assessing options to handle the growth
on Guam through 2029.
Mr. Moylan. What issues have enlisted personnel on Guam
reported regarding commissary use in Guam? Are they
experiencing shortages of goods like baby formula, and do
barriers exist on Guam preventing service members from
accessing necessary goods that my office should be aware of?
Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Honea. Neither my
office nor the Defense Commissary Agency (DeCA) leadership are
aware of any reported issues regarding commissary use in Guam.
Regarding access to goods, during the last year, DeCA has
experienced several challenges including manufacturing cuts,
distributor labor and driver shortages, ship delays, and port
congestion. These have placed a strain on overseas distribution
centers, which then impacts fill rates at the stores. The
manufacturing cuts have decreased in Fiscal Year 2023 and fill
rates have improved, climbing to 82%. Stock availability for
the Guam Central Distribution Center (CDC) averages 85% for
chill, dry and freeze categories.
In late January of 2023, DeCA upgraded its Central
Distribution Center warehouse, ordering and forecasting system.
The conversion caused minor disruptions. DeCA invested in the
new Warehouse Management System (WMS) to improve stock
availability in overseas distribution centers. This improvement
allows DeCA to maximize warehouse utilization, track product
availability, and allow for more efficient ordering from our
suppliers.
DeCA continues to prioritize overseas operations to ensure
our outside the contiguous United States patrons receive the
bulk of limited products. DeCA leadership is unaware of an
inability to access goods at commissary locations in Guam.
Mr. Moylan. With the increase in military presence on Guam
over the next few years, what are the Department of Defenses
plans with constructing new schools?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Bass. Because Guam
encompasses numerous Services, we defer this question to the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness (OSD-P&R); specifically, the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs and their DoD
Educational Activity (DoDEA) division.
Mr. Moylan. What issues have enlisted personnel on Guam
reported regarding commissary use in Guam? Are they
experiencing shortages of goods like baby formula, and do
barriers exist on Guam preventing service members from
accessing necessary goods that my office should be aware of?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Bass. Our service
members continue to face challenges in Guam at the Commissaries
including low product quantities and expired, or near-expiring,
daily use products like milk. We know this is due to DeCA
experiencing several challenges during the last year, including
manufacturing cuts, distributor labor, driver shortages, ship
delays, and port congestion, which have strained overseas
distribution centers. Additionally, manufacture cuts averaged
17.27% in FY22.
Regardless, when products are unavailable at the Commissary
where prices are subsidized on known value items (meat, eggs,
milk, etc.), our members must purchase these items from local
markets paying, in some cases, quadruple the price. It is
important to note that DeCA is aware of these challenges and
continues to prioritize overseas operations to overcome supply
chain problems and ensure OCONUS service members receive the
bulk of limited products.
Mr. Moylan. With the increase in military presence on Guam
over the next few years, what are the Department of Defenses
plans with constructing new schools?
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Black. An assessment is
underway to evaluate all school requirements associated with
the military presence in Guam.
Mr. Moylan. What issues have enlisted personnel on Guam
reported regarding commissary use in Guam? Are they
experiencing shortages of goods like baby formula, and do
barriers exist on Guam preventing service members from
accessing necessary goods that my office should be aware of?
Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Black. Supply chain
constraints on Guam have a noticeable impact on the
availability of commodities for service members, dependents,
and other authorized patrons. Inventory levels at the base
exchange and commissary are subject to change without notice
and make family meal planning/grocery budget management a
challenge.
Another contributing factor is the bulk purchase of items
by authorized patrons from within the local population. Guam
has the highest rate of military service per capita in the
United States and there are roughly 30,000 veteran patrons
eligible for commissary and exchange services within the
civilian population. These numbers are not captured in the base
loading criteria to determine Commissary/Exchange size and
service levels. Item restrictions put in place by Installation
Commanders to mitigate the negative effects of buying in bulk
are left to cashiers to enforce. Specific examples of items
often seen being purchased in bulk include meat, baby products,
and over the counter medicine.
These sentiments have been validated through several
working groups and other informal data calls with service
members and their families.
Mr. Moylan. With the increase in military presence on Guam
over the next few years, what are the Department of Defenses
plans with constructing new schools?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Towberman. Because
Guam encompasses numerous Services we defer this question to
the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and
Readiness (OSC-P&R); specifically, the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs and their DoD
Educational Activity (DoDEA) division.
Mr. Moylan. What issues have enlisted personnel on Guam
reported regarding commissary use in Guam? Are they
experiencing shortages of goods like baby formula, and do
barriers exist on Guam preventing service members from
accessing necessary goods that my office should be aware of?
Chief Master Sergeant of the Space Force Towberman. DeCA
leadership is unaware of any issues reported regarding
commissary use in Guam. DeCA has experienced several challenges
during the last year, including manufacturing cuts, distributor
labor, driver shortages, ship delays, and port congestion,
which have strained our overseas distribution centers.
Manufacture cuts averaged 17.27% in FY22. DeCA has begun to see
improvement in FY23, with manufacturing cuts decreasing to an
average of 12.45%. FY22 fill rates from our distributors
averaged 76%; FY23 rates have climbed to 82%. Our stock
availability for the Guam Central Distribution Center (CDC) is
85% chill, 85% dry, and 87% freeze. The CDC recently upgraded
from Power Enterprise (PE) to Warehouse Management System (WMS)
in late January 2023. Although, as expected, the conversion
caused minor disruptions, product availability is now at normal
levels.
DeCA invested in WMS, an automated warehouse system, and an
ordering/forecasting system to improve stock availability in
our overseas distribution centers. This improvement allows DeCA
to maximize warehouse utilization, track product availability,
and allow for more efficient ordering from our suppliers. DeCA
continues prioritizing our overseas operations to ensure our
OCONUS patrons receive the bulk of the limited product. DeCA
leadership is unaware of service members' inability to access
goods at commissary locations in Guam. This is the collective
DAF response.
