[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-73]

DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY FISCAL
YEAR 2025 BUDGET REQUEST

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 16, 2024

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-361                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

One Hundred Eighteenth Congress

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ADAM SMITH, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Vice    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
Chair                            RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
DON BACON, Nebraska                  MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               SARA JACOBS, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 PATRICK RYAN, New York
PAT FALLON, Texas                    JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota                  Pennsylvania
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
NICK LaLOTA, New York                TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                JIMMY PANETTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  MARC VEASEY, Texas
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia
LANCE GOODEN, Texas

Chris Vieson, Staff Director
Dave Sienicki, Professional Staff Member
Jay Vallario, Professional Staff Member
Logan Whelchel, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2

WITNESSES

George, GEN Randy A., USA, Chief of Staff........................     6
Wormuth, Christine, Secretary of the Army, U.S. Army.............     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Wormuth, Christine, and George, GEN Randy A..................    67

Documents Submitted for the Record:

Articles Submitted by Mr. Gaetz..............................    81

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Alford...................................................    98
Mr. Strong...................................................    98
Ms. Tokuda...................................................    97

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Bacon....................................................   107
Mr. Finstad..................................................   115
Mr. Gimenez..................................................   115
Mr. Horsford.................................................   117
Mrs. McClain.................................................   111
Mr. Mills....................................................   117
Mr. Norcross.................................................   104
Ms. Sewell...................................................   116
Mr. Turner...................................................   101
Mr. Waltz....................................................   109
Mr. Wilson...................................................   101
Mr. Wittman..................................................   105

DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY FISCAL YEAR 2025 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, April 16, 2024.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:59 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers (Chairman
of the Committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. The meeting will come to order. Without
objection, the chair may declare the committee in recess at any
point in the hearing. I also want to admonish the audience that
this is a public hearing but we will not tolerate disruptions.
Anybody who is disruptive will be removed and arrested.
Today we continue our review of the Fiscal Year 25 budget
request for the U.S. Army. I want to thank our witnesses for
being here and for their service to our nation. The Fiscal Year
25 defense budget is extremely tight and that's being generous.
The Fiscal Responsibility Act(FRA) caps total defense
spending at 895 billion for the year. That is less than one
percent increase over Fiscal Year 24. When you factor in
inflation, that one percent increase is actually a two percent
decrease in defense spending.
No service is hit harder than the Army. The Army continues
to be the Pentagon's bill payer. The President's budget cuts
operations and maintenance, putting readiness of the force at
risk.
It cuts Army Research and Development, including a 39
percent reduction in early stage research and development
projects that are critical to Army modernization efforts. It
cuts procurement of combat vehicles and ammunition and proposes
to cancel two major modernization programs. But for as bad as
the budget request is for the Army, it will get much worse if
Congress fails to pass the National Security Supplemental this
week.
The Army is struggling to pay the unplanned operating costs
of increased deployments and higher operation in Eastern Europe
and the Middle East. The Army is also rapidly running through
its supply of interceptors as it defends Israel and our troops
from Iran's unjustified missile and drone attacks. Furthermore,
the Army is the lead supplier of drawdown assistance to Israel
and Ukraine.
Without supplemental funding to replace the weapons, we are
providing -- and the weapons we're providing and expanding the
industrial base, the Army will be hard pressed to meet
operational requirements in the event of a conflict with China.
Making matters worse is the fact that the Army continues to
struggle with a historic recruiting crisis. The Army missed its
recruiting goals over the last two years by a combined 25,000
troops.
The Army is taking action, though. I want to commend
Secretary Wormuth and General George for requesting significant
increases in this budget to improve the quality of life for our
servicemembers and their families. This includes increased
funding to build new and modernize the existing barracks.
It also includes increases for programs to expand access to
childcare. These requests are tracked closely with the
recommendations of our quality of life panel. The panel's
recommendations will form the foundation of the Fiscal Year 25
National Defense Authorization Act.
If we're going to deter China, we need to recruit and
retain the best and brightest. Addressing the quality of life
issues our soldiers face will help do just that. I look forward
to working with my colleagues to enact these priorities. And
with that, I yield to my friend and the ranking member for any
opening statement he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
opening comments. I do want to thank our witnesses, Secretary
Wormuth and General George, for being here today and for their
work on so many important issues within the Army.
I just want to start with one point that the Chairman made
about the importance of passing the supplemental. I think it's
enormously important for a number of different reasons. But
certainly Ukraine is at the top of that list.
I know members of this committee understand. I don't know
the public more broadly does, just how close to the edge the
Ukraine is right now. But crucially if they were to get more
weapons, they could successfully defend their country.
They have proven that over the course of the two-plus years
of this war. Absent that, you will see Russia in Kiev in the
not too distance future. We need to get that support to Ukraine
now.
We've already waited weeks too long. And I do also want to
go on record as being deeply concerned about the convoluted
process that the Speaker announced yesterday for trying to get
that help to Ukraine. Now it is certainly true that we don't
always just have to take whatever the Senate does.
The House should come up with its own idea. But we've had
seven months to do that and have not done that. So at this
point coming up with the twisted process that was announced
yesterday will only further delay.
Best case scenario if they pull this together, maybe two
months from now we're able to figure this out. Once it goes
back to the Senate with all of these additional provisions to
it that the Senate has to sort its way through, that is
basically boiling Ukraine to death slowly. We have an option,
and that option is to pass the bill that the Senate passed two
months ago which would go directly to the President, would be
signed.
And the weapons would be flown to Ukraine literally within
days. Now again, I'm not unsympathetic. While the House, we
can't just do what the Senate does, we're the House. We should
exercise our own will.
Sure. We've had seven months to do it and we haven't,
haven't done anything as we've delayed over and over and over
and over again to the point where is simply no time to delay
further by once again torturing ourselves to try to figure out
what it is that the House Republican majority might want to do
on Ukraine. As I've said repeatedly, legislation is not
theoretical. It has to actually be written down, and we have
run out of time.
So I hope the majority will understand the importance of
that and get something done. As the Chairman said, this week,
passing a bill that is dramatically different than the Senate
bill, does not get something done this week. It is really
important that we do that.
I will just reiterate the points that the Chairman made
quickly, quality of life, recruitment enormously important. I
do want to compliment our witnesses today for their focus on
that issue and also compliment the Chairman and the Quality of
Life Panel that just came back with I think some excellent and
strong recommendations for how to meet those challenges and
better support the men and women who serve and certainly the
Army as the largest branch is most directly impacted by these
issues. So if we can make those improvements for quality of
life, that will help support our fighting force in a way that
they deserve and their families and crucially help with
recruitment and retention, to meet those goals and objectives.
And I know we've spoken a little bit there has been some
improvements in the recruitment issue. I know there have been a
lot of efforts made on that. Would be anxious to hear from you
both about how that process is going and what we can do to help
further support it.
And lastly, modernization, the Army, I think, was one of
the earliest to sort of see the future with what you did under,
I believe, Secretary Esper started the night court process to
go through and where are we spending our money, what makes
sense, what doesn't. How can we modernize? The Army futures
campaign was a very forward thinking move by the Army that I
think has helped.
But the goal is clear. We have to field the best, most
innovative equipment as quickly and as effectively as possible.
What has been seen on the battlefield in Ukraine is how rapidly
changing it all is and how it is crucial to have those new
innovative technologies to meet the threats and challenges that
you face.
So again, I thank our witnesses. I think the Chairman. With
that, I yield back. I look forward to the testimony.
The Chairman. I thank the Ranking Member, and I'd like to
introduce our witnesses. The Honorable Christine Wormuth is the
Secretary of the Army. General Randy George is the Chief of
Staff of the Army. Welcome to our witnesses. Secretary Wormuth,
we'll start with you. You're recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE CHRISTINE WORMUTH, SECRETARY OF THE
ARMY, U.S. ARMY

Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, Ranking
Member Smith, and distinguished members of the committee. Thank
you so much for your continued support of our soldiers, our
Army civilians, and their families. General George and I appear
before you today at a moment of profound transformation for the
United States Army.
We're transforming our capabilities, our force structure,
and our recruiting enterprise to ensure the Army is ready and
able to defeat evolving threats, keep pace with technology, and
attract the best talent so that we remain the world's best land
fighting force. As we pursue this transformation, we are also
taking care of our people, ensuring that soldiers and families
have the quality of life they deserve to sustain our readiness
now and in the future. This is my fourth year before this
committee.
And like last year, the Army's Fiscal Year 25 budget
request continues to support the most ambitious modernization
effort the Army has pursued in 40 years. We are making
significant progress in transforming our capabilities by
staying consistent in our modernization goals--
The Chairman. Secretary, would you suspend? I'm going to
ask the individuals behind you with their hands raised to
cease. And if you don't cease, you're going to be removed.
You're not going to disrupt this hearing. Now are you going
to take your hands down or do you want to leave? If they go
back up, you're to be removed.
Officers, just remove them. Just remove them. I couldn't
hear what she was saying. Thank you, Madam Secretary. You may
continue.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you for doing that, Chairman. As I
was saying, our modernization program is making good progress.
The next generation squad weapon, integrated battle command
system, midrange capability, and precision strike missile are
just some examples of the critical new systems we've recently
delivered.
As we bring these systems into our inventory, we are also
transforming our force structure to meet the priorities of the
National Defense Strategy. Guided by the results of our total
Army analysis process, we are building out new formations such
as our five multi-domain task forces that are equipped with the
capabilities we need to conduct large scale combat operations
against technologically advanced military powers. And we are
shrinking excess hollow force structure so that the units we
have are manned and ready.
While these force structure decisions bring down authorized
troop levels by about 24,000 spaces, our decisions will
actually -- our goal is to increase the Army's authorized end
strength from 445,000 to 470,000 by fiscal year 2029. To meet
that goal, we are working around the clock to overcome our
recruiting challenges and we are making solid progress.
Building on successful initiatives like the Future Soldier Prep
Course, we are fundamentally transforming our recruiting
enterprise to better compete in a 21st century job market.
Most significantly, we are professionalizing our recruiting
workforce by creating new, permanent talent acquisition
specialties for both enlisted soldiers and warrant officers.
The assessment and selection of the first cohort of warrant
officers is finished. And this group will actually be out in
the field by the end of the summer.
At the same time, our readiness depends not just on
recruiting, equipping, and training the force but also as this
committee knows well on the overall well-being of our soldiers
and families. The Army is dedicated to providing safe, high-
quality housing and barracks for our soldiers and families.
Over the next five years, we will invest an average of 2.1
billion dollars every year in the construction, sustainment,
restoration, and modernization of barracks for our
unaccompanied soldiers.
This investment will also fund 100 percent of the barracks
sustainment requirement for the first time in years. We are
also leveraging the expertise of our Army Corps of Engineers to
stabilize project costs. And we will be hiring civilian
barracks managers so that our soldiers can focus on their
warfighting duties.
Physically and emotionally healthy soldiers are more
resilient, higher performing, and less likely to engage in
harmful behaviors. To build resilient soldiers, we are
expanding health and holistic fitness programs to 71 of our
active component brigades. We're investing in financial
counseling services to ensure our soldiers know how to manage
their money.
And we're encouraging programs in our divisions that focus
on solider well-being. From a soldier's first day in the Army,
we are focused on building cohesive teams, proactively working
to reduce harmful behaviors and build positive climates in our
formations. Even as we transform, and we must because it is a
very dangerous world, we are continuing to provide combatant
commands with trained and ready formations.
This year's budget includes 1.5 billion dollars for
activities tied to the Pacific Deterrence Initiative. And we've
asked for 460 million dollars for Operation Pathways, our
series of exercises that aims to strengthen deterrence and
build interoperability with our partners in the Indo-Pacific.
In Europe, our troops are demonstrating our commitment to
deterring Russian aggression.
The Army is leading the effort to support Ukraine from
training over 17,000 Ukrainian troops to providing hundreds of
vehicles, weapon systems, and millions of munitions. In United
States Central Command (CENTCOM), our soldiers are mission
focused and standing reading to provide further support for
Israel's defense and to enhance regional stability. The Chief
and I strongly urge the passing of a supplemental
appropriations bill that will maintain critical support to our
partners in Europe, Asia, and the Middle East while investing
in our own readiness.
With your support, we'll continue to take care of our
people and sustain the transformation that will keep our Army
the best in the world. I'm proud of all that soldiers and Army
civilians are doing in service to the country and look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Wormuth and General
George can be found in the Appendix on page 67.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
General, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF THE GENERAL RANDY A. GEORGE, CHIEF OF STAFF, U.S.
ARMY

General George. Okay. Thank you, Chairman. Chairman Rogers,
Ranking Member Smith, distinguished members of the committee,
thank you for the opportunity to talk to you today about our
Army. The world is more volatile today than I've seen it in my
36-year career, and there is clear cooperation between
adversaries than we've seen in a while.
A spark in any region could have global impacts. Meanwhile,
the character war is changing rapidly which we see from what is
happening on battlefields in the Ukraine and in the Middle
East. Our Army is as important to the joint force as it has
ever been.
We must deter war everywhere and be ready to respond
anywhere. So we are focused on providing the best Army with the
budget we are given. Our soldiers deserve it, the joint team
deserves it, and our nation deserves it. And that means making
some tough decisions and finding ways to get better every day.
As the Secretary already highlighted, our planned
investments reflected in the Fiscal Year 25 budget will help
our Army win the future fight and ensure that our soldiers and
their families remain ready and resilient. Across the Army, we
are learning from global events and continuously transforming
how we operate, how we train, and how we equip. And I'd like to
highlight a handful of things.
We're learning that designs for things like unmanned
systems must be modular, adaptable, and software defined. We
are working to get relevant technology in the hands of our
soldiers immediately. We are learning that counter unmanned
systems must evolve as the threat does to protect our
formations and critical infrastructure.
We are also moving out on that while being mindful of the
cost curve. We need cheaper solutions. We are learning that in
some cases the right tech already exists to support
transformation.
For instance, the tech exists to make our command and
control nodes more mobile, low signature, and more effective.
And we are fixing our network. And we are building our magazine
depth and modernizing our organic industrial base because we
know that wars never end as quickly as we hope and they take a
lot of ammo.
We are also transforming how we recruit, ensuring that we
have the right talent and right tech and that we are getting
the word out about how our Army is a great place to serve
because of our mission and our people. Finally, we are also
looking at where we need to re-imagine our processes and where
we can afford to stop doing things that don't support our
warfighting mission or building cohesive teams. I'm proud of
what our soldiers are doing around the world to help defend our
country. Thank you for your support, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Wormuth and General
George can be found in the Appendix on page 67.]
The Chairman. I thank the General. And I would like to make
an announcement. For members here, please use the anteroom for
your entering and leaving the chamber.
It is discourteous to our witnesses and distracting to the
panelist to have all this activity going through these doors
back there. So I would urge members back in the offices or
staff of members back in their offices to advise their members
of that. I recognize myself for first questions.
To the both of you, can you lay out the risks that you're
taking in this budget as a result of pressure from ongoing high
levels of inflation and top line spending cap? And what does
that mean in terms of our ability to effectively deter China,
Russia, and Iran? Secretary Wormuth.
Secretary Wormuth. Chairman, I would say I think the
challenge we have with our budget in terms of managing risk are
a couple. One, it's always a challenge to manage -- do you buy
down current risk or do you buy down future risk? Do you invest
in readiness or do you invest in modernization of programs that
won't field for several years, for example?
The other challenge we have, of course, is where do we
spend that incremental dollar. Do we spend it on a weapons
system like our long-range hypersonic weapon? Or do we invest
it in buying down -- basically increasing the quality of our
barracks inventory, for example, or looking at buying more
combat training center rotations?
Those are the kinds of choices that the Chief and I have
had to make for the last few years. But I think on balance in
terms of our ability to deal with China and Russia, we are
investing in the right kinds of systems. We are making good
progress with our modernization, and we're meeting all of the
demands that the combatant commanders are putting on us right
now.
The Chairman. General, your thoughts. And I understand that
you're investing in those things. Are you investing enough to
have a deterrent effect. That's my concern, General.
General George. Yeah, Chairman, I would----there's a couple
of things that we put in----that I put in the unfunded----my
unfunded priority list if we had another dollar that we would
spend on. And some of that has to do with counter Unmanned
Aerial System (UAS), for example, is a large portion that's in
there. And some of that since we submitted this budget is how
the world has changed and things that I think that we need to
get after.
And then I think what you'll also see in there, we've
invested a lot in munitions and building our magazine depth
that we both talked about up front. But there was a couple of
areas that we could----if we had another dollar, that we would
increase and maximize to whatever the extent of production that
we could in magazine depth as well. But I agree with the
Secretary.
I think we're investing in the things that we need to
invest in. I think we're seeing that with specifically long-
range precision fires and what's coming online, what we're
doing to invest in integrated air and missile defense and how
important that is. And then counter-UAS is something that I
think we're going to -- we have a lot of that in our budget and
we'll need to turn faster on that.
The Chairman. Okay. Secretary Wormuth, we talked about and
you heard me make reference to it in my opening statement the
recruiting headwinds you all been facing. How significant do
you think the improvements in quality of life, the measures
that we're proposing that you've requested are going to impact
that recruiting problem?
Secretary Wormuth. Chairman, I think, of course, it will be
helpful the more we can point to quality barracks, competitive
pay with a civilian sector, for example. I think where that's
really going to help us is continuing to sustain our
historically high retention. Honestly, in the data that we
have, we don't see concerns from young Americans about whether
the pay is competitive or even whether the barracks are good
quality.
But certainly once folks join the Army, they see their
earning statement. They see where they're living. And that
shapes, I think, whether they want to stay in the Army. I think
a lot of what we've done to see improvements in our recruiting
has been opening up the Future Soldier Prep Course, selecting
our recruiters in a different way, and overhauling their
training to help make them even more effective.
The Chairman. So you don't think competitive pay is
essential in a recruitment process?
Secretary Wormuth. We haven't see it as a concern. Young
Americans basically right now see the pay as relatively
competitive. And I think that's partly because you all have
passed over 5 percent pay increase last year.
There's a budget request for another pay increase this
year. So I don't see that. Soldiers are not indicating that
that's a huge concern, at least the folks who are looking at
joining the Army.
The Chairman. Chair recognizes the ranking member.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Just following up on the
modernization question, when you look at what -- where it is
most important for you to modernize. You look at the
battlefield in Ukraine, drones, counter-drone, force
protection, long range fires.
Those are certainly the things that seem to be most
important in a battlefield fight that you would be facing. And
there's a lot of concern. We don't have the level of drone
manufacturing certainly in terms of Intelligence, Surveillance,
Reconnaissance (ISR) drones and all of that. I think it's
something like 90 percent of your average small ISR drones made
in China.
And what are we learning about what we're going to need to
have adequate force protection against incoming threats? What
are the key technologies and how are you developing them? So
both of you, but start with Secretary Wormuth.
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly. And I know General George
will want to build on this. We are making significant
investments in integrated air and missile defense. So this
budget has over 2 billion dollars for systems like maneuverable
short range air defense (SHORAD) which will go along with our
infantry forces to provide them protection against things like
drones.
We have directed energy. We have a directive energy version
of that, Congressman Smith, that's currently in CENTCOM. We
think it's very important to invest in things like directed
energy and high-powered microwaves.
Mr. Smith. Sorry to interrupt. I was over in the Middle
East a couple times last couple of months, and force protection
is a huge focus obviously. Is directed energy actually going to
work? Because we've been talking about this forever, and it's
not really fielded in any sort of comprehensive way.
Have we gotten to the point where this technology is
actually -- is it worth the investment? Is it going to help? Is
it going to get us there? Is this going to happen, like, I
don't know, in my lifetime?
Secretary Wormuth. Our prototypes right now that are in
CENTCOM are performing pretty well. And one of the reasons we
sent them there is we want to see how they do in a desert
environment, any time --
Mr. Smith. Right.
Secretary Wormuth. ----you got lasers with sand. But
they're performing well. I think the more open question which
you alluded to is can we get them to a place where they're
affordable at scale. And that we are still working on. But I
think there's a lot of promise with both lasers and high-
powered microwaves, particularly against swarms.
Mr. Smith. That's helpful. Sorry to interrupt.
Secretary Wormuth. No, that's okay. Why don't I let the
Chief speak to some of the Unmanned Aerial System issues.
General George. Yeah, Congressman. I think first what we're
focused on is a layered defense. You have to have a layered
defense with several different capabilities, so both kinetic
and non-kinetic.
As the Secretary mentioned, what we're doing over in the
Middle East, we're actually sending -- we want the user,
tester, developer all there together to make incremental
improvements. We've seen that, for example, with the Coyote
Missile. And it's been very, very effective doing that.
So I think that's what we're looking at broadly. You asked
what do we have to do to tie all this together. One of our big
focus areas is the network.
If you cannot command and control, you cannot be dispersed.
I mean, what we know is that you can be seen right now given
space and the ubiquitous sensors that are out there. So we have
to lower our profile.
And I think that's for everything that's on the battlefield
is going to have to be more mobile and below our signature. And
a lot of that technology exists right now. And that's what
we're focused on doing so that we can tie all of these sensors
together.
But I agree. There's three places that I think we need to
move faster in. And that's UAS, unmanned systems ourselves,
counter-UAS, and then Electronic Warfare (EW) because that is
changing in weeks. And we need the flexibility, I think, to be
able to change with that.
Mr. Smith. And it's something the Chairman and I have
worked a great deal on. We need to give you more flexibility in
terms of how you spend your money and how you make your
investments. We're working on a variety of different ways to do
that.
I think the Research & Development (R&D), pretty good.
Procurement still takes too long. I mean, if you've got an idea
in those areas or frankly any innovative technology in your
company out there, Department of Defense (DOD) will probably
help you with the R&D.
But if you actually get it to the point where you have
something that is developed and is ready to go, we are still
way too slow in purchasing it. And that's undermining it. One
final question along those lines, partnerships are going to be
crucial in meeting our production needs when it comes to
ammunition.
I know there's a Turkish company now that's getting ready
to build a plant in Texas that will be making a substantial
portion of our 155 rounds going forward. Who are the key
partners that you see when you're trying to figure out how do
we make sure we have enough munitions, everything we need? Who
are you thinking about partnering with globally like we've done
with Turkey and some other examples out there?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman Smith, I would point to a
couple of examples. We have entered into an agreement with
Australia. They are going to be producing Guided Multiple
Launch Rocket System (GMLRS), for example, in Australia. And
they hope and we hope that will expand to the precision strike
missile. So that's a great example.
We are also actually co-producing Strykers with India. So I
think the more that we can find some of our allies and partners
who want to have those kinds of arrangements, the better,
particularly when they are actually in the theater because that
allows us, obviously, to produce munitions in theater and not
have to bring them all the way from the United States to a
conflict.
Mr. Smith. I think that's absolutely crucial. We have a lot
of partners out there who want to work with us who have
incredible production capacity. We're going to have to work
with them to meet our needs going forward. With that, I yield
back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from South
Carolina, Mr. Wilson.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank both
of you for your service as a 31-year veteran myself. And I had
three sons serving in the Army, one year in Iraq, field
artillery, another signal in Egypt, and my youngest a year in
Afghanistan.
So Army service is very, very important to me. And that's
why what we're into is so incredible. We need your leadership
now more than ever.
Today, the Army is engaged in multiple fronts across the
globe. We find ourselves in a war we did not choose, a dictator
with the rule of gun invading democracies with rule of law.
This, of course, began with war criminal Putin invading Ukraine
on February 24, 2022 and then Iran puppets invading Israel on
October 7th with the Chinese Communist Party threatening
Taiwan.
We need peace through strength, protecting the border of
Ukraine, Israel, Taiwan, and America. And sadly with the Biden
open borders, we have so many terrorists coming across into our
country, what a risk of this coming in and of 9/11 attacks
across the United States. And we understand that attacks could
be imminent as the FBI has over and over again warned.
It's vital that we maintain an Army able to reign in and
project ready forces to defend our Constitution, our interest,
and our foreign allies and partners. Secretary Wormuth, this
weekend we witnessed hundreds of drones and missiles by the
regime in Tehran and its puppets against the people of Israel.
I was grateful that despite the size of the attacks, Israel was
able with the United States, UK, France, our allies to stop and
defeat the threat.
But this reinforces a ready now U.S. military. Secretary,
wouldn't a supplemental provide for the production of critical
munitions and benefit our nation in building a robust defense
industrial base?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, Congressman. It would actually. A
passage of a supplemental would be crucial for the Army in a
number of ways. But one of those ways is certainly allowing us
to continue to strengthen our industrial base.
For example, you've heard us talk a lot about our goal of
getting to 100,000 rounds of 155 a month. If the supplemental
does not pass, we will not be able to reach those production
levels. And that's just one example. And I would also highlight
that those munitions are made in American factories with
American workers so that they benefit people right here in the
United States.
Mr. Wilson. And that point just has got to be restated over
and over. So thank you very much. General George, we continue
to see the downsizing of the military with the Army's fiscal
year 25 end strength request well below what is authorized end
strength for the fiscal year 2024.
I was grateful -- I am grateful to represent the U.S. Army
training command at Fort Jackson, South Carolina where we have
a great commander with Major General Jason Kelly. And he's done
so much working with the Training and Doctrine commanding
general, General Gary Brito, on running the Army's Future
Soldier Prep Course. This Future Soldier Prep Course has been
so successful, the Army is already expanding the program.
With the success of this program, do you think it's
instrumental in increasing recruitment? And should other
services establish and maintain a similar program?
General George. Congressman, we're really proud of the work
that's going on down at Fort Jackson with the Future Soldier
Prep Course. We've had more than 18,000 new soldiers that have
come through there. And as you mentioned, we've expanded that
to Fort Moore.
What's important for us is that we are taking people out
there and we're bringing them up to our standards, both
academically and physically. And so we think that's critical.
So I'll leave it to the other services.
I think the Navy is doing something similar. But we're
looking in the Army at this holistic recruiting. And we have
found this to be very helpful.
Mr. Wilson. Well, it's an excellent program. Additionally,
General, we can learn from what's going on. War Criminal Putin
is conducting trench warfare. We thought that was over with.
Putin is also conducting a barbaric tactic of attacking
civilian apartment complex. And then a few minutes later when
the emergency personnel come, fire, EMS, police, that's when
the real attack comes. The intent is to discourage the
population and also to discourage the EMS. What are we doing to
learn on this -- how to address this?
General George. I will tell you, Congressman, that we have
-- and this is something that we talk about almost as much as
we do recruiting is what we're learning from the lessons in
Ukraine. We have a fairly extensive team that's over and we're
doing a lot to support Ukraine right now over with U.S. Army
Europe.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut, Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
both the witnesses today for your service and your testimony.
Just again, I want to begin by foot stomping what the ranking
member said.
The testimony we heard last week from General Cavoli in
terms of just how dire the situation is in Ukraine, we do not
have time for the gymnastics of a bifurcated, fragmented
legislative package. We have a bill that passed 70 to 29 on
February 13th sitting in the clerk's desk. And all it takes is
frankly just getting it to the floor for a vote and letting it
work its will which I believe will pass the measure and get it
to the President's desk.
And we heard from United States Transportation Command
(TRANSCOM) in our subcommittee the other day. I mean, we know
our planes are ready. Our ships are ready to get the help
there.
So really, the House is the bottleneck right now. And we've
just got to move in terms of solving this problem. Also just to
comment really quickly on the quality of life measures, again,
I represent a district with the largest military installation
in New England, the Groton Sub Base.
We have E-4s and less who basically if they have kids rely
on food assistance in terms of Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) to put food on the table. So I want
to applaud Mr. Bacon and Congresswoman Houlahan for their great
work in terms of this package. The Navy was off by 7,000 in
terms of their recruitment last year.
And to me, it just is kind of blindingly obvious that we
need to boost the package to attract more people. Secretary
Wormuth, recently the Army's aviation rebalancing announcement
on February 8th terminated the Future Attack Reconnaissance
Aircraft (FARA) program. We've had good briefings from your
team to sort of walk through folks particularly from
Connecticut in terms of thinking behind that.
Again, looking at the FY 25 budget, it's clear that the
Army has restored procurement for 24 aircraft in terms of the
Blackhawk Program that's there and obviously sends a strong
signal that the Army is committed to that program. If Congress
were to provide multi-year authority early in terms of that
program. Could you execute that authority to again just further
sort of solidify the industrial base?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, it's certainly our plan to
use multi-year authority for that contract when the current
contract expires which I think is a couple years from now if
I'm not mistaken. But we're prepared to sit down with Lockheed
and Sikorsky and negotiate that follow-on contract in the
relatively near future.
Mr. Courtney. Well, I appreciate that. I mean, again,
clearly I think there's a pretty solid consensus that this is
the path forward. Our foreign allies are also chiming in, in
terms of their orders into that program.
So the benefits of early authority in terms of just price
and as I said stability is in my opinion very attractive. And
hopefully, we can continue to work with you and your office to
try and achieve that goal. Honestly, that was my number one,
two, and three question for you here today. So with that, I
will yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Lamborn.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this
hearing. I want to thank you, especially General George, for
being here or both of you actually. But this is your first
appearance as Army Chief of Staff. You're a former commander of
the storied 4th Infantry Division headquartered in Fort Carson,
Colorado. So welcome here.
I'm really concerned because -- and we've been talking
about drones and counter-drone efforts. Both the ranking member
and the chairman have addressed this. And General George, I
think we're failing.
We do not have a program of record for counter-drone,
either laser or directed energy capability. We have no program
of record. We're doing some research and development.
We've been researching and developing for a long time. But
we have no program of record. We're not producing any kind of
meaningful capability to put out in the field. When are we
going to come to actually having this operational?
General George. Congressman, we do have air defense
equipment that is coming online that we have right now. As I
mentioned earlier, I think this is going to be a layered
approach. We're very effectively using Coyote and other systems
that are forward.
I agree with you that we need to do more and do it quicker.
One of the things that I talked about a little bit up front
that I do think we need is to have -- it's changing very
rapidly with drones -- is the flexibility to go from R&D to
procurement, making sure that we have modular open system
architecture and that we are doing things that we can get
what's best that's out there. That's how fast it's moving.
Right now, it's changing really quickly. A drone that works now
with the EW situation changing, we need to rapidly advance with
that.
Mr. Lamborn. I'd have to agree. There was a marvelous
effort over the weekend to help Israel shoot down the drones
and ballistic missiles and everything else from Iran. The only
problem with all that is that we had to use very expensive
munitions to do so because we don't have the lower cost lasers
and high energy capabilities fully deployed yet.
That's my concern is the cost effectiveness of it all. And
when it comes to drones, there's an article in the Wall Street
Journal on the 10th of April saying that -- headline, How
American Drones Failed to Turn the Tide in Ukraine. Drones from
American startups have been deemed glitchy and expensive,
prompting Ukraine to turn to alternatives from China. And this
is bad news for the Pentagon which needs a reliable supply of
thousands of small unmanned aircraft. So on the offensive side,
when are we going to have good drones that we can use in large
numbers in places like CENTCOM?
General George. I'm pretty confident, Congressman, that we
have the technology here stateside. I mean, I just was out at
National Training Center and saw a UAS. It's the Ghost, and it
was modular, very survivable in an EW environment.
So I'm confident we can do that. Part of that is what I was
mentioning earlier. I think we need to put the demand signal on
them. So the world fundamentally has changed here in the last
six or eight months.
We were not able to reprogram. This gets back to something
that's working. It's in R&D and you want to buy additional
capabilities of it because that's what companies are going to
respond to. I think that flexibility would help us.
Mr. Lamborn. Well, absolutely. I have to agree with you
1,000 percent. But I don't see that demand signal in the
proposed budget. That's my concern.
If I could shift gears. You know Fort Carson really well.
You know the Pinon Canyon Training Site, a premier -- a jewel
for training for the Army. But there's one problem and there is
that active pipeline that goes through part of that training
range. Would you support researching and looking at ways of
mitigating the limitations that pipeline puts on training at
Pinon Canyon?
General George. I'd certainly be interested in looking into
that Congressman. We can follow up with you. I've trained at
Pinon Canyon a whole bunch. It's a great training area. I know
our units are still getting after it right down in that
training area. So absolutely, we can look at that and follow up
with you.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you. Let's work on that. And I thank you
so much. Thank you both for being here. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. Chair now -- I love
the efficiency up here today. I recognize the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Norcross.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Chairman. And I thank the
witnesses for being here and having this very focused, at least
what I'm hearing so far, as we're looking -- excuse me -- at
our industrial base. Obviously, we go back a few years and it
was night court where we reevaluated quite frankly everything
that was on our agenda.
And the idea that is a living document that you made
adjustments I think worked extremely well in what you started
there. We started probably four and a half years ago building
the munitions industrial base because of the conditions it was
in. Quite frankly, if you went four years ago, you would think
you're dropping back in time to the Second World War on some of
the different facilities that we have.
But the fact of the matter -- and I heard the Ranking
Member talk about the facilities we're building down in Texas,
the 155s along with some Turkish partners. Secretary Wormuth,
if you were to take a look back at how the Army is managing
this industrial base, what items -- we've expanded many of
them. What still causes you concern in our industrial base? And
let me ask that question in lieu of the supplemental which
everything we did to get ready, unless the supplemental comes
through, just sits there and wait. Could you touch base on
where you see we've been and what the future is looking like?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman. I think one of
the -- if there is a silver lining to the terrible invasion
into Ukraine, it's been that it allowed us to sort of drop the
scales from our eyes about the fragility of our industrial
base. And I think thanks to a lot of the resources that you all
have provided here on Capitol Hill, we've been able to invest
both in the Army zone organic industrial base, places like
Scranton, Holston, Radford, as well as work with our partners
in industry to see them invest in their industrial base so that
we can create more munitions.
I think the two pieces -- separate from the supplemental
which we very much need to be able to realize some of what
we've done with the industrial base. Two things I think we
still need to work on. One is working with our partners in
industry to help them to continue to identify where do they
have difficulties sourcing particular components or materials
for things like explosives and propellants.
And then the other place that's been very helpful is multi-
year authority. You all gave us multi-year authority for GMLRS,
for example, for the Patriot Advanced Capability-3 Missile
Segment Enhancement (PAC-3 MSE). Being able to send that
consistent demand signal to our partners in industry is very,
very helpful. They're more willing to lean forward if they see
that consistent demand.
Mr. Norcross. So thank you. And the idea of a long lead
item and I heard some comments earlier about recruitment goals.
This is not unique to the Army or any of our services. Getting
that next generation of worker to go out and want to work with
our hands is something that's going on across.
And in particular, the longest lead item is the human
capital, the ability that young men and women coming out of
high school to go to work, whether it's to serve their nation
in uniform or to go to work in one of our industrial factories
and how important that is. Incredibly important. Let me just --
as we -- assuming we get the supplemental and there's a time
frame we need, we are ramping up significantly across this
country and quite frankly in some of our partnering nations.
What happens when it ends? How are we going to manage?
Because this goes to the demand signal that we're talking
about, these ebbs and flows that we go on. How are you going to
mitigate some of the drop off when that happens?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, again, Congressman, I would say a
couple of things. One, multi-year authority creates more of a
consistent demand signal. And I think that's something that
will help us with industry.
We also have been relooking our own total minimum
requirements for all of these kinds of munitions. Again, I
think there's a realization now that in a protracted conflict,
there are going to be huge demands for munitions. So we
ourselves are in the process of looking at do we actually need
to be buying more than we have the last few years going forward
in the future. And I think that's something we'll have to look
at carefully.
General George. Congressman, can I just add one thing to
that?
Mr. Norcross. Yes.
General George. Part of what we're trying to do also is
modernize. So if you modernize, I'll give you an example. Down
at Radford or the Iowa ammunition plant, if you modernize, you
have the same workforce. But you can expand your output. And I
think that's what we -- that's the big point, I think, of
modernizing our plants that we have. And I think the other
thing that we have to look at potentially is should we
stockpile hard to get things.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank our
witnesses for joining us. General George, I want to begin with
you.
We've seen the proliferation of drones by Russia in
Ukraine. We see that they're using commercial versions of
drones to pretty good effect, ISR, pretty rudimentary loading
of munitions but effective in that realm. We see too our
efforts.
Obviously, you talk about the technology side. That's fine.
And we see what we're doing there, National Training Center and
other places. The question is of scale. We see scale happening
in Ukraine as we speak.
But we also see some threats here at home. We see
overflights of U.S. military facilities by a small UAS. We also
see that our ability to do counter-UAS is limited, especially
when it comes to scale.
Again, this whole issue with expendables is all about
scale. I don't question that we don't have the technology. We
have the technology.
The question is, when are we going to scale it? When is it
going to be operationally effective? When is it going to be a
deterrent? When are we going to be able to use it in ways that
really have an impact on these building threats?
That is the key. And I want to get your perspective about
how are we going to do that. How are we going to deal with
several things, domestically, overflights?
How are we going to deal with counter-UAS as we have
cancelled the FARA program? To me, the focus needs to be on
small-unmanned aeial system (sSUAS) and counter-UAS. Let me get
your perspective.
General George. Congressman, I share your concern on this.
And the Army is leading. We have the joint counter-UAS office
that work the executive authority for the Department of
Defense.
And we spend a lot of time on this. And I think we have to
get to your point. Again, this is non-kinetic and kinetic. But
stateside, it's non-kinetic that we have to get after.
And I think that some of this is authorities and
permissions that we're working through, obviously, with other
interagency and what you have with airlines, Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), and all of that. I think what's going to
help us again is I think we have to go. The environment is
changing really quick.
I think to get scale, we have to have built things that are
open system architecture that can plug and play with all of our
systems, that go into all of our radars and all of our sensors.
And then we buy the best thing that's out there on the market
and continue to do that. And that's kind of where I think our
point is on flexible funding.
If you could go from R&D, you got systems that were
working, you could buy it very quickly. And I think that's in
UAS, counter-UAS, and EW systems. I think that's -- we're going
to have to be on a faster schedule.
Mr. Wittman. Listen, I agree. We have to operate at the
speed of relevance. We send the demand signal. I think the
technology is there.
The key is we're going to take some risk. There's not going
to be the 100 percent solution that's going to happen
immediately. We want the 80 percent solution that can be
delivered next week, next month. That I think is the key.
Secretary Wormuth. let me ask you. Another element,
logistics in the Indo-Pacific, key. Army in order to get around
needs watercraft. As we know, the Army has gone through a
period of time where now watercraft is back in the game.
Fort Eustis, Virginia, the logistics center, being able to
move and put that temporary facility there going into Gaza. It
brings to light the key for logistics in Army watercraft. The
army unfortunately through the years has been divesting in
watercraft. Now you look at testing and project convergence
with the Navy and Marine Corps figuring out, hey, what should
the future hold?
Give me your perspective. It seems like we are on a roller
coaster here. We sell watercraft and now we're going to get
back in the business of buying watercraft. What's the Army's
vision for the logistical need, especially Indo-Pacific, for
Army watercraft. Listen, our sailors are great and our soldiers
are great. But until they can walk on water, we got to put them
in watercraft.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. I will say I was
a little surprised when I came in as Secretary of the Army to
see the extent to which the Army had divested its watercraft
because the distances in Indo-Pacific are obviously
considerable. So we are trying to reinvest in watercraft.
We're going to have a composite watercraft company in Japan
very soon. We are looking at frankly trying to find ways to
build up our watercraft capability maybe in a way that's a
little bit more cost affordable. So I think we're going to be
looking at leasing and some other options.
But we are making a significant investment in watercraft.
Another part of contested logistics is obviously pre-positioned
equipment. We've got to be working on that. And we've got to be
continuing to work with our allies and partners in the region
to gain greater access and basing opportunities which is also
really important.
Mr. Wittman. One key measure in SUAS, counter-UAS, Army
watercraft, the speed of relevance matters. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes
the gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you so much
for the opportunity to talk to you all today. I'm going to
start with where the Chairman and the Ranking Member started,
focusing on the urgency, the sense of urgency, the dire urgency
of getting our supplemental passed.
As it stands from the Senate, it's the only path that I
think many of us see to happen. I would like to not be
political but have to be for a moment. We just recently
discovered that votes were going to be cancelled in the June
time frame so that a large contingency of the House could go to
D-Day observations for the 80th.
And there seems to be a lack of understanding of the irony
of us piling into aircraft to go overseas to honor and observe
the 80th of D-Day without understanding the history that went
behind that and the fact that the United States remained
largely isolated for a long period of time, arguably way, way
too long. And then we ended up in a global war, a world war.
And I worry that we're heading towards a World War III if we
don't do the right thing by voting for the supplemental and
voting for it now.
It has been now I think since October that we've had the
opportunity to do something, do the right thing. And we haven't
done that. And speaking to World War III, I do not want to see
our men and women in uniform engaged in any way, shape, or form
in any sort of conflict on any soil.
But we do have to face that. You all said that in your
testimony that this is one of the scariest times in your
careers in terms of what's going on around the world. And so we
need to think about our readiness.
We need to think about the men and women who are in
uniform. And so that's why the work, I think, of the Quality of
Life panel has been quite essential so that we're preparing for
the fact that we want to make sure that we have the best
military in the world which I believe that we do. So my first
question to you would be to talk a little bit about the Quality
of Life panel. There were five categories, member pay, spouse
employment, childcare, housing, and healthcare. I would love to
know from each of you which of those resonates most do you
think with you.
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congresswoman, I think they're all
pretty darn important. And I want to first thank the Quality of
Life panel for the work that you all have done. And I think a
lot of what we've tried to put in our budget is consistent with
the recommendations that you all made.
We have a very significant investment in barracks. I think
that is absolutely critical. There are just too many instances
that I've seen myself where I've gone and seen barracks that
just are not acceptable. So that's key.
I think we do want to continue to look at making sure that
our soldiers are being compensated competitively with their
civilian counterparts. Healthcare and childcare is really
important. Frankly, I think keeping families in the Army,
childcare is really important.
And we have been investing in Child Development Centers
(CDCs). We've also really been trying to focus on staffing at
our CDCs because if we can get the percentage of staff closer
to 90 percent, we're better able to take kids off the wait
list. That's a challenge in a lot of different places.
But we're very focused on that. We're giving recruiting
bonuses to our childcare workers, retention bonuses. So that is
really important. And I think spouse employment is another
piece of keeping people in the Army. I think one of the best
things we've done there is the career accelerator pilot which
is a 12-week sort of paid fellowship to put spouses in
companies in small firms that eventually lead to permanent
employment. And about 40 percent of the participants now are
Army spouses.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you. Appreciate it. And General?
General George. Yeah, I'd just comment. I mean, there's --
Congresswoman, there's always been five buckets when I've been
a commander and four of them are on there. The other one I
would add that's always important to family is schools, where
you're going to go to school in the local area.
And for us, I think it depends. The approach we're trying
to take is every location is a little bit different. I was just
up at Joint Base Lewis-McChord up in Washington, Tacoma,
Washington.
Housing and CDCs are the two, the challenge right there.
And everybody is struggling to hire workers on and off base.
And I think that's going to be our challenge is that we're
going to need the flexibility to get after solutions locally
because everywhere is a little bit different.
Housing is also a problem there. In other areas, it may be
spouse employment or schools. And that's kind of the approach
that we're trying to take with these.
Ms. Houlahan. I absolutely look forward to working with you
guys and with the committee on the NDAA on these really
essential issues. And I agree with you. Having grown up in the
military as a military child, your school really mattered.
Every year moving, a different school and a different set
of rules. It definitely affects the family. Thank you, and I
yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too hope that we get
to have a vote this week on Ukraine aid and Israel aid and
Taiwan aid. I will say I personally think the Speaker is doing
the right thing to separate them. I think they're three
separate issues.
And whether we roll them back together or not is a
leadership decision. But there are people in my party that will
vote to support Israel that will not vote to support Ukraine. I
think they've made that very clear publicly.
And I think there are people on the Democratic side that
will vote to support Ukraine that will not vote to support
Israel. So I think that every member should have the ability to
vote their convictions on each of those. And more importantly
than that, in our democracy, I think the citizens should have
the right to see how their members vote as we go into this
election cycle.
General George. you've been in the military a long time.
And I'll quote a historian, an Army historian, Vail Motter from
Oil and War. "No matter how well fed, equipped, an officer
without oil and gasoline, the modern Army is a hopeless monster
mired and marked for destruction." Was he correct in those
comments?
General George. I missed the first part. Without oil and
gasoline, is that --
Mr. Scott. Does the military need oil and gas to function?
General George. Yes, we do, Congressman.
Mr. Scott. The Russians have shown no mercy in attacking
the energy infrastructure in Ukraine regardless of what type of
energy infrastructure it is, including the oil and gas. In a
war, if your energy is targeting your oil and gas and your
energy infrastructure and you were the commanding general,
would you attack theirs as well?
General George. Well, I don't really -- on hypothetical
situations, I guess I would. We normally do a center of gravity
analysis, Congressman, and kind of determine what targets that
we think would be most effective to achieve in our aims.
Mr. Scott. Well, I would think it would be a pretty simple
decision to attack the diesel that was allowing your enemy's
tanks to run if they were using those tanks to fire on you. And
we don't understand -- I don't understand why President Biden
thinks it's okay for the Russians to attack the oil and gas
infrastructure in Ukraine and the Ukrainians is not going to
attack the oil and gas infrastructure in Russia. Secretary
Wormuth, can you tell me why President Biden is opposed to the
Ukrainians attacking the oil and gas infrastructure in Russia
when it is the oil and gas infrastructure in Russia that is
funding the war against Ukraine?
Secretary Wormuth. As General George said, Congressman, I
think the Ukrainian military, and again, this is outside the
sphere of our Title X responsibilities, so I myself am not
having conversations with the Ukrainian military leadership.
But I think, as General George said, we would be looking at the
range of targets, and how lucrative those targets are. There
may be targets in terms of a military perspective that may have
more immediate detrimental effect than hitting the energy
targets, for example.
Mr. Scott. You know good and damn well in a war when
someone is firing at you, you fire back at them, that is all
there is to it. You can't let them attack your oil and gas
infrastructure, and your energy supply, and you not attack
theirs. Even if they are not attacking yours, if you want to
win, you are going to attack theirs. That is just all there is
to it.
Secretary Wormuth. I would only add, Congressman, that
given the relative scarcity of munitions that the Ukrainians
have at this point, in part because they are waiting for us to
pass the supplemental --
Mr. Scott. Madam Secretary, with all due respect, the
reasons the Russians have as many weapons as they have is
because Joe Biden did not enforce the sanctions against Russia.
And Putin took all of that money from his growing economy, and
he put it into weapons manufacturing. If Joe Biden had enforced
the sanctions against the Russians, Putin would not have the
weapons that he has, and he would not have been able to rebuild
the military that he has.
I hope we get the supplemental done, I hope we get the
supplemental done. But the White House has not done their job
in helping to win this war.
I yield.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Moulton.
Mr. Moulton. I have just got to say, I mean the hypocrisy,
the utter hypocrisy of House Republicans refusing for clearly
political reasons to pass Ukraine aid, and then blaming Joe
Biden. I mean, I have been critical of certain aspects of this
Ukraine war, I am not afraid to criticize a Democratic
administration. But the alternative is a president who has said
and has proven he will support Putin and Russia, that is the
alternative here.
It is amazing. To focus for a second on China, General
George, can you just articulate to me what the Army's strategy
is in the Pacific? The Marine Corps has laid out a very clear
strategy for how the Marine Corps will be used to deter and
counter a Chinese aggression in the Pacific, what is the Army's
role?
General George. Congressman, thanks for that question.
First, we are a global Army, and we are very busy around the
world. One of the things that we have not done, as busy as we
have been, we have been very focused in our forces out in the
Pacific, and what I always say is that there is no such thing
as an air or a maritime theater. It is a joint theater, and I
think the Army plays a huge role over there.
So, I will run down and give you some of the examples. I
think we have seen just how effective, and hard to target land
based long range precision fires are. We are continuing to add
those, and right now we have the medium range capability that
is actually out and exercising with our partners out in the
Indo-Pacific. I think that we bring integrated air and missile
defense to the joint force, and to our partners.
And assisting with that, I think the Army plays a huge role
in contested logistics. The question came up earlier before,
which is pre-positioned stocks, and what we are going to do,
those are going to be joint missions that are over there, so I
think we have a big role. And I would end with command and
control, because I think that is something that we have
exercised on a daily basis around the world in large scale
operations.
Mr. Moulton. And I know you are ready to go to war today if
that is necessary, but are we where we need to be for the China
fight in the Pacific, or do we have more work to do?
General George. How we are looking at this is I think we
are -- we have got to get better every day, and that is what we
are tasking everybody to do. I think we need to grow Air
Defense Artillery (ADA) forces is one, as an example, but I
think, and we talked about recruiting more, and growing that
capability. But I think we are on a great path forward with the
capabilities that we have, and now it is just expanding those
capabilities.
Mr. Moulton. Yeah, so that is exactly my concern, you have
hit the nail on the head, general, the capabilities that we
have. A lot of your modernization efforts seem to be on
modernizing existing capabilities, and yet in the war in
Ukraine, we have seen how five thousand dollar drones can very
easily take out five million dollar tanks. Now, the Marine
Corps has a much more aggressive modernization program where
they are just saying we have got to move on.
We make some tough divestitures, not saying that you can't
find some use for a tank, but the Marine Corps has said we are
going to get rid of tanks. We are going to invest in long range
rockets and missiles, we are going to do things to
fundamentally change the nature and constitution of marine
rifle units at the lowest level to make them more lethal and
effective in today's world.
Why is the Army pursuing an incremental modernization
strategy rather than a revolutionary strategy?
General George. I actually don't think that we are, and I
will tell you first, Congressman, is that we are still going to
need tanks, we are still going to need artillery, and the Army
is still going to be -- our country is still going to require
that for us. So, we can't --
Mr. Moulton. How are you going to use artillery -- General,
how are you going to use artillery --
General George. I am talking around the world, and we are
going to need that capability in other places, but we are --
Mr. Moulton. Are you divesting of any of it?
General George. We are making adjustments, we are buying
additional long-range fires, we are taking a look at our whole
fires portfolio right now.
Mr. Moulton. I am almost out of time, but Secretary, do you
think the Army modernization schedule is fast enough?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we always want to be
faster. I think General George and I are very focused on
figuring out how we can go faster, but you know, and --
Mr. Moulton. Well, here is how you can go faster, get rid
of old stuff you don't need, or is not as relevant today.
Secretary Wormuth. We are doing that, we are doing that,
Congressman --
Mr. Moulton. The Marine Corps has taken some tough
criticism for this, but as a result they are really modernizing
their force at a pace that can at least have a chance of
keeping up with China's modernization efforts. And I just worry
that the Army is hanging on too much to old gear.
Secretary Wormuth. Well, we just decided not to pursue the
future aerial reconnaissance aircraft, we also have stopped
operating Shadow and Raven, so I would give those as examples
of things that we have divested pretty recently so that we can
move forward.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska, Mr.
Bacon.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you both for being here. There you go, I
know it is hard to find who is speaking. I want to talk about
the suicide rates we have been hearing about with the armor
units. We hear they are significantly higher than the other
specialties. Some thoughts are it is because of the high
operations (ops) tempo, and the rotating deployments to Poland.
What is your assessment of why the suicide rates are
significantly higher for armor personnel?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we are looking into that
because we want to better understand it. Our data shows
actually that the suicide rates are higher actually in our
Stryker units. They are higher general in Stryker, armored, and
light infantry. So, it is not just the armor folks, and I am
not even sure that the armored units are having the highest
rates, but we want to understand what is happening there.
I do worry about the op tempo for those units, and one of
the things that we are going to do, and are already doing for a
number of reasons, but to include trying to make sure we are
reducing pressure on those soldiers is lengthening the windows
in rearm. We had said that basically they would have eight
months to deploy, eight months to come back and do
modernization, and we found that in reality they just can't
move that fast.
So, we are going to lengthen those windows to give them
more time. But we are going to look further into that, because
we obviously want to prevent suicides everywhere we possibly
can.
Mr. Bacon. You are right, I have just one source though,
maybe that data isn't right, but it was concerning to read.
Secretary Wormuth. It is absolutely concerning, and again,
we share that, and I would be happy to follow up with you, and
have our folks talk more about the data that we have.
Mr. Bacon. Is there any thought about permanent basing in
Poland?
Secretary Wormuth. I think, you know, there are pros and
cons associated with permanent basing. It is going to be
overseas military construction, we would want to build schools
and the kinds of amenities that our families would need.
Certainly that would have some benefits in terms of operational
tempo, and I think the Poles, I am sure, would be very
interested in hosting us in a permanent way. But I think we
will continue to look at those kinds of issues as we continue
to look at force posture in Europe going forward.
General George. Can I mention just one thing, Congressman?
Mr. Bacon. Yes, sir.
General George. The other thing we have done is made an
adjustment, for example we had an Armored Brigade Combat Team
(ABCT) that was rotating to Korea, it is now a Stryker unit
that is doing that. And I think the other thing in looking, and
agree with the secretary, I think the challenge would be on
anything permanent basing, it would be like okay, what do we --
where is it going to come from, what unit is it going to come
from state side?
And so, right now we have flexibility, I think with
deploying our units that helps. And there is probably other
things that we need to grow right now, if we are going to grow
a new unit like air defense artillery, or counter-UAS
batteries, or some of those other capabilities.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. Turning to barracks, I appreciate
your plan for increasing your spending, and trying to repair
the damage that has been done over the last decade. And you
have already addressed this, so I won't drill into that so
much, but I am curious, how do we get there? Because when I was
a commander at Ramstein in 2008, 2009, I was commander of
Offutt 2011, and 2012, I had four star generals inspecting the
dorms, and if they would have been bad I would have gotten
fired.
So, I am trying to figure out what happened in the Army,
and it seems to be in all the services, where we let the
standards decrease to the level we did. I am just trying to
understand it, any thoughts on that?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, my view is there are a lot
of factors at play, it is a little bit like recruiting. A lot
of things went into it, we didn't kind of get into the crisis
overnight, and I think it is a little bit the same with
barracks. Part of it is we have an enormous inventory, we have
the biggest inventory of barracks of any service.
A lot of our barracks are in places where we are
experiencing climate change, and the temperature is increasing,
the humidity is increasing, and all of that makes maintaining
barracks more complicated. Some of it, frankly, I am sad to
say, is the harvest of sequestration, if you will. We went in
and we basically cut lots of folks out of our departments of
public works all across installations all across the country.
And that meant we had fewer people overseeing the barracks.
And some of it is, I think the Army has always struggled to
find enough to invest in barracks, and do modernization, and
other things. So, I think there is a lot of things that went
into it, but we are very committed now to doing everything we
can to get out of it.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, with three seconds left I will yield
the remainder of my time back.
The Chairman. Very generous of you.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, I will take the five minutes,
three seconds, thank you. No. I really want to follow up on
what the Ranking Member, Mr. Smith, raised early on. And that
has to do with the process of getting a supplemental done. It
appears as though we are headed for a very complex mechanism
that may very well cause significant delay in the enactment of
the supplemental.
And so, for Secretary Wormuth, and General George, could
you speak to the immanency of the problem of not having a
supplemental for these many months? In fact it has been one
year since the Congress has voted for any support for Ukraine.
So, if you could speak to the nature of the problem that you
are facing?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman. First of all, I
think in terms of the immanence issue, as General Cavoli said
when he was here last week, I believe, the Ukrainians are in
dire need, they are running very low on ammunition, they are
running very low on Patriot interceptors, the things that they
need to intercept all the missiles that the Russians are
launching at them. And the sooner the supplemental passes, the
sooner we can turn the spigot back on.
Mr. Garamendi. He actually said a matter of a few weeks,
and then redefined it to probably three weeks, get it done or
else.
Secretary Wormuth. Yeah, it is very concerning, it is very
concerning. And for the Army, in terms of immanence, we have
been cash flowing almost eight hundred million dollars to
support largely the Ukrainians, all of the training that we
have done for them, but also some of the work we have done in
CENTCOM, and if a supplemental doesn't pass for us, probably by
the end of May we are going to have to look at things like
reducing our participation in the Kosovo Force (KFOR) mission,
or canceling our participation in exercises in the third and
fourth quarter.
Because we just don't have the money to be able to pay for
any of that. So, those are some of the time sensitive issues
for us.
Mr. Garamendi. Good. General, anything to add?
General George. Yeah, the only other time sensitive thing
that I would add to what the secretary mentioned is the
question came up earlier about magazine depth and 155s. Every
bit we are waiting, we are not modernizing our own industrial
base, and we are not actually increasing our own magazine
depth. We will be able to go to one hundred thousand rounds of
155 millimeter a month for production.
But without the supplemental, we will stop well short of
that. So, I think that that is what it does for us as well.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you. Very few of us are left here,
both Democrat and Republican, but this is here and now. The
problem that Ranking Member Smith pointed out at the outset of
this hearing is very, very real. Add any bell and whistle to
the supplemental that was passed by the Senate, and the delay
will be substantial, well past the dates that were given to us
by General Cavoli, and by General George, and by Secretary
Wormuth.
We really cannot play this game any longer. It is on us to
get it done, and specifically it is on our Republican
colleagues. Don't play a game, don't try to seek perfection. I
do have another set of issues that I want to put on the table.
We did talk about this earlier in our earlier meetings, but the
contested logistics, and the intra-theater logistics.
My colleague from Massachusetts who happens to have been,
or is a marine, seems to think that the Army ought to be the
Marine Corps. However, that won't happen, but the fact of the
matter, the Pacific is different. What do you need to be able
to operate intra-theater in the Pacific, things that you don't
now have that you need to have?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I will start, and then
quickly turn to General George. I think as one of the other
members of the committee pointed out, watercraft is very, very
key. So, we are investing in that, and we are exploring what we
can do to grow our capability there in a cost-effective way.
Another thing that we need, that frankly is more controlled by
our allies and friends in the theater is access.
Because the more we are able to put our soldiers there with
their capabilities, the more effective we will be in that
theater. And so, that is something we are working on. And then
another thing I would point to is the kind of co-production of
munitions like what we are going to be doing with Australia,
that will be very helpful from a logistics perspective.
General George. I would add --
Mr. Garamendi. I claim my thirty seconds.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Guam, Mr.
Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary, the top
item on INDOPACOM's unfunded priority list is Guam's missile
defense system. The system is largely operated by the United
States Army personnel. Will an increase in funding for the Guam
missile defense improve the Army's ability to defend my
constituents?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. We are very
focused on the defense of Guam. At the same time it is
absolutely going to be a joint mission, and a joint
responsibility, we are working very closely, for example with
the Navy on defense of Guam. We have money in our budget to
enable us to be able to bring forward a defense of Guam by
fiscal year 2027.
It will be a mix of Patriots, Terminal High Altitude Area
Defense (THAADs) that are already there in Guam, I had the
opportunity to visit our THAAD battery there, and then some of
our newer systems like the Indirect Fires Protection Capability
(IFPC), and we will have a battalion of that by the fiscal year
2027. So, I think the money in our budget right now is going to
keep us on path to be able to build out the defense of Guam as
we have planned.
Mr. Moylan. However, we do have a top, number one unfunded
priority, so that is my concern. General, can you expand on
that importance of the missile defense and getting it fully
funded?
General George. Yeah, I wouldn't -- Congressman, I think to
what the Secretary said, I mean the Army, our big role is
actually helping technically, and Mr. Bush is kind of helping
with that, and our acquisition professionals in integrated air
and missile defense to figure out how to get that together. But
it is Air Force and Navy, there is a Navy base there, there is
an Air Force base, right now there is just one Army battalion
that is on the ground.
So, we are leaning in fully to help do this, and understand
the importance of doing it, and I know that there is a team led
by the Undersecretary of the Navy that is actually pulling all
of that together, and we are doing whatever we can to support,
and really focusing on the technical aspect of the solution
there.
Mr. Moylan. I appreciate it, thank you. And Secretary, I am
also very proud to represent many of my constituents who are
members of the Guam National Guard. Brigadier General Cruz, the
Adjutant General of Guam Guard relayed to me his wish to have
closeness and presence amongst the forces on island. How is the
Guam Guard being incorporated into the strategic planning for
future operations on Guam? And will the new Joint Task Force
(JTF) Micronesia impact the Guam Guard's operation?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, right now my understanding
is that a lot of the great National Guard soldiers on Guam are
providing some of the force protection for some of the active
duty Army folks, and are doing a great job. I actually had the
opportunity to meet you're the Adjutant General (TAG) when I
was in Guam last summer, I think. And we are very open to
exploring how the Guam Guard can be more involved as JTF
Micronesia stands up.
Mr. Moylan. I am happy to see that they are part of the
Joint Task Force Micronesia to give their input. These folks
know Guam, live Guam, know all the roads, if disaster happens,
they will be an asset. I thank you for that. My last question,
last year General Karbler testified that demand for THAAD and
Patriot systems has outpaced supply. He stated quote "every
combatant command wants more Patriots, they need more THAAD"
unquote.
So, has anything changed with respect to this demand
signal? Especially for Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPACOM) with
respect to Guam.
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we continue to see huge
demand for our air defenders, whether it is Patriot, THAAD,
with everything happening in the Middle East right now, they
are wanted there, they are wanted in INDOPACOM, they are wanted
in European Command (EUCOM), what we are doing in addition to
growing our capabilities, is we are growing our force structure
for our air defenders.
So, we are trying to create -- we are creating an
additional Patriot battalion over the next several years, and
we are also creating new, what we call indirect fire protection
capability battalions. So, we are trying to grow our air
defender community to give us more supply.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you for your testimonies.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms.
Slotkin.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just will reiterate
the calls of so many of my colleagues on the urgency which you
all have articulated, of getting our supplemental package,
bipartisan package voted on this week in the House. And I just
want to say since we have been in here, there has been rumors
on Twitter that again on the Republican side there is a threat
to Speaker Johnson, a potential motion to vacate, to remove him
because of this vote.
And I just want to say very openly and publicly that there
is a bunch of Democrats willing to have a conversation about
helping in that scenario if it means we get the supplemental
through this week. That is how important this is to national
security, to America's leadership role in the world, to making
sure that Ukraine is not rolled. The first time a democracy
would be rolled since World War II.
So, I just want to state that outright. It is insane to me
that we are so desperate in the Ukraine that the Pentagon
notified, with the Department of Justice, the transfer of
Iranian weapons that we seized off of Yemen to Ukraine. And the
insanity of that, I think is lost, I hope on no one. So, in any
case, you all know the consequences of that. Shifting gears,
Secretary Wormuth, it is great to see you, thank you for coming
to Michigan, and seeing all the great ground vehicles that we
make in Michigan.
Obviously, that is our sweet spot, and our skill set. And I
just want to ask you a number of questions, they are not trick
questions, it is just to help us grapple with what we are
glowingly concerned over in Michigan, which is the threat of
Chinese electric vehicles on the commercial side flooding the
United States the way they flooded the European Union (E.U.)
So, just a pure sort of yes or no question, I believe I know
the answers. But would you support Chinese produced cameras
being put on our ground vehicles in the Army?
Secretary Wormuth. No.
Ms. Slotkin. Would you support Chinese radar technology
being put on ground vehicles in the Army?
Secretary Wormuth. No.
Ms. Slotkin. Would you support Chinese Light Detection and
Ranging (LIDAR) being used on ground vehicles in the Army?
Secretary Wormuth. No, not if we can avoid it.
Ms. Slotkin. Would you support Chinese software that would
process all the information from those cameras, the radar, the
LIDAR, in American military vehicles?
Secretary Wormuth. Not combat vehicles, no.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay. And my colleagues have -- we have all
taken a lot of votes on the threat of things like TikTok, and
the Chinese Government having access to all this personal
information of Americans. What I would pose is that we are
about to have a big moment of inflection here with the
possibility of the saturation of Chinese electric vehicles
being sold in the United States.
The first Chinese electric vehicle sold in Europe was in
2021, they now have up to twenty-five percent of market share.
That means every vehicle collecting information, collecting
mapping data, collecting all kinds of information about our
cities, our infrastructure locations, our military bases, and
everything else. So, I make this point only to say that our
military would never allow the national security risk of those
Chinese components, of those Chinese things being on our
military vehicles.
Why would we open the door with a red carpet to allow those
same Chinese commercial vehicles, that same technology rolling
around every single American city, every single American town?
So, I will be submitting a number of amendments in the NDAA
that just help us make clear that from an American military
perspective, we are never going to use those component parts,
and I know we have buy American requirements.
So, that shouldn't be hard to fulfill. But I am also going
to be asking that the experts on ground vehicles provide some
assessment of what that kind of Chinese technology would do in
the United States of America, again, commercially, and what
kind of national security risk that would pose. So, I
appreciate your participation in that, and thank you for
coming.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Alabama, Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, and thanks to each
of our distinguished panel persons for being here today.
Redstone Arsenal in my district is a Federal Center of
Excellence, but the Army gave us a start back in 1941, and
because of that every day is Army day in Huntsville. As my
colleagues know, I could, and would gladly spend the entire
hearing sharing all the great things that the Army is doing at
Redstone Arsenal.
But unfortunately I only have five minutes. However, I
would be remiss if I didn't express excitement about the newest
Army cross function team (CFT), the all domain sensing CFT
standing up shop at Redstone Arsenal. Four out of ten CFTs
isn't too bad if you ask me, and only further proves that you
can't talk about Army priorities and modernization without
talking about North Alabama.
Secretary Wormuth. the Fiscal Year 2018 NDAA mandated that
mature Missile Defense Agency (MDA) programs should be
transferred to services. However, Congress repealed that
requirement after sustained advocacy from the Pentagon sharing
how this would be highly disruptive, especially to programs
like THAAD. Is this still the DOD's view, that this would be
disruptive?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, there are a lot of
conversations that happen inside of the Pentagon that I am not
necessarily always aware of. But I think at this point there is
not any plan to transfer MDA responsibilities to the Army.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Given the sudden change of policy
this committee is going to need a very clear explanation as to
why. Can I have your commitment to provide a written report on
the reasoning?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, I'm happy to have our team
lay out kind of our thinking on where that is right now.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I remain focused on our nation's
hypersonic fielding strategy, especially relating to the work
coming out of the Army's Rapid Capabilities and Critical
Technologies Office, otherwise known as RCCTO, which is
headquartered at Redstone. To the extent that you can share in
this venue, I have two questions. How is the Army progressing
in the long-range hypersonic weapons program, and how is the
fielding of the new units to operate these systems progressing?
Secretary Wormuth. Happy to give you a quick update,
Congressman. The work on the long-range hypersonic weapon is
going well. Obviously when we didn't have a successful test
most recently, we have spent a lot of that time looking at what
happened there, how do we understand it, how do we fix the
problem so that the test that we will have later this year will
be successful?
And I think we have a good handle on that, we have been
working very closely with the Navy. In the meantime, the unit
out at Joint Base Lewis McChord (JBLM) that will eventually get
the round, the hypersonic round, has been training with their
ground equipment, and so they are going to be ready to go just
as soon as we get that all up round to them. I don't know,
Chief, if you want to add?
General George. Yeah, I just was out, Congressman, and went
to that unit, and they are ready to go, they are actually
training, and whenever we get the missile to them, which I
think will be shortly, they are going to be ready to go.
Mr. Strong. That is what we like to hear. Secretary
Wormuth, General George, I want to applaud your efforts, and
that of the Sergeant Major for your support ofthe Army's
efforts in the space domain. The space mission area is only
continuing to grow, as proven by the stand up of Space Force.
However, as you both know, the Army is still the top user of
space in the Department of Defense.
It is my understanding that several months ago the Army
approved the elevation of space operations career field from a
function area to a branch. I have three questions, what is the
status as to where the Army stands with the space branch, when
can you expect it to roll out, what help do you need from this
committee to help?
Secretary Wormuth. I'm sorry. Congressman, we work closely
with our colleagues in the Space Force. As you said, we are the
biggest consumer of space-based capabilities. In terms of sort
of the specifics that you had asked about, I would like to take
that question for the record and get back to you, unless the
chief wants to add something.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 98.]
General George. Yeah, I will just add, Congressman, because
I just was -- General Gainey, we were just having this
discussion actually. So, we haven't, and right now we are
analyzing, obviously space is very, very important to us. There
are several branches right now, or functional areas like in
military intelligence, certain aspects of air defense,
artillery, and signal, and all of those that have been going
back and forth.
And so, what we are trying to determine, if we do go with a
branch, what is it going to look like, and how are we going to
do that? But we are invested in space, and will continue, and I
will tell you that we are growing that with what we are doing,
like for our multi domain task forces that all have a space
component in there, so it is critically important. And we are
happy to come talk to you about how we are looking to move
forward.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Ryan.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you both for being
here. Just want to build on many of the questions actually,
particularly around innovation and modernization. I feel like
in the last few years we have really seen and experienced a
preview of what, God forbid, we were to fight a major war, what
it would look like. Particularly between Ukraine and Russia,
some of the Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures (TTPs) there.
And then even just over this weekend, what we saw in the
way that -- in an unprecedented attack in and of itself, but
also the employment of attributable drones, and various other
means by Iran against our ally, Israel. Based on all of that,
what are you all, at a high level, taking away from -- I think
in some ways it is an opportunity for us, without our own
forces directly engaged, learn, and quickly, urgently adapt.
So, what are the high level take aways there? And then
specifically, can you talk about how that ties into Project
Convergence, and what you see coming out of that in terms of
technology, and command and control specifically, and sort of
Joint All-Domain Command and Control (JADC2)? I know that is a
lot there. I will start with you, Madam Secretary, please.
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, and I will make sure to be
concise so that the Chief has time. I think lessons learned
from Ukraine, from what we're seeing right now with Israel,
validate in a lot of ways the programs that the Army has been
investing in in recent years. The incredible importance of
integrated air and missile defenses, we saw how important that
was this weekend, the Army is investing in that in very
significant ways.
The importance of UAS and counter-UAS in a transparent
battlefield. Again, we have, since 2020 we have invested over
three billion dollars in UAS and counter-UAS. We need to do
more, and we need to do it more quickly, as we have talked
about quite a bit. The importance of long-range fires, again,
whether it is precision strike missile, whether it is our mid-
range capability that is ground launched and has a mobile
seeker that allows to hit ships, incredibly important.
I think all of what we have seen in Ukraine, and what they
have done with the Russian Navy underscores that. And let me
turn it to the Chief.
General George. Yeah, I would say broadly, Congressman,
that you are going to have to be mobile, and low signature on
today's battlefield, which really affects everything else, and
why we are starting with the network. I think everybody has
seen that American equipment works really well, so I think that
that is -- what is good about that is our partners, and allies
that are buying that same stuff, and we are using it, and helps
with interoperability.
Magazine depth, I think we have covered that a couple of
times, how important that is, so we could go on for a long time
about lessons learned, and we are really focused on that. What
can we 3D print for example, how can we use added manufacturing
and telemaintenance so that we can reduce or logistical
footprint that is out there. But we are looking at this in
every war fighting function.
And really across all, what is open source, and what is at
the more higher end. EW is another one, we are learning the
electromagnetic environment is changing almost on a daily
basis, and so how do we adapt to that.
Mr. Ryan. Appreciate that. To push a little bit, can you
give a few specific examples of with speed and urgency, some
new programs? And I spoke about Convergence, and JADC2, but if
there are other things that, I know it is a quick turn, but we
have now had a few years of this, are there specific
investments in this year's budget that you think directly speak
to the high-level points that you rightly brought up?
General George. I will mention a couple. We are actually
adjusting our network right now, and doing that inside, we are
changing from -- what we are talking about is not dragging
around big antennas, and having server stacks, or making those
kinds of things, and so we are investing in other capabilities.
We are also buying other short-range reconnaissance UAS. You
will see other aspects in our budget, the same thing on
counter-UAS.
So, there are things, Precision Strike Missile (PrSM) is an
example for long range fire, we could go down a lot of what we
were, like the Secretary said, producing, is what is going to
work on today's battlefield anywhere it is going to deploy. And
we just, I think on the smaller systems, UAS, counter-UAS,
those are the ones that we need to, I think, pour a little more
fuel on the fire on those.
Secretary Wormuth. And Congressman, I would just add also
the integrated battle command control system that is going to
tie together a lot of the air and missile defenses, that kind
of capability allows us to be able to share data not just
across Army platforms, but with other services, and I think
that is going to be critical for JADC2.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Wormuth, is
race a factor in admissions to the Army's Officer Candidate
School (OCS)?
Secretary Wormuth. To be honest, Congressman, I am not sure
off the top of my head. We basically are looking for the best
qualified, diverse folks to come into our officer corps.
Mr. Banks. So, the Army has said repeatedly that
affirmative action at West Point is quote "critical to our
national security", so why is it critical at West Point, you
don't seem to know about Officer Candidate School, but why
would it be critical to our national security to protect
affirmative action at West Point?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think it is the same
reason it would be true for OCS and our West Point officers. It
is to try to make sure that we have the best qualified, diverse
set of people to lead an enormous Army made up of people from
all different races, all different religions, all different
demographics.
Mr. Banks. The Supreme Court's ban on affirmative action at
universities obviously applies to Reserve Officer Training
Corps (ROTC) programs. Has that ruling harmed our national
security?
Secretary Wormuth. I think we are still seeing the
implications of the Supreme Court's decision. But in the
meantime, we are doing everything we can to recruit the best
possible folks into our officer corps, and to the Army more
broadly.
Mr. Banks. But if the Army says it over and over again,
what does it really mean that quote "affirmative action is
critical to our national security", I'm just wondering what
does that mean specifically?
Secretary Wormuth. I think what I --
Mr. Banks. Why is it critical to our national security, why
is affirmative action critical to our national security?
Secretary Wormuth. What is critical to our national
security is having the best qualified officers we can have to
lead our soldiers. A large number of our soldiers are African
American, are Hispanic, are women, and we want to make sure
that they have leaders that they look up to, that they have
things in common with, and that they see as credible. So, I
think we want to have a diverse set of leaders to lead a
diverse set of Americans who are serving in the Army.
Mr. Banks. Is affirmative action the only way to accomplish
that?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, I think we are taking a number of
factors into account.
Mr. Banks. And does it seem hypocritical that affirmative
action at West Point, but not for ROTC, how does the Army
compute that?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I think, frankly I was a
little puzzled at the Supreme Court's decision, and the fact
that they created a carve out for the military academies when
they decided that affirmative action wasn't legal for all of
the colleges and universities.
Mr. Banks. Why were you puzzled?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, it just seems interesting to me.
Why would they treat the academies differently from regular
civilian colleges and universities? I wasn't sure what the line
of thinking there was, but I am not an attorney.
Mr. Banks. If Congress eliminated affirmative action to --
I agree, it is puzzling. If Congress ended affirmative action
at West Point, would the Army abide by that like every other
college and university in America, and do away with it?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army is going to abide by the laws
of the United States. So, yes, I think if Congress passes a
law, we will abide by it.
Mr. Banks. At a conference at Duke University you said
quote "today more than eighty percent of recruits come from
military families, there is a risk of developing a warrior
caste when only one percent of the population serves in the
military", what did you mean by that?
Secretary Wormuth. What I meant by that is I think if you
have the preponderance of folks in the Army coming from Army
families, you have the possibility of becoming more and more
distant from the ninety-nine percent of the other Americans who
aren't familiar with the military, and I just think that is
something you want to guard against. I think it is healthy for
us in the Army to have as broad a representation as possible of
folks.
Mr. Banks. Where is the biggest source of military
recruitment, where does that come from?
Secretary Wormuth. We get people from all across the
country, we take a lot of people from the South, and Southeast
--
Mr. Banks. It comes from military families.
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, about eighty percent.
Mr. Banks. Children of service members.
Secretary Wormuth. Yes.
Mr. Banks. How far off is the Army of its current
recruitment goals?
Secretary Wormuth. Right now we are actually on pace, I
think. I don't want to get overly confident, but I think we are
going to make our recruiting this year, which is a goal of
fifty-five thousand contracts.
Mr. Banks. But you agree that you have reduced your goal
from last year when you were way off the mark?
Secretary Wormuth. We had a very ambitious goal last year.
I think General George and I agree that a goal of fifty-five
thousand new soldiers, plus five thousand in the delayed entry
program is healthy.
Mr. Banks. I take it from what you just said, is the Army
intentionally avoiding new recruits from military families? I
mean, this is really stunning.
Secretary Wormuth. No, certainly not. We are very proud --
Mr. Banks. Because you are worried about a warrior caste.
Secretary Wormuth. We are very proud of all the folks who
come from military families, and we welcome them with open
arms.
Mr. Banks. Really shocking testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Escobar.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and many
thanks to our witnesses. I want to reiterate a couple things
that my colleagues mentioned. Number one, it really is stunning
to me that Republicans have unfortunately stood in the way of
help to Ukraine, especially as Ukraine is on this very
dangerous precipice. Number two, I want to also say that I am
so proud of the work that the Quality of Life Panel did, and
the work that we have reported out.
I am grateful to the Chair and the Ranking Member for their
support and encouragement of this work, and I look forward to
working on implementation once the House, the Senate have
passed this, and the president has signed. But I want to turn
my attention to Fort Bliss. Incredible military installation
that I have the honor and privilege of representing.
Secretary Wormuth. General George, I was so pleased to see
the forty-four million dollars in additional funding included
in the budget request to complete the rail yard at Fort Bliss
following the seventy-four million dollar investment requested,
authorized, and appropriated for the project in fiscal year
2024. The rail yard is a critical infrastructure requirement I
have advocated for throughout my time in Congress.
And I would love for you to speak to the importance of
these military construction (MILCON) investments to support
Fort Bliss' power projection mission requirements please.
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, thank you, Congresswoman, and
I'll turn it over to General George shortly. As you alluded to,
it is very important for us to be able to project power out of
the United States, to flow our forces wherever they may be
needed, and sometimes they are needed on very short notice. So,
those rail heads like the one at Fort Bliss are key to us being
able to move our soldiers' equipment out rapidly.
And we have a number of infrastructure requirements for
power projection that we are continuing to get after, but I am
very glad we were able to put the investment towards the one at
Fort Bliss. Chief?
General George. Yeah, Congresswoman, Bliss is a great place
to train, it is a great place for our families, it is a crown
jewel for us down there. And I think, like the Secretary said,
to get First Armored Division, and all of the other units that
we have, important units, to include air defense artillery out
of there, having a really good rail head, and being able to
move those formations quickly is critically important to us,
and that is what that is going to provide.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you both so much. Secretary Wormuth, I
understand that through earlier iterations of the Army's 2030
Modernization Plan and the station actions to follow, Fort
Bliss was projected to receive an ERCA, or Extended Range
Cannon Artillery battalion in fiscal year 2026. As you know,
the intent behind this was to provide improved lethality and
range to our armored brigade combat teams such as the First
Armored Division, which I'm so honored to represent.
Given the relatively recent decision to cancel the ERCA
program, can you speak very broadly on the Army 2030 objective
to deliver precise longer-range fires, and specifically how
will post cancellation recalibration efforts address the First
Armored Division's need for improved fire capabilities?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman. As we have
said a number of times during this hearing, long range
precision fires are incredibly important to the Army, and we
see their value playing out right now on the battlefield in
Ukraine. We did make the decision to not go forward with ERCA
because of some significant engineering challenges that were
jeopardizing soldier safety, but we still have the requirement
for that kind of a fire system with that kind of range.
So, this summer we are actually going to be doing a
performance demo with industry. There are other systems out
there that we think may be able to meet our needs, and I think
it is possible that we could even sign a contract for
production in fiscal year 2025. So, I think you are still going
to see an ERCA-like capability, if you will, eventually going
to Fort Bliss. But we just have to do some work this summer to
look at what is out there.
Ms. Escobar. Okay, thank you both so much, appreciate it.
I am just about out of time, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Waltz.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Secretary, General
George, thank you for the meeting a few days ago. I just want
to talk to you for a moment again about recruiting, and the
crisis that we are in. And particularly with junior ROTC
programs in our high schools. Senator Wicker and I in the last
NDAA with the support of many on this committee increased the
cap for the number of junior ROTC (JROTC) programs from thirty-
five hundred to four thousand.
Unfortunately, the president's budget request nowhere near
funds these programs. And just for everybody watching and
listening, we are talking about two to three people, half of
their cost, because the school system covers the other half.
So, really this is what you call in the Pentagon, budget dust.
But I think the impact is huge. You get, there is a lot of talk
about Gen Z doesn't know what it is like to serve, or want to
serve.
Well, now you have Gen Z that is showing up right place,
right time, right uniform, positive male and female role
models, leadership, discipline, followership, teamwork, and
even if they don't join the military, you get a better citizen
out of it. I think you would agree, yes? Thank you. And what I
have here is a correlation of the states where you have the
highest concentration of junior ROTC programs, mainly in the
Southeast and the Midwest.
You have your highest percentage of recruiting here and
here, that are actually joining. So, my question is why do we
have the Army shutting down junior ROTC programs right now? And
what is concerning, in line with the diversity goals that you
were just talking to with Representative Banks, eighty percent
of the junior ROTC programs in the high schools that are being
shut down are in minority majority high schools.
Eighty percent of the ones being shut down. Can you speak
to that, Secretary Wormuth, why is that? How does that fit your
recruiting goals, how does that fit your diversity goals?
Shutting down minority majority junior ROTC programs.
Secretary Wormuth. First of all, I want to say I completely
agree with you, that JROTC programs are great. I have had the
opportunity to visit a number, and the kids in those programs
are terrific.
Mr. Waltz. Will you commit to work with us to increase what
the president's budget request requested? Because I think the
out sized impact, the bang for the bucks is tremendous.
Secretary Wormuth. I think if there is a way to get
additional funding for these programs, that would be helpful to
us. The limiting factor is really funding, and then also
instructors, finding people who are qualified, and who --
Mr. Waltz. We also broaden, in the last NDAA, the type of
people that can serve as instructors, and increase their pay,
but please continue.
Secretary Wormuth. That is helpful, because in many cases,
frankly Congressman, it is the instructors, and the
availability of instructors that can be a limiting factor. And
you will recall, there was, I think a series of news articles
looking at some very unfortunate circumstances where we had
instructors engaging in very inappropriate ways with some of
those cadets. So, we want to make sure we have the right people
--
Mr. Waltz. Absolutely, and I think those were outliers, I
think the vast majority of the ROTC are continuing to serve --
Secretary Wormuth. I agree, absolutely agree with that.
Mr. Waltz. Just in the interest of time, please take a hard
look at the programs you are shutting down, and where. Number
one, and we will have a measure to reduce the number of minimum
cadets in this next NDAA. I think if you have fifty, sixty,
seventy kids, that program should continue. Right now it is at
one hundred, and that puts them on the list to be shut down.
So, we will work with you to look at that.
Just switching topics very quickly, we have talked about
the cuts to our Special Operations Forces (SOF) enterprise, to
our special operators. General George, you well, and everyone
knows, it was Green Berets I'm proud to say that were training
the Ukrainians from 2014 on to get them ready for this fight. I
think they have had an outsized impact, and will continue in
great war competition.
One of the biggest concerns is misinformation. We are
seeing that in Gaza, we are seeing misinformation in the
Pacific, a lot of talk in this town about misinformation, yet
the biggest cuts are to Psychological Operations (PSYOPs), why
is that, Secretary Wormuth?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, my understanding is
actually the preponderance of the three thousand slots that are
being reduced are actually enablers. They are communicators,
they are administrative support people. I think that Special
Operations Command (SOCOM) and Special Operations/Low-Intensity
Conflict (SO/LIC) have worked very hard to have very targeted
reductions to authorizations, and that the reductions to PSYOP
are relatively small out of that broader three thousand.
Mr. Waltz. Okay, we will relook that. And just in the few
seconds I have remaining, back to the electric vehicles (EV)
issue, are there any charging stations in Ukraine, or Africa,
or anywhere else? I think we need to take a hard look at the
carbon neutral goal, and what we're doing to --
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. Although I
will say I want to foot stomp what he said about JROTC, those
are outstanding programs, we need to do everything we can to
maintain those as viable.
With that, I recognize the gentlelady from New Jersey, Ms.
Sherrill.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you've stated,
the Army continues to aggressively pursue modernization as a
top priority to ensure our land forces can dominate any future
battlefield. And as we have seen in Ukraine, the ability to
strike at extended ranges allows forces to hit deeper into
enemy territory while maintaining a standoff. And when we talk
about long range precision fires, many default to precision
rockets and missiles.
But the reality is that while these systems have their
place, they are not an economic solution for any sustained
large-scale conflict. So, you mentioned that you think there
are opportunities out there with the cancellation of the
Extended Range Cannon Artillery Program to meet some needs,
even having some procurement goals, you said, I think fiscal
year 2025.
Are there any other research and other programs you are
pursuing to ensure we achieve overmatch against any potential
enemy with our current and future Howitzer platforms?
General George. I will talk about this a little bit,
Congresswoman. So, yeah, we are looking, and I agree with you,
it is not just, this gets to the same thing as integrated air
and missile defense with long range fires, with the extended
battlefield we will need mortars, artillery, all of that, we
are looking at that. And I think what we are looking at right
now is how do we become more mobile on the battlefield with all
of those systems.
And then we have also got to look at the round, what can we
do to adjust the round? And we have done a lot with energetics,
and made some adjustment so that we are not changing out our
systems, that we are actually getting increased range,
increased accuracy, and increased lethality by using that as
well. So, we are trying to look at it in totality.
And then the other thing, I do think that there are
loitering munitions, and other things that we can do, that we
can reduce the cost on that, that will also expand the
battlefield. That is, we are looking at those as well.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you. And our support to Ukraine has
also opened our eyes to the shortcomings in our defense
industrial base, especially for artillery shells that continue
to show their necessity in modern warfare. So, Ukraine is
limited to firing, I believe I last heard two thousand
artillery shells a day, roughly one third of Russia's capacity
due to shortages.
If the U.S. is to find itself in a large-scale conflict,
our industrial base must be able to quickly and effectively
increase production of critical munitions to support our armed
forces. So, Madam Secretary, this committee has done much to
support the Army ammunition production base. What further
investments are needed to ensure our organic industrial base
can scale production of munitions to meet the requirements of
not only today with respect to Ukraine, but potential conflict
in the future?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman. The work that
has been done, you know at places like Picatinny and elsewhere
in the past couple of years has just been outstanding. I think
we have strengthened our industrial base considerably. In terms
of future investments, our budget invests a billion dollars a
year across the five years in our organic industrial base.
So, in our twenty-three arsenals, ammo plants, and depots.
And then, of course we need to work with our partners in
industry to continue to build up our munitions. And so, this
budget requests over three billion dollars a year for
munitions, everything from Javelins, to Stingers, to GMLRs, to
PAC-3 MSE. So, there is a very substantial investment in
munitions, and the broader industrial base in this budget
request.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you. And then as we have seen from the
war in Ukraine, it has given us valuable lessons learned as we
prepare our forces for large scale combat operations. It is one
thing to develop and adopt technologies such as drones and
electromagnetic warfare, but we have to incorporate those
lessons into doctrine, training, and the organization of our
land forces.
So, General George, can you provide an overview of how the
Army is incorporating lessons from Ukraine at echelon, how are
our soldiers mastering these new technologies while also
working on old school tasks such as trench warfare and analog
communications? And finally, how are we preparing to counter
the lessons our adversaries are learning from this conflict as
well?
General George. Okay, thanks for the question,
Congresswoman.
Ms. Sherrill. Yeah, twenty seconds.
General George. So, I'll try to be quick. We have Center
for Army Lessons Learned over there, Training and Doctrine
Command (TRADOC) is leading this, but really all of the
organizations from the Army, Army Futures Command making sure
that we are learning what we are doing. And we say there is a
difference between a lesson observed and a lesson learned. For
it to be learned we have to change how we train, we have to
change how we equip, and how we operate.
We have been at Combined Training Centers (CTCs), I have
been out to every one of them here in the last three months,
and we are doing that. One quick example is we haven't been
looking up with drones, and what you can be -- how you can be
seen, and now signature management is increasing --
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, thank you very much. And I want to
follow up a little bit with my colleague from Florida in terms
of electrification. Secretary, do you believe that climate
change is the greatest threat that we face as a nation?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, unfortunately, right now we
face a number of extremely pronounced threats, whether it is
Russia, China, Iran, but I think climate change --
Mr. Gimenez. That is not the question, that is not the
question. Is it the greatest threat we face as a nation,
existential threat we face as a nation?
Secretary Wormuth. I generally don't support sort of one
endless prioritization, but I think climate change is a concern
for us certainly.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you believe that it -- what is more
important for a weapon system, to be carbon dioxide neutral, or
is it to be effective?
Secretary Wormuth. Of course it is for it to be
operationally effective.
Mr. Gimenez. Very good, thank you. So, I would hope that
when we look at this charge to electrification, that we look at
effectiveness more. Really effectiveness, to me, is the only
criteria that we need to follow. So, Secretary, one of my
biggest concerns is our defense industrial base, and the
current status of the one hundred and fifty-five millimeter
stockpiles, what is the Army doing to invest in the industrial
base?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we have invested a billion
dollars in the organic industrial base, the base that we
control. And then we have over three billion dollars in our
budget for munitions. I think the biggest thing that would be
really helpful is if Congress is able to pass the supplemental,
we will be able to get up to the target we have set of one
hundred thousand rounds per month of one five five millimeter
shells. If the supplemental doesn't pass, we won't be able to
reach that target.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, I think we agree on that, I actually
support the supplemental, or at least parts of the
supplemental. The ones that concern me, the benefit that I get
from the supplemental is that we help our allies, but we also
help our industrial base, and we need to ramp up our industrial
base really quickly. And obviously you are concerned with our
stockpiles of the one hundred and fifty-five millimeter?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, I am very supportive of investing
that money so that we can build up those stockpiles.
Mr. Gimenez. What is the size of the current Army?
Secretary Wormuth. Right now I believe we are at four
hundred and fifty-two thousand active duty soldiers, and then -
-
Mr. Gimenez. Is that big enough to deal with the threats
that we are facing all over the world?
Secretary Wormuth. We have been able to meet the combatant
commander requirements, yes, we have. But General George and I
are committed to increasing the size of the army, in particular
the active component.
Mr. Gimenez. By how much?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, we are aiming to get to about four
hundred and seventy thousand, Congressman, by 2029.
Mr. Gimenez. Will that be sufficient to face our threats
around the world, or potential threats around the world?
Obviously talking about the potential threat of China. What is
the size of their army?
Secretary Wormuth. I think they have a very large army,
particularly because they have a very large police force as
well, an Interior Ministry force.
Mr. Gimenez. And that is considered part of the army?
Secretary Wormuth. It has some similar roles to the army,
yes.
Mr. Gimenez. Okay. Is it significantly bigger than ours?
Secretary Wormuth. I think, Congressman, it may be bigger
than ours. But one thing I will tell you that I think is a huge
comparative advantage for the United States Army is the quality
of our soldiers and our leaders. That is a comparative
advantage for us, we are much more effective, and able to
execute mission command than the Chinese Army, and that
translates to combat effectiveness.
Mr. Gimenez. All right. General George, it is my
understanding the Army is working on to upgrade the precision
strike missile weapons system, and increase its range to more
than a thousand kilometers. Known as PrSM, increment four, the
Army requires additional funding in fiscal year 2025 to
maintain the schedule and resource the competitive program.
This is one of the Army's highest modernization priorities
because of its relevance to the INDOPACOM theater and contested
environments.
The current missile has a maximum range of five hundred
kilos, and can reach only a small percentage of identified
maritime and land-based targets in China, is that correct?
General George. Congressman, yes, PrSM is a very important
missile for us, long range fires, and we are working on
research and development on how we can take the range out.
There is other increments, and we can come by and brief you on
those different increments that allow us to hit mobile targets
as well. So, that is part of our portfolio. And the great thing
about that system, and that missile is it works with our
HIMARS.
Which, we know those ground-based fires have been extremely
effective, they have proven that in Ukraine, and they can hide,
and move, and very hard to target. So, looking forward --
Mr. Gimenez. What is your target date for operation of the
new enhanced missile?
General George. Well, we are getting, actually some of PrSM
will come online here this calendar year --
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Hawaii, Ms.
Tokuda.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Secretary Wormuth, I
appreciate the extent to which you have made childcare a
priority for the Department of the Army under your leadership.
Last week military.com released a damning article detailing
systemic delays in reporting child abuse and harm in the
Department of Defense's child development centers.
Too many instances when processes and systems or lack
thereof have failed our children and our families. Given that
the Army owns and operates the majority of the department's
child development centers, its policies on child care are
especially important and impactful. In reviewing Army
regulation on child development services, the section on
reporting requirements for allegations of child abuse is quite
frankly confusing.
The threshold for action is far too high, especially when
we are talking about potential child abuse. It takes too long,
and quite frankly the determination of what sufficient
credibility means is subjective. Noticeably missing from this
section of the regulation is any mention of notifying parents
and legal guardians. In fact, the regulation only explicitly
requires parents to be notified about their child in very
limited circumstances.
In medical emergencies, instances of communicable disease,
acute illness, unusual occurrence, excursions, availability of
care, change in personnel, no mention of child abuse. Secretary
Wormuth, in the interest of the health and safety of our
children, what steps can the Army take to clear up its policies
on reporting these instances of child abuse, and ensure that
parents and legal guardians are part of those policies?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congresswoman. And as a mom
who has two grown kids now, but who had kids in daycare
centers, I would certainly want to be notified if something had
happened. So, what I would like to propose is that our teamwork
with your office to look at the regulation, and look at some
ways that we can strengthen it, and make sure that we are
notifying parents if something happens with their child, we
certainly want to make sure that that happens.
I will say we have very high standards for the employees
that work in our CDCs, they go through background checks, and I
want to make sure we don't have any instances of inappropriate
behavior, but I think on balance the quality of our CDC
employees is very high, I have been very impressed with what I
have seen.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. And the bottom line is those
policies need to be reflective of the actions we would like to
see, and we have to make sure we hold them accountable.
Military.com also reported that some updated policy is marked
as CUI, controlled unclassified information, making it
difficult for some parents to see those policies and actually
know the information they should be getting about their
children.
Secretary, would you please explain why these policy
documents have been marked CUI in many cases, and what will the
Army do to make sure that parents and legal guardians are
clearly informed of these policies?
Secretary Wormuth. As I'm sure you know, Congresswoman, CUI
stands for basically unclassified information, but it is
official purposes. But we want to make sure that parents
understand what our policies are, and have access to that
information, so I am confident we can find a way to make sure
that our regulations and policies are available for parents,
and we can be transparent with them.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, we would like to remove as many
barriers as possible for parents to know how their children are
doing in the care they're receiving. One last issue I would
like to flag is the fact that the regulations rely
significantly on individual garrisons to implement standard
operating procedures, meaning there is no clear single, unified
standard.
Not only does this create a patchwork of procedures for
reporting incidents, but it also makes it harder, quite
frankly, to track these issues more broadly between garrisons.
Secretary, what is the department doing to create a clear,
unified standard for documenting incidences of all kinds at
Army child development centers, especially for those incidences
involving child abuse?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, what I would like to do
is take for the record, that question, so that I get back to
you with accurate information. I do think we want to have a
clear, consistent standard for all of our CDCs. But I also want
to emphasize that I think every installation is different,
every installation has different programs.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 97.]
So, my goal would be to try to make sure we have a clear
standard, but we still give our garrison commanders flexibility
so that we can tailor to what makes sense to their area.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you. I look forward to those responses,
and while we all want flexibility, bottom line is we all want
our children to be safe. I cannot understate how absolutely
unacceptable all of these things are that were in the article
that is happening even in my home town of Hawaii, and how
important it is that the department act quickly to fix these
issues that were raised in the story itself.
This is a broken trust, and for the state of readiness we
have been talking about today for our military men and women to
do their jobs, they need to trust that their families as well
are also safe. And I worry that if we don't act quickly, and we
don't aggressively enough tackle this issue about how we keep
our children safe in childcare institutions, we erode that
trust, and make it harder to recruit and retain the talent that
we need.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Dr.
Jackson.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
it. Thank you to our witnesses for being here today, I really
appreciate your time. The Army is at a pivotal moment in time
right now where we must modernize our force to meet the
challenges of future conflict, but we need to assure we are
leveraging our investments in the right way.
With our strategic focus on the Indo-Pacific, we must
prepare and adapt for the vast ranges and contested battle
spaces in which we will operate. In the Army's aviation
investment rebalance announcement, I was happy to hear that you
both were fully committed and dedicated to the future long
range assault aircraft, and the Bell V280. As you both
certainly know, I have been one of the chief advocates here in
Congress for the Army's aviation modernization efforts.
I think we all understand that this aircraft is a massive
leap ahead in terms of capability, flying twice as far and
twice as fast compared to the helicopters it will replace.
General George, I would like to ask you, can you assure us that
the Army has an iron clad commitment to this program? And can
you describe in some detail how the new capabilities provided
by this platform will be advantageous to our operational
forces, and why it is so critical to the future of the Army?
General George. Sure, Congressman. It is a leap ahead
technology, I think it is going to change how we are able to
insert forces on the battlefield, and do a plethora of missions
with this. It is also going to give us the ability, what we
have been working with as far as other launched effects that
could come with this program. So, it is going to provide us
significant capability, we are committed to it, and I agree
with you.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Okay, I also want to point out too as
an emergency medical physician, and a physician in the military
that served in a combat zone as well, I fully understand the
importance of what we used to refer to as the golden hour, but
obviously time is translated into lives, in lives that we will
or won't save. With the Indo-Pacific in particular, there is
going to be some long medievac distances.
And I believe that some of these V280s are going to be
outfitted specifically for that mission, and I think that I
can't reiterate how important that is going to be, to be able
to get someone from the point of injury on the battlefield to
the next higher level of care, and I think that right now this
platform is the only thing that is going to be able to do that.
In the budget request for this year it looks like there is
roughly one point two six billion included for future long
range assault aircraft development. General George, can you
speak to that funding, what that funding will provide for the
future long range assault aircraft program, and is it the right
amount to keep this program on track, and on schedule, to field
the first operational unit in fiscal year 2030?
General George. Yeah, I think it is the right amount,
Congressman, to make sure that we keep everything on track, and
keep moving forward. And like you said, and I mentioned just a
couple of missions, this aircraft, with its speed, and its
legs, how far it can fly will be a multi mission aircraft
force, and it is important that we get it into the force as
soon as we can.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Well, thank you. As a member of this
committee I am committed to doing everything I can to make sure
that we stay on track, and you have everything you need to make
that happen, because I believe in it as well. Real quickly I
just wanted to ask you a quick question. A few weeks ago the
commander for SOCOM told the Intelligence Special Operations
Subcommittee about the dangers of the proposed cuts to the
special operations forces in the Army.
I get it, with constrained budgets and record inflations,
difficult decisions have to be made by cutting specialized
personnel and their unique capabilities from the force. I don't
think -- I think that it is a little bit strategically short
sighted. It undercuts our strategy to compete and deter our
adversaries, because I promise you our adversaries are not
doing the same.
When asked about the Army's decision to cut these special
forces, General Fenton said the challenge is that it is against
the backdrop of ever-increasing demands from our combatant
commands. A one hundred and fifty percent increase or more in
our crisis response missions over the last three years, and
this ever changing, more challenging character and environment
of war.
And I agree with him on that, I think things, with the new
focus on the Indo-Pacific, and the continued focus on counter-
terrorism, and the global war on terrorism, I don't think that
is going away. I have been briefed on this topic, and I was
told not to worry about it because it is not the operators that
are being cut, it is just the SOF enablers, or those positions.
I just want to reiterate that I think that those enablers
have a lot of extra training in these units, and they are very
special in their own regard, and I don't think they can be
easily replaced or interchanged. And so, I wanted to ask you
what are your thoughts on these numbers-- can you tell me what
the level of risk is that we are absorbing by cutting these
three thousand SOF personnel during a time where conflicts are
growing worldwide?
General George. Again, we left it up to SOCOM to look
specifically at these cuts, Congressman. But actually the
enablers that they were cut were the least deployed that we had
had, units that we had in the Army. And we are still supporting
SOF around the world --
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Virginia, Ms.
McClellan.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
you may recall that last year we had a conversation about
childcare, and you have gotten a couple questions I want to
follow up on today. And if I recall correctly, you said one of
the biggest challenges that the Army faces, and I think this is
probably true across branches, was with the work force, and
with length of time it takes to get through background checks.
And I just wanted to follow up a year later to see if there
are any steps that the Army has taken to try to streamline that
process.
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congresswoman, if only I, as
Secretary of the Army, controlled the security clearance
process, because that is often a moment in the pipeline that
takes quite awhile. There is a separate agency in DOD that is
responsible for security clearances and background checks. So,
that is outside of the Army's control, but we are certainly
doing everything we can to try to help folks who are applying
to our CDCs, to help them fill out the forms in ways that
reduce the number of questions, and back and forth that they
get.
But the background check continues to be a bit of a long
pole on the tent. At the same time, I will just say to the
Congresswoman Tokuda's points, that security clearance is
important. We do want to make sure that the people we hire are
safe --
Ms. McClellan. And I don't doubt that.
Secretary Wormuth. I know.
Ms. McClellan. I think if it is the largest challenge to
filling these childcare centers, over the past year I have
spent a lot of time either visiting bases across the, not just
the Army, talking to CDC providers, talking to service members.
And it is a critical issue that I hear. One of the biggest
issues with recruitment and retention, and frankly morale, is
the inability to have quality affordable childcare.
And when they can't get it on base, there is also a crisis
in the community where the base is, and we have got to do
everything we can. So, I don't disagree with you that they have
to go through the background check. But if it is one of the
biggest impediments, we also have got to do something to fix
that impediment.
One of the other impediments that I hear is, or one of the
programs that I have heard is benefits with tuition assistance,
professional development that the DOD is trying to give to
recruit and retain employees at childcare centers. But a lot of
these employees don't know that these benefits are available,
and I heard that directly from employees and their supervisors.
Can you tell me whether the Army has conducted a review to
ensure that employees and potential employees know about these
benefits that are available as they are recruiting and trying
to retain their childcare workers?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, I don't think that we
have done a review at the headquarters level, that is something
that we can talk to our G9 about doing that. I think our
garrison commanders, who are usually the folks who are
interfacing most often with the CDCs and the employees there
are very aware of the different incentives we have. Whether it
is recruiting bonuses, whether it is discounts for people who
work in the CDC for their children to go there.
First child goes free, second child goes fifty percent off,
our garrison commanders are, I think very familiar with those.
But we can certainly look at how we can do more to get that
message out.
Ms. McClellan. I would suggest you do that, because there
are a lot of people that just don't know. Given the developing
Russia China partnership, we have seen it is more important
than ever that the U.S. work with its allies to deter threats,
and obviously this weekend was a perfect example of the
importance of that.
Can you elaborate, either of you, on how the Army has
sought to deepen its ties with partner nation militaries at all
levels from industrial base coordination to technological
interoperability and multi-lateral training?
Secretary Wormuth. A couple things I would highlight on
that, Congresswoman, and then turn it over to General George.
First, we have something called security force assistance
brigades (SFABs). We have five of those, they are each aligned
to a combatant command. So, for example the SFAB in the Indo-
Pacific works with twelve different partner countries there
doing amazing things.
On the industrial base, the Australians are going to be co-
producing GMLRs missiles for us, and then another program I
would highlight is the terrific state partnership program that
our Army National Guard has with countries all around the world
that does training. So, those are just some examples.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you.
General George. I'll just, eighty eight state partnership
programs, just to plug for the Guard and what they're doing.
And every time I go to Romania, the first thing I hear is roll
tide, so I know they are having an impact over there. The
secretary mentioned AUKUS pillar two, that's something that we
are working with both Australians and the U.K., that's a
process --
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Alford.
Mr. Alford. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Ranking
Member, for this important hearing today, and thank you for our
witnesses. As our witnesses know, my district hosts the Army's
Fort Leonard Wood, home to Training and Doctrine Command
Maneuver Support Center of Excellence under the leadership of
Commanding General Beck.
The Maneuver Support Center of Excellence is the only
location for soldiers and Army leaders to hone their expertise
as engineers, military police, chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear, (CBRN) specialists. Later this week
sappers at Fort Leonard Wood will compete in the annual Best
Sapper Competition, I encourage everyone to watch on Fort
Leonard Wood's Facebook page, U.S. Army, Fort Leonard Wood, it
starts this Friday, ought to be good.
General George. I want to thank, in particular, the Army,
and personally thank you, Secretary Wormuth, for going to Fort
Leonard Wood for your attention that you have paid to this
distinguished installation. In the president's budget, one
hundred forty-four million dollars is now dedicated to advance
individual training barracks at Fort Leonard Wood, thank you so
much.
It is great news, it is going to mean a lot for our
soldiers. Additionally, the Quality of Life Panel, which I was
a part of, released a list of recommendations last Thursday
that will dramatically improve the livelihoods of soldiers and
their families all over the world, and across the military, and
I want to personally thank General Bacon for having me on this
panel and for his leadership.
I am excited for these recommendations to serve as a
foundation of the fiscal year 2025 NDAA. We have the
opportunity now to take care of the service members who take
care of our nation, and I know we are going to do the right
thing. The Army is also going through changes related to its
structure, and I am supportive of the Army's efforts to do that
to meet our new challenges.
However, I encourage the Army to ensure that as it changes,
it continues to support the communities that in turn have
supported the Army for so many years. Secretary Wormuth, as the
Army does restructure, it is cutting military police battalions
and engineer units, it is going to affect Fort Leonard Wood,
fewer positions in these specialties will mean fewer soldiers
over time attending basic training at Fort Leonard Wood.
It is going to disproportionately impact the rural
community around the installation compared to that of other
installations, and I will submit to you it already is. Is it
feasible to plus up the number of soldiers attending basic
training at Fort Leonard Wood to ensure that the community is
not too adversely affected?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, first of all, we look at
our Army force structure, and how it is arrayed every year
through the total Army analysis process that we use. So, we
will continually be looking at that to include at places like
Fort Leonard Wood. I do want to note we have, in the
restructuring that we have done, we were looking at authorized
spaces, basically spaces, not faces.
And at Fort Leonard Wood, and at many of our installations
around the country, the actual number of soldiers right now is
below the number of authorizations. So, it is possible, and the
reason I am hesitating a little is because I don't have Fort
Leonard Wood's kind of foot print in my mind in terms of
numbers, but in many of our major bases by the end of the next
five years the number of actual soldiers at Fort Leonard Wood
may be higher than what you have now.
In part because in so many places due to the recruiting
challenges, we are actually below the number of authorizations.
Mr. Alford. Do you have a percentage of that increase?
Secretary Wormuth. I just, again, don't have those numbers
off the top of my head----
Mr. Alford. Would you get that to us?
Secretary Wormuth. But we can get them to you, absolutely,
because we do have them.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 98.]
Mr. Alford. Thank you so much. Can you talk about the
changes that the Army is making to the Army's criminal
investigation division? I know we have talked about this in my
office, and the impacts it will have across the Army, and also
at Fort Leonard Wood, where CID agents get their training?
Secretary Wormuth. Absolutely, and our CID agents get
terrific training at Fort Leonard Wood. Again, I was pleased to
be able to see a lot of what the installation offers when I was
there. Broadly speaking what we are trying to do with CID, and
a lot of this came out of the commission that looked at
everything that happened at Fort Hood in the wake of Vanessa
Guillen's murder.
We are essentially transforming at least sixty percent of
our CID agents to civilians, so it won't be a fully military
force anymore. And I think one thing that is going to do is
improve the level of professionalism, the level of experience
that our agents have, which is really important, I think
particularly given the importance of their investigative roles.
So, that is broadly what we are doing with the
transformation, but happy to have Director Ford come and talk
with you in more detail if you would like.
Mr. Alford. I would love to have a discussion with Director
Ford personally, thank you so much. And again, thank you,
Secretary, and General, thank you for your service to our
nation. I invite you to Fort Leonard Wood any time, would love
to accompany you there.
All right, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Mexico, Mr.
Vasquez.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, thank you
Secretary Wormuth, General George, for taking the time to speak
with us today. I have the privilege of representing New
Mexico's second district, home to White Sands Missile Range,
the birthplace of America's missile and space program, and the
Department of Defense's premier research and testing facility.
As you both know, White Sands is one of the department's
most valuable assets, but it is not receiving the
prioritization and attention that it deserves from the Army.
Rural installations such as White Sands face unique challenges
to provide sufficient, and adequate, and modernized housing for
service members and their families.
During my visit to White Sands this year, I spoke with base
leadership about how they are currently at over ninety percent
capacity for their on base housing, and are struggling to meet
housing demands. Unfortunately, the Army's own calculations
don't recognize that White Sands is reaching maximum capacity,
because the formula only counts uniform personnel who are
living on base, and does not count additional civilian and
contractor workers who also live on base.
Because the Army marks White Sands at a significantly lower
capacity, the base faces greater challenges getting the
resources needed to modernize, expand, and improve its housing
conditions to meet actual demand. Secretary Wormuth, would you
say that updating outdated housing for service members is a top
priority in this budget request?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, we have put a lot of money towards
barracks, we have also put a lot of money towards new homes,
for example, or renovating family homes.
Mr. Vasquez. What could the people of White Sands expect
from this two point one billion dollars, I believe per year, to
achieve safe, quality housing over the next year if this budget
request is granted?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, the two point one billion dollars
is focused on barracks exclusively for unaccompanied soldiers,
so it is not going to get after some of the housing issues. I
think, Congressman, what I would suggest is that we look
specifically at White Sands, and see if in fact we are for some
reason not appropriately thinking about soldiers plus civilians
and contractors. I think we can certainly look into that with
you.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you so much, I really appreciate that,
Secretary. And that is a challenge that we continue to face,
because we do have a mix of both civilian contractor, and of
course enlisted personnel that rely on on base housing that
currently is not being met. Many of the buildings at White
Sands Missile Range were also constructed in the years
following World War II, including much of the housing, and
decades later on base housing is in dire need of upgrades.
Last year I was proud to help secure Section 2833 in the
Fiscal Year 2024 NDAA, which terminated all waivers that
allowed for unsatisfactory housing, to ensure that all Army
housing adhered to current living standards, particularly
surrounding square footage per soldier. Secretary, given this,
how exactly does the Army intend to go about improving housing
given this new directive?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, we are looking at a few
things, to include looking at the design, for example, of our
housing, of our barracks in particular. One thing we are doing
is trying to shrink the inventory of the worst barracks, the
Q3, Q4. We are hiring civilians to be barracks managers, to go
into our Department of Public Works to help us do oversight
better.
And the chief and I, and others are looking at the
standards for design to look at what is the bare minimum for
square footage, how many soldiers per room. We want to look at
that, and do that in a way that is cost effective, but gives
soldiers good housing.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Secretary, and do you believe that
currently the Army, or in your budget request has the adequate
personnel, resources, and planning ability needed to execute
these directives to improve these housing conditions? And if
not, what else can we do to make sure you have those resources?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. Two things I
would say, and again, I would like the chief to add. One, we do
need to hire more barracks managers, and there is money in the
budget to do that, although we continue to be looking at what
the requirement is for that. Two, I do want to say given the
inventory of barracks and housing that the United States Army
has, it is enormous, it is bigger than any service, and we
don't have the money in our budget to get that inventory up to
a high standard in a short time frame.
It is just going to cost in billions of dollars, so while
we have put a very strong investment towards barracks, it is
going to take some years to really get after that problem.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, Secretary. Chief?
General George. Yeah, the only thing I would add,
Congressman, is we are reviewing on the barracks, and we can
come back, and we want a little bit of flexibility, and we are
talking to soldiers out there, I have lived in those barracks,
so the second is we are also looking at how we can spend our
money better, and some of the process things that we have just
done with including the Corps of Engineers to kind of
streamline what our process is.
So, we are studying what they are doing out there. One of
the places that we went and looked at was University of
Alabama, and kind of comparing the cost for what we are
building, and I would love to have our team come over and kind
of walk you through that.
Mr. Vasquez. Thank you, General, thank you, Secretary,
thank you both for your service.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. And I thank you for talking with the
University of Alabama.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, it is great
to see you again, and thank you so much for coming to visit in
our office, I think it was very productive, and I have every
confidence that we will have a great working relationship, if
not partnership moving forward. I wanted to visit with you on
the Humvee Retrofit Program. Some people may not know that
Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) posed a great threat to
Humvees.
And to mitigate that, we created another issue, which was
it is susceptible to roll overs, as you know. Unfortunately,
there has been three hundred and forty-nine roll overs, over
seven hundred soldiers have been injured, and tragically one
hundred and thirty have been killed. And so, I was, when I read
the base budget request, I had to admit I was a bit befuddled,
because it was a request for forty-five million dollars.
And it was even more so confusing to me because it was
published after the Assistant Secretary for Acquisitions told
Inside Defense, and I quote here, ``the core issue with the
program's speed and volume is Congress isn't appropriating
enough money.'' And I have to take offense to that, I have a
sliver of anger, bewilderment, and bafflement, because for
three straight years since I have been in Congress, in a
bipartisan fashion, in a bicameral manner, we have appropriated
four times as much as what the Army has asked for.
So, please help me help you. I think it is feasible to do
it within five years, there is going to be NDAA language that
will be written in to do that, because we are talking about
soldiers' lives. So, General, and Madam Secretary, help us
please do the right thing, and can we count on you? Madam
Secretary, and then General George.
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, certainly soldier safety is
critical to us, and we want to work with you. I think one of
the things we are doing, frankly, and the Chief may want to
elaborate on this, is General Rainey at Army Futures Command is
actually looking at do we have the right number of vehicles in
our formations? In some cases we may want to actually be
reducing the proportion, if you will, of Humvees that we have
in some of our formations.
So, that is something we are going to have to factor in as
we look at the investment in the anti-lock brake systems.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you.
General George. I would say it is a safety issue. Yes, we
are focused on it, and we appreciate all the assistance that
you have provided to -- Red River Army Depot is critically
important to us, and this kind of gets to the larger discussion
that we have been having today, and I think that that work
force, I think what we need to look at is, and I think we
talked about this a little bit.
Is how we, what is the next projects, what are the things
that we are going to need to do just based on the skilled
workers that we have there, and the capability. And that is
where I think even beyond this, that we need to start looking
longer term.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah, to keep that out, and also to
retrofitting as opposed to buying new ones saves about eight
billion dollars, and when you have the kind of budget crunches
that we are facing, that is a good thing. What I also wanted to
visit with you both about is what I really feel is an absolute
existential threat to our national security, which is the
recruiting crisis. And I do think it is a crisis.
Every once in awhile we might not hit a number, but when it
is year over year it is getting to be we have to ring the alarm
bell. So, I think it is an all hands on deck, the one point one
billion in increased marketing is a good step. What we all
want, is we don't want to just throw money at an issue, and we
really need measurable results. So, I wanted to visit with you
on, Madam Secretary, talk about how we can measure some of
these new -- because I do think we need to be innovative, and
creative, quite frankly.
And we need to be committed to addressing this. And so,
what, if you could, share with us kind of a comprehensive plan
as to how to address this, looking at it in some new ways, and
how we are going to measure it.
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman. First of all,
while I don't want to be overconfident, because we have six
more months left in the fiscal year, if we continue to perform
the way we have in the last few months, I think there is an
excellent chance that we will make our recruiting goal this
year of fifty-five thousand soldiers, and five thousand in the
delayed entry program.
So, the things that the Army has been doing in the last
year and a half, I think are starting to work. And one of those
has been the Future Soldier Prep Course, which is done
exceedingly well. We have a soldier referral program, the
additional marketing that you talked about, I don't know if you
saw our commercial during the March Madness Tournament. All of
that, I think is starting to bear fruit. But to your point
about --
Mr. Fallon. Is that with Coach Kryzewski?
Secretary Wormuth. Coach K, yeah, exactly.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah.
Secretary Wormuth. And we have got more ads, I think that
will be rolling out in August of this summer. But to your point
about metrics and the broader transformation, that is critical.
And the Chief and I made a series of decisions last fall to
transform our recruiting enterprise. One of them was to give us
an analytical capability to actually understand what we are
doing that is working, and what is not working. Because
frankly, before that it was a little bit throw spaghetti at the
wall.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah, double up on what is working, ditch what
is not working, and we are not going to succeed at every
innovative and new idea that we have, and I think that we can
provide you some help as well. We are drafting legislation
right now to compel institutions of learning, high schools, and
colleges, if they receive federal funds, to give access to our
recruiters, to mandate that.
Thank you very much, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Nevada, Mr.
Horsford.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the Ranking
Member. The Army's twenty-three arsenals, depots, and
ammunition plants play a critical and crucial role in
supporting the war fighter through sustaining readiness
requirements across the joint force. In my district it includes
the Hawthorne Army Depot, which apart from storing conventional
munitions, has been tasked with demilitarizing, and disposing
of unserviceable, obsolete, and surplus munitions.
On March 20 the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
released a proposed rule to revise the standards for the open
burn, open detonation of waste explosive. This rule affects
sixty-seven Resource Conservation and Recovery Act OBOM
facilities, including Hawthorne Army Depot in my district. Even
though the installation currently has permits until 2029 and
2023, the proposed rule would require the implementation of
identified viable alternatives in lieu of OBOM.
This means that no matter the cost, OBOM (Open Burn/Open
Munitions) facilities must evaluate and re-evaluate whether
safe alternative technologies are available, and facilities
must use those alternatives. EPA is estimating that this rule
could cost the installations between six million to twenty-
eight million dollars annually. For rural installations such as
the ones in my district, this amount of money is just
staggering.
I don't have to tell you that smaller installations, which
often have little to no active duty receive much less attention
than their larger counterparts. So, I worry this rule will only
exacerbate that issue. While I understand the need to invest in
alternative technologies, and address the environmental impacts
these practices cause, I am concerned that this rule will have
wide implications for installations such as Hawthorne.
Secretary Wormuth. and General George, are you aware of
this proposed rule, and the impacts it will have on Army depots
across the United States?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, I am
broadly aware of that EPA rule on open burn facilities, and
certainly I think you are correct, it could have significant
implications for Hawthorne. So, I think this is something that
we need to look into to better understand precisely what those
impacts would be. I would like to have our Army Materiel
Command, which oversees our arsenals and depots, look into
that, and be in touch with your staff.
Because I think we want to understand what those
implications are. As you said in your statement, in some cases
we have been able to find alternative technologies to allow us
to do that kind of demilitarization in a different way, but I
think this is something we need to dig into a little more, and
we would do that with you.
Mr. Horsford. I would like to work with you on that to
address this issue that installations such as Hawthorne are not
adversely impacted by this proposed rule, so I will follow up
with you. Also, as you know, Hawthorne, which is housed on over
one hundred and forty thousand acres, and provides an explosive
storage capacity of seven million six hundred and eighty-five
thousand square feet.
Can you please outline the steps that you are taking to
address the special requirements and funding needs of the
smaller rural installations in order to ensure proper
maintenance and readiness at these crucial sites?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, in broad terms I can do that.
All twenty-three of our arsenals, ammo plants, and depots are
critically important to our organic industrial base, and
through the leadership of Army Materiel Command, we have a
fifteen year facilities investment plan, and an organic
industrial base plan that looks at our investments. And we look
at each of them individually to try to determine what their
current and future requirements are.
And then we basically bring that into our budgeting process
to try to make sure that we are investing in those facilities
in the way that is needed. I will be honest, given our top
line, we don't always have all the money we need to get to
everything right away, but we do have a fifteen year plan.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you. And again, I would like to follow
up on a few items specific to Hawthorne. Some of the issues
that I have been able to work with the Chairman and the Ranking
Member on in the past, I do not want these installations to be
forgotten or ignored, we have critical needs throughout. But
places like Hawthorne and other rural installations are vitally
important as well, and should be given priorities.
So, with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Dr.
McCormick.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Secretary Wormuth, I
noticed that we have a recruiting shortfall this year, how many
thousands are we below our -- what is our shortfall for the
Army right now?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, Congressman, right now we are --
again, I don't want to be overconfident, but we are on track to
make our recruiting goal this year, which is fifty-five
thousand new contracts, but plus five thousand individuals in
what we call our delayed entry program.
Dr. McCormick. I am familiar. Now, given the recruiting
shortages we had in the past, we are still under manned though,
correct?
Secretary Wormuth. Well, we are able to meet all of the
requirements that the combatant commanders have levied on us.
We would like to grow, absolutely, General George and I want to
see our end strength come up, and our plan is to have our end
strength be at four hundred and seventy thousand by 2029.
Dr. McCormick. And they are at four hundred and fifty-two
thousand, but is that four hundred and fifty-two thousand
manned right now, or do you have a shortfall?
Secretary Wormuth. It is manned right now, yes. Our
authorizations are above that, but we are manned at four fifty-
two.
Dr. McCormick. Got you. And I noticed a couple things,
first of all, the former Sergeant Major of the Army still owes
me one hundred push ups for not making his goals last year when
we made a bet on it. I always say that it is because the Army
doesn't have as good of commercials as the Marine Corps, but
that is just my opinion. Obviously, the barracks conditions has
something to do with morale and retention.
I was in the Marine Corps barracks in Camp Lejeune
recently, and saw some really bad ones, and some really, really
good ones. There is a disparity as we continue to build toward
something better. One thing I notice in Georgia though, Fort
Stewart is really bad right now. I am sure you are aware right
now, but one of the recent analysis showed that there was brown
faucet water, moldy ceilings, raw sewage on the bathroom
floors.
This is for the Third Infantry Division at Fort Stewart.
What are we doing to improve that, and what can we expect for a
time line?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, that is what the two point
one billion dollar investment is all about. We are trying to
reduce the inventory that is Q3, Q4 as quickly as possible. So,
we are going to be investing in construction of new barracks,
we are investing in sustainment at one hundred percent, which
we haven't done in years and years, we are hiring new barracks
managers.
And we have a whole process where the Fort Stewart garrison
commander and division commander can weigh in, and basically
hold up their hand and say we are in dire need. But we are
investing a lot of money to try to get after that exact
problem.
Dr. McCormick. Good, I look forward to updates on that. I
know one of the things we noticed with forward reconnaissance,
General, we are using drones now, autonomous drones for forward
looking in place of reconnaissance, I think it is great,
because we always used to say about force recon that you were
swift, silent, and totally surrounded. This is a better
technology for outward looking technology that we can use to
give a battlefield update real time.
Is the Army fully committed to this, and do we need to do
something in Congress to accelerate the program to save lives,
and inform the battlefield better in the fog of war?
General George. I think we are -- we get that that is where
we have to go, Congressman. That we have to, we are investing
in that at every level. I think that we are going to have to
have, for reconnaissance, and it is also joint, because we are
looking at the space assets that are out there from the Space
Force. So, I think we are learning those lessons, and we are
moving forward, and trying to do it quickly.
Dr. McCormick. So, we dedicate to that, is that a priority,
or you think that is low on the priority as far as the,
obviously you guys need a lot, everybody needs a lot right now,
we have a worldwide challenge, whether it be in different
multiple arenas, funding allies that are fighting wars, is this
a priority?
General George. I think it is a priority. There is three
areas that we have asked for that I think we need to have more
flexibility, and that is with UAS, counter-UAS, and EW. It is
going to change, we are buying off a blue list, which is all
U.S. stuff right now. I think that we can produce those things,
I think we, all of those systems, I think we do need a little
bit of flexibility to move stuff from R&D immediately into
procurement, and we could certainly use your help doing that.
Dr. McCormick. Great. And then final question has to do
with what is going on over in Ukraine. Obviously, Ukraine is
being out shelled about ten to one, a large portion of their
munitions are going to come from us, and our sustained support.
Obviously, a lot of the munitions we send to Ukraine are going
to be replaced here in America, about sixty-eight percent I
believe is the recent statistic I heard.
Is our failure to get this package done to help Ukraine in
what they are trying to do against an age-old adversarial
opponent, do you think that is hampering your efforts to do
what you need to do to be prepared for the next war by us not
passing what we need to get done over in Ukraine?
General George. Short answer to that is yes. We need the
supplemental to build our magazine depth, and replace
equipment.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, Madam Secretary,
and General. Our service members, and especially Army personnel
are forced to cope with substandard, and often toxic field
feeding systems. Madam Secretary, as part of the 2024 NDAA
there was a report provision that would speak, and address
towards this situation in the planning. Can you give any update
in terms of the status of this?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I'm sorry, did you say
feeding?
Mr. Davis. Yes.
Secretary Wormuth. Okay, sure. We are very focused on
trying to make sure that our soldiers have access to quality
food, and we have had some challenges in the last year, but
here is what we are doing about it. First of all, we are
investing in things like meals on the go that soldiers can go
and grab, and take home to their barracks later to prepare. We
are building food kiosks that are, again, have a great variety
of food.
I actually saw one of our food kiosks at Fort Cavazos
recently. We are also bringing in food trucks when soldiers are
sometimes away from their Dining Facility (DFACs). So, I think
all of that is going to improve the quality and sort of
availability, if you will, of food for our soldiers. But we are
also engaged in a broader effort, really, to try to transform
our DFACs, and have them be more like college campuses in terms
of the quality and variety that they offer.
And also the hours that they are available. So we have a
lot of work that we are doing on our food strategy.
Mr. Davis. Okay.
General George. Can I jump in on that one, Congressman?
Mr. Davis. Yes.
General George. Just because I have been eating at all of
those. I mean, I think outside, everywhere we have changed,
people want quick food, they want healthy food, and they want
really flexible hours, I think we are seeing that. And what we
need to do is do the same thing on our installations. And I
think you are going to see some really big changes here in the
next year, in how we are approaching exactly that.
And the Secretary mentioned a couple of the things that we
are looking at doing, and some of this is getting some outside
help in looking at how industry is doing it. But I think we are
going to make some changes here real soon, very positive.
Mr. Davis. And could you speak specifically in terms of
field program out?
General George. Yeah, well I think every location is going
to be a little bit different. So, I just, it depends on how
spread out everything is, and what they want, what their access
is to off base, and kind of like the Secretary said, it is more
like campus style dining, it is going to be a little bit
different. We have had a kiosk, for example, that they opened
up, and we partnered with Defense Commisary Agency (DECA),
which was the commissary, to put the food in there.
And they are very, very popular to the point where they had
three hundred people showing up a day, and a couple days later
there was eighteen hundred people. So, we think we got the
right strategy, we are just going to have to implement it at
every different location.
Mr. Davis. Okay. I am super proud of Fort Liberty, and
especially headquartered there, Special Operations Command.
General George, how is the Special Operations Command making up
for what we would lack in sheer volume of personnel, in terms
of equipment, and greater efficiency, and precision itself?
General George. Yeah, I mean, I would just like to overall
talk about Fort Liberty in general. We have got US Army Special
Operations Command (USASOC) there, but we have also got 18th
Airborne Corps, we have got the 82nd Airborne Division, I mean
there is a lot that is there at Liberty. We are getting ready
to invest with some additional multi domain task forces going
to go there. So, obviously very, very important to us.
And there is a lot of innovation, I mean, I could probably
go on for a good long time about what we are doing down at
Liberty right now, but they are really helping us to innovate
USASOC specifically with high altitude balloons, or small UAS.
So, it is really across all the war fighting functions, I mean
we are one big Army, and we are a big piece of that, and Army
makes up a big part of SOCOM in total.
Mr. Davis. Well, thank you so much.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. Secretary Wormuth, there is train and equip
money you requested in this budget, right?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congressman.
Mr. Gaetz. And the train and equip mission in Niger is
owned by the Army, right?
Secretary Wormuth. Yes, we certainly provide soldiers for
that, yes.
Mr. Gaetz. General, do you know what is going on in Niger
right now?
General George. I know there is some challenges over there
in Niger right now, and I don't think that we are actually in
charge of that mission that is on the ground --
Mr. Gaetz. Well, yeah, we just heard the Secretary say you
have got soldiers there, so we are going to dive into that to
some extent. Do you know what the status is of diplomatic
overflights to our installations in Niger?
General George. I am vaguely tracking that that is a
challenge.
Mr. Gaetz. It is not a challenge, it is binary. Are we
allowed right now to do diplomatic overflights in Niger, yes or
no?
General George. I don't know exactly, I don't track that
close, I don't think --
Mr. Gaetz. Madam Secretary, do you know if we are allowed
to do those diplomatic overflights?
Secretary Wormuth. I don't, but I am sure the US Arica
Command (AFRICOM) commander does.
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah, but you guys just said it is in the budget
you are asking for to do these train and equip missions. One of
them is in Niger. In Niger right now, the government has
stopped us from doing diplomatic overflight missions. So, we
have Army soldiers right now in Niger who aren't getting their
troop rotations, who aren't getting their medicine, who aren't
getting their supplies, who aren't getting their mail.
And the two senior people in the United States Army are
sitting before me, and it is like hear no evil, see no evil,
speak no evil. Are you going to do anything for the soldiers
that are in Niger right now who can't get medicine? Yes or no.
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, certainly, we can talk to
General Langley, and make sure that --
Mr. Gaetz. I have talked to General Langley, he comes in
here and never has really good answers. I mean, I asked him for
information about how many of the coup leaders we had trained,
including in Niger, and Ghana, and Mali, and the Ivory Coast,
and he didn't even produce his report on time. So, pardon me
for a lack of confidence in General Langley.
What I am telling the two of you is that you have a
responsibility for these soldiers in Niger, and General, you
would agree with me, with the premise, that we should never
sacrifice the well-being of our service members to avoid
political embarrassment, right?
General George. Congressman, I will tell you I am not
tracking that anybody -- that somebody in Niger is not getting
their medicine or their mail, but I will follow up after this -
-
Mr. Gaetz. Okay, but you don't even know the status of the
diplomatic overflights, how about the great power competition?
You would agree on train and equip missions, we would never
want Russian soldiers at the U.S. installation where we are
doing train and equip, right? That is not even a tough
question, you would agree?
General George. Yes.
Mr. Gaetz. And so, if there were Russian soldiers behind
the wire at Airbase 101 in Niger, where we have soldiers doing
the train and equip mission, that would concern you, wouldn't
it? Right, well, I am here to tell you we have received reports
that they run out of medicine in May. That they cannot get
their troop rotations. And you know why you don't know that?
Because it is a cover up, because the U.S. embassy in Niger
is covering it up because of Secretary Blinken's embarrassment.
Because Blinken went there in March of 2023, and said this was
the centerpiece of our Africa strategy, this was the model of
resilience. And then lo and behold, the very coup leader we
trained takes over the country. And then we struggle with
whether or not to call it a coup.
We have now called it a coup, since we have called it a
coup, now they won't let us get folks in and out. And so, I am
looking at what could erupt as another Benghazi, where there is
no mission to do, there is no train and equip right now with
the coup leaders. So, we have got a bunch of people sitting
around without their supplies, without their medicine, and the
whole reason intelligence isn't getting to us is because the
embassy is blocking it because Blinken is humiliated that this
failed.
And I have used my five minutes on everything in the Army
right now because I have constituents who are there in Niger,
and they are wondering how to get water. Did you know they
can't even get clean water? Did you know that the partner
nations that we have at that base with our soldiers, the
partner nations, the Italians and the Germans, they have
stopped cooperating with us?
They won't even help us get provisions to our troops
because of the status of forces agreement that we have with the
government being deemed invalid. I am just a country lawyer
from North Florida, but this strikes me as something the two of
you should know about. I get the blank stares, but Secretary
Wormuth, can I take as your commitment that you are going to
leave here, and you are going to see to the well being of these
folks in Niger, and that they can get the rotations and the
medicine they need?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly I will make sure they are
getting the medicine and the water that they need, yes,
Congressman.
Mr. Gaetz. Great. Mr. Chairman, I have a number of
unanimous consent requests. First, an article from Politico,
``It is like a Bad Movie U.S. Officials Who Helped Train Niger
Troops Reel from Coup.''
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 81.]
Mr. Gaetz. "Russian Troops Arrive in Niger as Military
Agreement Begins", and from the BBC.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 86.]
Mr. Gaetz. "Niger Termination of U.S. Military Ties
Followed Accusation of Uranium Deal", March 17, 2024 from the
Wall Street Journal.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered. The
gentleman's time has expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 91.]
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you both
Secretary Wormuth, and General George for being here today.
Hearing some experts on conspiracy theories and otherwise, but
having served in the military I have a little bit more
confidence as a service member, veteran, in what you do. Things
aren't always perfect, but I think you do a great job in trying
to lead our men and women in the service.
General George. as you know, the Army is undergoing
substantial modernization efforts. Can you speak to where you
see space-based assets fitting into the Army's modernization
efforts, and do you see foresee challenges with integrating
space based assets with legacy systems?
General George. Congressman, at space, we are growing this
capability. For us, we have stood up already three multi domain
task forces, a big component of that is what we have with our
space-based assets that are inside of that. We are going to
grow two additional, the Army is the biggest user of space on
the ground. So, I don't see any challenges.
Right now we are updating our network, which will allow us
to share all this, we are learning a lot from the commercial
industry as well, so I think we are on a good path as it
relates to space, and building that capability, and working
with the Space Force.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. Secretary Wormuth, the Army is
simultaneously undergoing both a significant force structure
and recruitment enterprise transformation, do you see these two
reforms complimenting each other? How will the new recruiting
enterprise help fulfill new force strength goal of four hundred
and seventy thousand soldiers by fiscal year 2029?
Secretary Wormuth. Thank you, Congressman, and thanks for
your opening comments of support, appreciated. I am confident
that our recruiting transformation is going to help us. We are
already doing better, and I think we will just keep doing
better over time. We have just started -- we just selected our
first cohort of warrant officers who are going to be focused on
recruiting.
They are going to go into the field this summer, we are in
the process of developing the pipeline for how we are going to
start taking enlisted soldiers, and making them specialized
recruiters, I think that will be really important. We are
looking at things like what does the recruiting station of the
future look like?
We have a new innovation cell that we will be standing up
that is going to help us understand, to a conversation I had
with another member earlier, what is working and what is not
working. And then of course we are looking at, as we build new
units like our multi domain task force, or as we grow
additional air defenders, or grow soldiers with space
capabilities.
We are working with our recruiters in our G1 to make sure
that we are filing those billets, and able to recruit that kind
of great talent into the Army.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. We have heard a lot about
hypersonic weapon systems on this committee. General George,
how do you see hypersonic weapons changing the landscape of
warfare we have seen over the last few decades, and how is the
Army adapting to this new technology?
General George. Congressman, I think hypersonics is an
important capability, it is going to be another arrow in our
quiver, it is not one answer. There is other aspects of long
range fires that we will use, but again, I think it is an
important capability, provides extra range, and could go after
critical targets, but we are going to need the whole portfolio
to be successful.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you. It seems that each year cases of
military sexual assault continue to happen despite military
leadership saying that they will address this issue. I know the
cases of sexual assault in the Army have dropped compared to
other service branches, but what is the solution to getting our
hands around this? This is an issue that has been around
forever.
Military brass always says we are dealing with it, we are
doing our best. What is the solution?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, first of all I would say
this is a national, unfortunately, problem, sexual harassment,
and sexual assault, not an exclusively military one. But we are
really focused on it, and I will tell you, one of the things
that I think is going to help us significantly get our arms
around it, and start doing more to prevent those kinds of
incidences, is by adding some new training for our new soldiers
at basic training.
A lot of our soldiers come in today, and they just don't
understand kind of the basic right and wrong, what consent
means, what boundaries are. We need to teach our soldiers to
respect each other, and to say no. And starting this fall we
are going to be adding some training into basic training so
that every new soldier that comes into the Army learns about
that.
And then we have also, on the response side, our Special
Trial Counsel's Office has reached full operational capability,
and they are starting to prosecute those kinds of cases. That
organization reports directly to me, and I think that will help
restore some trust----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
California, Ms. Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Wormuth,
General George, I wanted to follow up actually on some of where
my colleagues, Mr. Waltz, and Mr. Jackson left off regarding
some of the proposed cuts to the SOF community. I specifically
want to know about the impacts to civil affairs teams who
represent the department's capability to do stabilization
operations, understand the information space, and civilian
environment, and engage in strategic competition.
This capability is particularly important to the DOD's
implementation of the Global Fragility Act, which has civil
affairs teams deployed to coastal West African states. So,
given all this, can you explain the rationale for cuts to civil
affairs?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly, Congresswoman. First of all,
I am a huge believer in civil affairs. One, I want to be clear
that General George and I fully support and endorse the value
of special operators, and what they bring to the table, civil
affairs is just one example of that. Basically working with
SOCOM and SO/LIC we looked at the overall capacity of our
special operations community, which grew substantially during
the last twenty years.
And we basically ran a series of analysis that looked at a
conflict with Russia, a conflict with China, and also looked at
what did we need to be able to compete during peacetime. And
what we found was we had some excess capacity essentially. So,
we have made some trends, as I said to another gentleman
earlier, sixty-five percent of the three thousand comes out of
enablers.
So, it is a small number of reductions in the civil affairs
authorizations, but we still need that overall capability, it
is important.
General George. Can I add one thing? A lot of our
capability on civil affairs, when I have deployed to Iraq,
Afghanistan, came out of the Guard and the Army Reserve, and so
none of those cuts came out there as well. So, I think we need
to remind everybody, if we are going to go do something that is
very consequential for our nation, it is going to be a total
Army that is going to go do it.
And we do have those capabilities, so when we are looking
at all of these things we try to look at, that is why we call
it total Army analysis, we are trying to look at the depth of
our formation.
Ms. Jacobs. Yeah, I understand, and I think when it is a
big conflict, that would be the case. But one of the things I
am concerned about is that AFRICOM is already an under
resourced command. So, I was wondering in your assessment of
these cuts, do you have any analysis on how this would impact
civil affairs positions in AFRICOM's Area of Responsibility
(AOR)? And in particular, I have heard concerns that
potentially Cote d'Ivoire might not be able to have a civil
affairs presence after these cuts.
And especially as the coastal West African states are so
important for the Global Fragility Act, how will you mitigate
these impacts, especially in those areas?
Secretary Wormuth. Congresswoman, I think the way I would
say that is we worked with SOCOM and SO/LIC to look at the
overall capacity. With what is still there after the cuts, it
will be up to, say again, the AFRICOM commander to decide where
to allocate those. So, I think if there is a pressing need in
Cote d'Ivoire, there is still going to be a capability to be
able to be provided there.
Those kinds of decisions about where to send our civil
affairs folks generally comes from the combatant commander.
General George. That said, it is kind of a gift map
request, so if AFRICOM wants to do that, and working with the
joint staff, we do support with Guard, and Reserve, and active
duty, I mean we look at a total Army solution. If something is
important, and we are, obviously as a Title X supporter, and we
are directed to do that mission, we will do it.
Ms. Jacobs. Great, thank you, I appreciate that. I would
like to turn to the implementation of the civilian harm
mitigation and response plan. As part of this, the department
established the Center of Excellence, and committed to achieve
full operational capacity by fiscal year 2025. Can you discuss
the progress in achieving this capacity, and how the department
is ensuring staffing reflects a range of service branches?
Secretary Wormuth. Certainly. We have established the
Center of Excellence, as I'm sure you know, Mike McNerney is
the director of that center. He has a military deputy director,
and I believe a civilian deputy as well. The different services
have contributed to staffing that center, and as far as I know,
everything is on track, and that they are already working with
the combatant commanders to provide advice and counsel where
needed.
Ms. Jacobs. Great. Well, we will follow up with you on
implementation of the Civilian Harm Mitigation and Response
Action Plan (CHMR-AP) as it continues, because it is a priority
for all of us, we passed a lot of the enabling language in last
year's NDAA. So, thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady. I wanted to ask
Secretary Wormuth, over the last three years the Army has
requested about half of the funding required to sustain Army
modernization goals. I am hoping that that is not a resetting
of the base line, and that has just been dealing with funding
constraints. To be parochial, shortfalls in the Abrams,
Stryker, and Paladin are particularly acute this year.
Can you tell me where you are going with this, how do you
intend to close that gap, or have you reset your base line for
spending?
Secretary Wormuth. Congressman, I would say the investment
levels you pointed to are good examples of where the Chief and
I have had to make hard choices about how do we allocate the
incremental dollar to enduring systems like Abrams, or Stryker,
or Paladin versus FLRAA, or next gen squad weapon, or precision
strike missile. I will say if the supplemental passes, for
example, that will help us be able to buy more Paladins, just
as one example.
So, it is important there, and Stryker. But yeah, what you
are seeing there is the tension between enduring systems, and
future systems.
The Chairman. Great. Thank you. You all both have been very
helpful, we appreciate you being here, appreciate your service
to our nation. And with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:03 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 16, 2024

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 16, 2024

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 16, 2024

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. TOKUDA

Secretary Wormuth. The Army is dedicated to providing a safe,
nurturing environment for the children of our Soldiers and their
Families. We understand the importance of this responsibility and are
committed to upholding the highest standards of care in our facilities.
The Army Family Advocacy Program regulation, AR 608-18, along with
Execution Order 201-24, "Implementation Guidance for Installation
Response to Problematic Sexual Behavior in Children and Youth," ensures
standard operating procedures and compliance across Army installations
when responding to reports of child abuse and problematic sexual
behavior in children and youth (PSB-CY).
In alignment with this commitment, our focus on continuous
improvement, and greater transparency, the Army published Execution
Order 201-24, "Implementation Guidance for Installation Response to
Problematic Sexual Behavior in Children and Youth," in May 2024. It
includes the following timeline:
a. On the day the incident is identified, Child Youth & School
Services (CYSS) or Department of Defense Education Activity on the
installation will communicate PSB-CY incidents to parents and guardians
of impacted and exhibiting children. They will make the notification
consistent with the Privacy Act guidelines. The appropriate
organization will report all PSB-CY incidents that occur on a military
installation to the Family Advocacy Program Manager (FAPM). Once FAPM
is notified, they will immediately provide resources and support
services to children, youth, and their Families.
b. Within 24 hours of receiving the report, the FAPM will notify
the installation law enforcement. If child abuse and/or neglect, or co-
occurrence of domestic abuse is suspected, the FAPM will communicate
with the appropriate civilian Child Welfare Services (CWS) agency, FAP
clinical chief, and appropriate law enforcement agency, in accordance
with DoD and DA policies as well as Federal, State, local, and host
nation laws.
c. Within three days, the FAPM is required to establish a
multidisciplinary team (MDT) that will address safety and risk factors,
recommend treatment, counseling, and appropriate intervention for all
incidents.
The Army Family Advocacy Program regulation, AR 608-18, requires
all installation law enforcement personnel, physicians, nurses, social
workers, school personnel, Family Advocacy Program (FAP) and Children &
Youth Services (CYS) personnel, psychologists and other medical
personnel to report information about known or suspected cases of child
abuse to the reporting point of contact. It includes the following
timeline:
a. If an adult initiated child abuse incident occurs at an Army
operated Child Care Development Center (CDC) or CYS, the CYS
Coordinator will immediately report the incidents to the Military
Police, Reporting Point of Contact (RPOC), local Child Protective
Services, and child's parents and guardians.
b. Next, the CYS Coordinator reports allegations of abuse in a CYS
Program through their Chain of Command using the Commander Critical
Incident Report, in accordance with Installation Command Regulation
190-45-1.
c. Within one business day, the CYS Coordinator reports through
their IMCOM Directorate to Headquarters, Installation Command G-9 CYS
using the Report of Unusual Incident.
d. The CYS Coordinator will conduct weekly follow-up reports
through the chain of command until the investigation is complete and/or
retraining or disciplinary action is complete. By working
collaboratively, Family Advocacy and Child & Youth Services create a
supportive environment where military Families feel empowered to seek
help and receive assistance. The child abuse reporting procedures
ensure a systematic approach to reporting and managing incidents of
abuse with an emphasis on prompt reporting, thorough investigation, and
appropriate follow-up actions to safeguard the welfare of children,
youth, and their Families.  [See page 41.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. STRONG
Secretary Wormuth. While the Army fully recognizes the importance
of the Space Domain and our role within it, we currently have not
established Space Operations as a branch. Space Operations is currently
a Functional Area, supported by Space Operations officers (40A). In
recognition of the significant role that Space plays in supporting Army
operations, U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command (the Army's
Space Proponent) is reviewing options to further develop Space
Operations. We sincerely appreciate the ongoing congressional support
for Army Space Operations and look forward to ongoing progress updates
as we move forward.  [See page 29.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. ALFORD
Secretary Wormuth. The U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command team
is exploring the possibility of expanding Basic Combat Training at Fort
Leonard Wood (FLW) and Fort Sill in FY 2025, but the Army has not yet
made a decision to expand. The Army must look carefully at what we
believe will be the combined future requirements for both Future
Soldier Preparatory Course and Initial Entry Training to determine what
expansion, if any, may be needed.
Recent force structure decisions have resulted in the reduction of
165 permanent authorizations at FLW. FLW is currently manned at 93.89%.
Given structure losses across the Army, it is possible that FLW will
see its manning level increase. Thus, it is possible for FLW to have
more soldiers assigned in the future than are assigned today, despite
less structure.  [See page 46.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 16, 2024

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WILSON

Mr. Wilson. Secretary Wormuth, I remain concerned about our ability
to protect our forces deployed overseas who face a growing threat with
the proliferation of small drones. The US needs a more cost-effective
way to respond to these threats. As I said at our hearing in February,
we're using multi-million dollar defense systems against $39.95 drones.
I am pleased that the budget includes an effort to expand our Counter-
small UAS capability and that Counter-UAS efforts are your #1 and #2 on
the Army's Unfunded Priority List. 1) Can you explain the cost and
performance advantages we gain by employing lower-cost interceptors and
effectors instead of using million-dollar missiles to intercept
thousand-dollar drones?
Secretary Wormuth. As the Department of Defense Executive Agent for
Counter-small Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-sUAS), the Army recognizes
the urgent need for, and importance of, effective and affordable C-
sUAS. These strategies and this mission area require a layered system-
of-systems capable of detecting, tracking, identifying, and defeating
incoming threats in real-time, while minimizing collateral damage.
Today, countering sUAS threats requires constant adaptation to evolving
tactics and technologies, making it a multifaceted and resource-
intensive endeavor.
The requirement for low-cost C-sUAS interceptors and effectors
demands a strategic balance between cost and operational effectiveness.
Cost-effective sUAS countermeasures are crucial within a layered
defense and contribute positively to the overall architecture despite
potential limitations when compared to more exquisite, and expensive,
solutions. While cheaper alternatives may lack the advanced
capabilities of more sophisticated systems, their integration offers
the advantage of scalability. We will evaluate and consider
transportability and mobility of alternative lower cost solutions.
Incorporation of more economical solutions enables the Department of
Defense to more efficiently source materiel, providing increased
magazine depth that ultimately enables a more enduring and sustainable
defense. This not only boosts the capacity of ongoing efforts, but also
expands protection to a broader range of assets.
The C-sUAS problem set is a department-wide priority and we are
committed to not only pacing, but out-pacing, this rapidly
proliferating threat to maximize protection of U.S. interests, at home
and abroad.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. TURNER
Mr. Turner. The Army is spending a tremendous amount of taxpayer
resources to modernize its intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance capabilities. I'm concerned that the Army is over
investing in capabilities like airborne ISR that potentially will not
be relevant or survivable in a conflict with China, and under investing
in capabilities like nontraditional open-source intelligence that will
provide unique mission relevant data, especially in exploiting Chinese
civil military fusion. Can you assure the committee that Army
intelligence is focused on building the capabilities Combatant
Commanders need to prevail in strategic competition? Please provide the
committee with an overview of how the Army plans to integration the
collection, processing, exploitation, and dissemination of
nontraditional open-source information into multidomain operations?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army Intelligence and Security Enterprise is
committed to pursuing a balanced modernization strategy in support of
Service and Combatant Command requirements across the full competition
continuum. These investments provide a layered approach for sensing in
support of integrated campaigning, but also support the transition to
conflict with long-range, standoff sensors enabling stand-in,
penetrative capabilities, and associated kill-chains.
To enable these investments, the Army is divesting of legacy
capabilities that no longer meet the requirements of the National
Defense Strategy in a rapidly evolving battlefield, and reinvesting
funds in systems and processes that are better aligned to National
Priorities and the doctrine of Multi-Domain Operations.
In addition to Aerial ISR investments, the Army is focused on
building Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) capabilities to support the
Intelligence Community (IC) and Joint Force during multidomain
operations and has dedicated 360 Military OSINT collector positions
across the total Army force to include budgeting to equip this force
with the tools needed to execute OSINT collection. Our updated training
and the introduction of Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning has
postured the Army for faster collection, processing, exploitation, and
dissemination of OSINT to support the full continuum of operations from
strategic competition through large-scale conflict.
The Army programmed for and is building an automated OSINT
reporting capability that will streamline the OSINT production process.
This new dissemination capability is specifically focused on providing
OSINT to the tactical edge in support of multidomain operations. The
Army OSINT collection data will integrate with all Intelligence
Community repositories as well as the Army's modernized All-Source
Intelligence systems utilized at tactical formations across the Army.
Mr. Turner. In your statement, you highlighted the Army's recent
creation of the Office of the Special Trial Counsel (OSTC). This office
is manned by specially trained, independent military attorneys known as
"special trial counsel," tasked with making prosecution decisions
regarding sexual assault, domestic violence, and other relevant
offenses. This initiative has notably enhanced transparency and
impartiality within the military justice system.
I know the DoD, and specifically the Army, has taken significant
steps towards deterring sexual misconduct in the military, but it is
crucial to emphasize the pivotal role of preventive measures at the
unit level. Do you believe the Army could do more to implement measures
at the unit level to further prevent instances of sexual misconduct? If
so, could you provide insight into the specific actions the Army has
implemented or intends to implement at the unit level to further
prevent instances of sexual misconduct?
Secretary Wormuth. Unit-level preventive measures are crucial in
complementing broader initiatives aimed at deterring sexual misconduct.
The Army is focused on ensuring that prevention resources are placed at
the unit-level to ensure progress in preventing harmful behaviors.
Prevention starts with engaged leadership at every echelon of the Army.
Our leaders must set the tone for the desired values and principles of
the unit. To that end, the Army is investing in primary prevention
efforts to prevent sexual misconduct before it ever happens.
The Army is actively incorporating reforms derived from the 90-Day-
Independent Review Commission on Sexual Assault in the Military. As
part of these efforts, the Army is introducing Sexual Harassment/
Assault Response and Prevention (SHARP) program Prevention Specialists
at each installation for the first time since the program's inception.
The Army is also hiring a dedicated integrated primary prevention
workforce, who will work with other prevention professionals, to ensure
safe and inclusive military communities and command climates for our
soldiers, families, and civilians.
The preventative actions will be individual, interpersonal, and
community/organizational level and will include policies, programs, and
practices. This will ensure that we are addressing sexual assault and
other harmful behaviors with a comprehensive approach and continually
working toward an Army culture of prevention.
To date, the Army has recruited and onboarded 10 Prevention
Specialists and close to 100 Integrated Prevention Personnel to lead
primary prevention efforts for the Army. These prevention professionals
are tasked with spearheading the planning, execution, coordination, and
evaluation of prevention activities, encompassing policies, programs,
and practices. Their responsibilities extend to providing prevention
education and outreach initiatives focused on increasing protective
factors that decrease the likelihood of harmful behaviors, including
sexual assault, harassment, retaliation, domestic abuse, child abuse
and neglect, and suicide, while also increasing our soldiers' ability
to thrive in all aspects of life.
The integrated prevention workforce works with leadership to
understand results from their command climate assessments (CCA),
including the Defense Organizational Climate Survey (DEOCS) and the
Defense Organizational Climate-Pulse (DOC-P) survey. The comprehensive
integrated primary prevention (CIPP) plan, for which the command
leadership signs, is then utilized to codify actions for addressing
command climate issues, tracking progress, and holding leaders
appropriately accountable for their command climates.
Collaboration with other stakeholders such as the Family Advocacy
Program, Behavioral Health, and Equal Opportunity enhances the
effectiveness of prevention efforts. By deploying SHARP Prevention
Specialists and the integrated prevention personnel at each
installation, the Army is equipping itself with dedicated professionals
who possess the requisite capabilities, skills, and tools necessary to
combat sexual misconduct and other harmful behaviors.
The Army is also in the process of developing curricula on
foundational skills to address prevention of harmful behaviors at
initial entry and officer training for our most junior soldiers and
cadets. This training will enhance our youngest soldiers' ability to
create and maintain healthy relationships founded on the Army Values,
and is being integrated into basic training starting this summer.
Mr. Turner. The Army is spending a tremendous amount of taxpayer
resources to modernize its intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance capabilities. I'm concerned that the Army is over
investing in capabilities like airborne ISR that potentially will not
be relevant or survivable in a conflict with China, and under investing
in capabilities like nontraditional open-source intelligence that will
provide unique mission relevant data, especially in exploiting Chinese
civil military fusion. Can you assure the committee that Army
intelligence is focused on building the capabilities Combatant
Commanders need to prevail in strategic competition? Please provide the
committee with an overview of how the Army plans to integration the
collection, processing, exploitation, and dissemination of
nontraditional open-source information into multidomain operations?
General George. The Army Intelligence and Security Enterprise is
committed to pursuing a balanced modernization strategy in support of
Service and Combatant Command requirements across the full competition
continuum. These investments provide a layered approach for sensing in
support of integrated campaigning, but also support the transition to
conflict with long-range, standoff sensors enabling stand-in,
penetrative capabilities, and associated kill-chains. To enable these
investments, the Army is divesting of legacy capabilities that no
longer meet the requirements of the National Defense Strategy in a
rapidly evolving battlefield, and reinvesting funds in systems and
processes that are better aligned to National Priorities and the
doctrine of Multi-Domain Operations.
In addition to Aerial ISR investments, the Army is focused on
building Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) capabilities to support the
Intelligence Community (IC) and Joint Force during multidomain
operations and has dedicated 360 Military OSINT collector positions
across the total Army force to include budgeting to equip this force
with the tools needed to execute OSINT collection. Our updated training
and the introduction of Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning has
postured the Army for faster collection, processing, exploitation, and
dissemination of OSINT to support the full continuum of operations from
strategic competition through large-scale conflict.
The Army programmed for and is building an automated OSINT
reporting capability that will streamline the OSINT production process.
This new dissemination capability is specifically focused on providing
OSINT to the tactical edge in support of multidomain operations. The
Army OSINT collection data will integrate with all Intelligence
Community repositories as well as the Army's modernized All-Source
Intelligence systems utilized at tactical formations across the Army.
Mr. Turner. In your FY 2025 budget request, you are seeking $1.5
billion for Pacific Deterrence Initiative activities. Your FY25
unfunded priorities list underscores the need for Stinger and Patriot
missiles, along with other counter-UAS weapon platforms, to bolster
force protection in the Middle East, Europe, and the Pacific.
Additionally, you highlight the inclusion of additional Precision
Strike Missile (PrSM) production in the unfunded priority list, aiming
to enhance supply and provide superior striking capability in the Indo-
Pacific AOR while phasing out less capable systems.
However, the efficacy of these measures hinge on the Army's ability
to overcome logistical challenges in deploying these assets to their
designated locations. Could you elaborate on the strategies and
initiatives the Army is implementing to operate effectively within a
contested logistics environment?
General George. The Army is developing the strategies and
initiatives necessary to operate effectively and overcome logistics
challenges in multi-domain contested logistics environments across
distance, particularly in the Indo-Pacific. In 2023, Army Futures
Command established the Contested Logistics (CL) Cross-functional Team
(CFT). The CL CFT is seeking integrated sustainment solutions necessary
to overcome logistical challenges in multi-domain contested
environments.
Its portfolio addresses challenges identified in the Joint Concept
for Contested Logistics, namely Precision Sustainment, HMI Supply and
Distribution Systems, Advanced Power, and Demand Reduction. One CFT
effort seeks to employ low cost, autonomous assets (air, land, sea) to
provide dispersed capability across the Indo-Pacific Command area of
responsibility.
Deploying critical assets to the point of need and sustaining the
Army in a contested logistics environment across distance requires a
modern industrial base, resilient supply chains, and capable power
projection assets. Last fall, the Army began its 15-year, $18 billion
Organic Industrial Base Modernization initiative to repair and restore
critical facilities (ammunition plants, depots) and infrastructure
(rail, roads, ports).
Innovations in artificial intelligence and data-processing are
helping the Army become more predictive and reduce demand. Demand
reduction is key to addressing the challenges of CL. Predictive
Logistics (PL) allows the Army to reduce its logistics tail,
appropriately position critical sustainment assets, and deliver
precision sustainment to the point of need. In February 2024, the Army
approved a PL Abbreviated Capabilities Development Document that
enables efforts to implement and scale predictive logistics.
The recently released force structure plan allows the Army to build
capabilities and formations (e.g. long-range fires, air and missile
defense) required to support the National Defense Strategy. New
formations like the five Multi-Domain Task Forces enable the Army to
fulfill theater-level protection and fires responsibilities to the
Joint Force in a contested logistics environment. Future organizational
design considerations include a theater opening capability specifically
designed for Pacific to integrate and synchronize sustainment in a
contested logistics environment.
Similarly, the Army has instituted a new Army Watercraft Governance
process to facilitate initiatives of fleet modernization, adding
terminal capabilities and other types of infrastructure to reduce the
risks in a Contested Logistics environment. The Army is assessing the
strategic posture of its prepositioned stock APS-3 Afloat, but no
decision has been made at this time. The Army continually reviews the
force structure requirements and capabilities in the Indo-Pacific Area
of Operations to leverage Commander's input and efficiencies from
analytical modeling.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. NORCROSS
Mr. Norcross. Congress has added funds over the last few years to
speed up installation of anti-lock brakes and electronic stability
control safety upgrades to the HMMWV fleet. I have asked Is there
anything you can tell us about the difference that these upgrades have
made on HMMWV accident mitigation or avoidance? Is the Army collecting
data or creating metrics to help determine if this investment is making
any difference with improved safety or accident avoidance? If not, can
the Army figure out a way to collect some data on the difference they
are making, if any?
Secretary Wormuth. The investment in Anti-Lock Brakes/Electronic
Stability Control (ABS/ESC) for armored HMMWVs will reduce the
likelihood of the loss of vehicle control and improve safety for our
Soldiers. However, we do not have any metrics that would indicate ABS/
ESC is reducing mishaps because the Army Safety Management Information
System (ASMIS) does not collect ABS/ESC information for mishaps
involving HMMWVs.
The Army agrees with the National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration (NHTSA) when the ABS/ESC rule was published,
specifically The level of life saving associated with ESC would be
second only to seatbelts among the items of equipment or elements of
design regulated by the Federal motor vehicle safety standards.
However, the Army does not have specific data or mishap reports that
indicate the ABS/ESC has reduced, mitigated, or prevented mishaps
involving HMMWVs.
Given the extensive research performed by the NHTSA on ABS/ESC,
there are no current efforts to invest resources in data collection
capabilities to validate the effectiveness of ABS/ESC installation on
HMMWVS.
Yes. The Army can require a mandatory yes/no entry for ABS/ESC in
the HMMWV equipment list for submitted mishap reports in ASMIS. The
Army is also tracking the models and serial numbers of approximately
13,100 HMMWVs that have been upgraded with the ABS/ESC system. This
information would allow the mishap analysis to compare mishaps of
HMMWVs with and without the ABS/ESC system; however, it will still not
be able to reveal whether ABS/ESC system prevented a mishap.
Mr. Norcross. Congress has added funds over the last few years to
speed up installation of anti-lock brakes and electronic stability
control safety upgrades to the HMMWV fleet. I have asked Is there
anything you can tell us about the difference that these upgrades have
made on HMMWV accident mitigation or avoidance? Is the Army collecting
data or creating metrics to help determine if this investment is making
any difference with improved safety or accident avoidance? If not, can
the Army figure out a way to collect some data on the difference they
are making, if any?
General George. The investment in Anti-Lock Brakes/Electronic
Stability Control (ABS/ESC) for armored HMMWVs will reduce the
likelihood of the loss of vehicle control and improve safety for our
Soldiers. However, we do not have any metrics that would indicate ABS/
ESC is reducing mishaps because the Army Safety Management Information
System (ASMIS) does not collect ABS/ESC information for mishaps
involving HMMWVs.
The Army agrees with the National Highway Transportation Safety
Administration (NHTSA) when the ABS/ESC rule was published,
specifically The level of life saving associated with ESC would be
second only to seatbelts among the items of equipment or elements of
design regulated by the Federal motor vehicle safety standards.
However, the Army does not have specific data or mishap reports that
indicate the ABS/ESC has reduced, mitigated, or prevented mishaps
involving HMMWVs.
Given the extensive research performed by the NHTSA on ABS/ESC,
there are no current efforts to invest resources in data collection
capabilities to validate the effectiveness of ABS/ESC installation on
HMMWVS.
Yes. The Army can require a mandatory yes/no entry for ABS/ESC in
the HMMWV equipment list for submitted mishap reports in ASMIS. The
Army is also tracking the models and serial numbers of approximately
13,100 HMMWVs that have been upgraded with the ABS/ESC system. This
information would allow the mishap analysis to compare mishaps of
HMMWVs with and without the ABS/ESC system; however, it will still not
be able to reveal whether ABS/ESC system prevented a mishap.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WITTMAN
Mr. Wittman. The effectiveness of small drones has been one of the
most important lessons-learned from the wars in Ukraine and the Middle
East. The use of commercial, cutting-edge autonomous drones has become
one of the most cost efficient and sustainable pathways to implement
these drones in combat. The Army has embraced this approach through the
Short Range Reconnaissance Program and has plans to implement drones on
a wider scale in a variety of functions. To this end, what additional
resourcing does the Army need in order to further this program? And is
the Army committed to fully fielding small drones for employment by
tactical units?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army is constantly analyzing the pervasive
and evolving use of small drones and how it is changing the character
of warfare. The Army is committed to incorporating these lessons
learned by employing drones at every echelon in all types of functional
formations. Soldiers at every echelon, regardless of Military
Occupational Specialty (MOS), must be proficient in operating and
maintaining Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) because it is integral to
maneuvering across an ever-evolving battlefield.
To further incorporate UAS into Army formations, the Army continues
to field tranche 1 Short Range Reconnaissance (SRR) systems to units
with over 600 of 1,083 planned systems fielded to date. The Chief of
Staff of the Army's Unfunded Priorities List (UPL) includes a request
for $26.5 million to accelerate SRR fielding. The Army's investment in
accelerating the procurement of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) like
the SRR is critical to fill a near term requirement for reconnaissance,
surveillance, and target acquisition capabilities. In the long term,
inform the programmed UAS strategy by defining the functions, density,
and capabilities required on the battlefield of the future. The
fielding plan will adjust to account for the lessons learned by units
that have already fielded SRR, such as the 82nd Airborne Division and
the 101st Airborne Division, and later this this summer, the 25th
Infantry Division.
Ms. Wittman. Program executive officers are contracting for
commercial autonomy software for ground vehicles through mid-tier
acquisition. However, the Army continues to invest in government off-
the-shelf (GOTS) software programs (ARCS/RTK) that have proven to be
insufficient and expensive to manage. As the Army progresses in its
RDT&E and acquisition of autonomous software, it is not clear why the
Army continues to invest in and experiment with inadequate GOTS
solutions while commercial solutions offer superior capabilities. What
is insufficient in the Army's approach in acquiring commercial autonomy
that necessitates the significant investment in Army GOTS programs
(ARCS/RTK)?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army is investing in the maturation of
modular open systems architecture and autonomous software modules
developed by industry and academic partners, to support several
uncrewed ground modernization efforts for use in complex and dynamic
military operational domains.
Specifically, the Army Robotic Common Software (ARCS) / Robotic
Technology Kernel (RTK) is a modular open systems approach (MOSA)
software framework that establishes a pipeline of re-usable software
modules that have been developed by multiple Industry partners,
Federally Funded Research and Development Centers, and Government Labs.
These advanced modules are then made available to industry and
government organizations for integration across multiple ground systems
in order to meet current and emerging requirements. ARCS/RTK is not a
Government-off-the-shelf (GOTS) autonomy solution that competes with
industry offerings.
This MOSA approach is congruent with Congressional guidance for
software acquisition and enables integration across multiple ground
systems which will ensure competition across the nascent off-road
ground autonomy market with flexibility to meet current and emerging
requirements. The Army will continue to produce and field a capability
within alignment of Congressional guidance to include focusing on the
lowest life-cycle costs while also enabling the integration of new,
advanced capabilities from multiple industry providers as they become
available over time.
Mr. Wittman. The Army's recently updated software acquisition
policy makes good efforts to incorporate a more agile framework based
off of industry best practices. While many aspects of the policy
increase flexibility and speed, reports for time and materials create
burdensome requirements on what should be firm fixed price contracts.
Why is the Army continuing to buy reports instead of encouraging
competition that reduces costs?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army's new software modernization policy,
Army Directive 2024-02 (Enabling Modern Software Development and
Acquisition Practices), institutionalizes agile software development
and acquisition approaches in line with industry best practices. These
approaches enable the rapid development and iterative refinement of
software over time in line with changing user needs and requirements,
resulting in enhanced capabilities for soldiers. For software
development efforts, the policy specifically encourages the use of
contract types that are flexible in nature and allow for the refinement
and evolution of requirements over time, including cost reimbursement,
labor hour, incentive, or hybrid contracts.
Other contract types, such as firm fixed price contracts, are more
suitable when requirements can be clearly defined upfront and are not
subject to significant change, such as when acquiring commercial
software solutions. Importantly, the policy does not prohibit or
require any specific contract type; rather, that decision is left to
the contracting officers based on the unique circumstances of an effort
(e.g., development of custom software solutions, acquisition of
commercial solutions).
When competitively awarded, evaluations of proposals include a
price evaluation that considers the hourly rates proposed by each
contractor (price is one of the evaluation factors in a best value
trade off source selection). In the context of software development,
labor hour contracts are not to be used to purchase reports. The
reporting requirements applicable to labor hour contracts for software
development are specified in each individual contract, similar to the
reports required under any other contract type. Further, the Government
has the flexibility to permit contractors to submit labor hour reports
using the contractor's preferred format, instead of a Government
specific report, which can further reduce the additional reporting
burden on contractors.
Mr. Wittman. Although the Army has made progress in incorporating
industry partners into its science and technology ecosystem, it has
been slow to adapt its requirement processes to speed up fielding of
commercially acquired systems and software. For instance, the Army is
acquiring another uncrewed vehicle that it describes as autonomy ready,
yet the Army has no plans to field an autonomy payload. How will the
Army fix the gap in its rapid requirements process to support the
fielding of equipment which already exists in the commercial sector?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army recognizes the gap in the rapid
requirements process and is currently looking for opportunities for
acceleration. Analysis is ongoing to determine what capabilities can be
expedited to meet the Army's needs. The Abbreviated Capability
Development Document (A-CDD)/Middle Tier Acquisition approach allows
the Army to present a broad range of desired characteristics to the
materiel developer for either rapid prototyping or rapid fielding of
promising commercially available products.
The utilization of Directed Requirements (DR) is a requirement
document option the Army uses to secure rapid approval and then
resource and deliver via the acquisition system, readily available
equipment. The Chief of Staff of the Army, Vice Chief of Staff of the
Army, or the Commanding General, Army Futures Command, serve as the
approval authority for all DRs.
The Army is working to change the current software acquisition
process that will streamline development and transition to an agile
continuous improvement/delivery model. Several accomplishments include
a completed Software Development Process and Guidebook, updated
templates for software-related requirements documents, a Software
Capability Roadmap and Value Assessment among others.
Mr. Wittman. The Army is working to develop a large,
transformative, financial improvement multi-award vehicle that will
enable the Army to accelerate audit progress and drive financial
transformation by leveraging industry leaders in a competitive
environment. What is the Army's timeline to award that vehicle and what
actions is the Army taking to expedite the availability of that
vehicle?
Secretary Wormuth. The solicitation for the single award Army
Financial Improvement (AFI) contract is set to be released by June
2024. This solicitation will remain open for approximately 30 days with
vendor questions and proposals being consolidated by Aberdeen Proving
Ground, Army Contracting Command (APG-ACC). In the months following the
closure of the solicitation period, proposals will be received and
evaluated, with an award decision rendered.
Upon final decision, a single vendor will be sent a notice of
intent to award, and a fully established contract is expected to start
no later than the end of the second quarter of FY 2025, with the entire
period of performance anticipated to run up to the second quarter of FY
2026. The beginning of the acquisition process for the AFI multi-award
will be taking place concurrently with the award and performance of the
AFI single-award IDIQ contract.
The acquisition planning and pre-award documentation for the AFI
multi-award are anticipated to be complete and ready for solicitation
by the first quarter of FY 2025. The AFI multi-award solicitation close
date and proposal evaluation process should properly align with the
completion of the AFI single award for the workstreams to seamlessly
transition to the AFI multi-award by the second quarter of FY 2026.
We have made significant progress accelerating audit efforts and
have downgraded a material weakness (Fund Balance With Treasury-Working
Capital Fund) for the first time in the Army's 30 year history
implementing financial improvement efforts. Our AFI acquisition
strategy will give Army continuity of vendor support in the short term,
as we transition to a more agile and outcome-based approach enabling us
to achieve the congressionally mandated FY 2028 audit opinion.
Mr. Wittman. The effectiveness of small drones has been one of the
most important lessons-learned from the wars in Ukraine and the Middle
East. The use of commercial, cutting-edge autonomous drones has become
one of the most cost efficient and sustainable pathways to implement
these drones in combat. The Army has embraced this approach through the
Short Range Reconnaissance Program and has plans to implement drones on
a wider scale in a variety of functions. To this end, what additional
resourcing does the Army need in order to further this program? And is
the Army committed to fully fielding small drones for employment by
tactical units?
General George. The Army is constantly analyzing the pervasive and
evolving use of small drones and how it is changing the character of
warfare. The Army is committed to incorporating these lessons learned
by employing drones at every echelon in all types of functional
formations. Soldiers at every echelon, regardless of Military
Occupational Specialty (MOS), must be proficient in operating and
maintaining Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) because it is integral to
maneuvering across an ever-evolving battlefield.
To further incorporate UAS into Army formations, the Army continues
to field tranche 1 Short Range Reconnaissance (SRR) systems to units
with over 600 of 1,083 planned systems fielded to date. The Chief of
Staff of the Army's Unfunded Priorities List (UPL) includes a request
for $26.5 million to accelerate SRR fielding. The Army's investment in
accelerating the procurement of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) like
the SRR is critical to fill a near term requirement for reconnaissance,
surveillance, and target acquisition capabilities. In the long term,
inform the programmed UAS strategy by defining the functions, density,
and capabilities required on the battlefield of the future. The
fielding plan will adjust to account for the lessons learned by units
that have already fielded SRR, such as the 82nd Airborne Division and
the 101st Airborne Division, and later this this summer, the 25th
Infantry Division.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. BACON
Mr. Bacon. A recent Army Times article brought to light the high
rate of suicide among the Armor units due to long training hours and
continuous deployments. According to this reporting, six soldiers from
the 1st Battalion, 66th Armor Regiment, died by suicide over a 14 month
period.
1) Which Army unit types and military occupational specialties have
experienced the highest suicide rates over the last two years?
2) What are the respective numbers of suicides within Armor,
Stryker and light infantry formations over the last two years?
3) What is the Army doing to prevent and reduce suicides in these
formations and across the Army generally?
Secretary Wormuth. The unit types with the highest suicide rates in
2022-2023 were Stryker Brigade Combat Teams (BCT), Engineer Groups,
Military Intelligence (MI) Brigades, Armored BCTs, and Infantry BCTS,
and all were above the Regular Army average. Recognizing the
operational demands on our BCTs, the Army adjusted the ReARMM model and
changed rotational deployments to the Republic of Korea from Armor to
Stryker BCTs.
These efforts were aimed at reducing demands on some of the highest
in-demand formations. The Army's Total Army Analysis changes will
further assist in reducing OPTEMPO demands by ensuring that formations
are manned at higher levels than they were in the past. They will also
grow in-demand capabilities.
The Career Fields/Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) with the
highest rate was Infantry (11 series MOS). Many of the other Regular
Army's highest suicide rates were in Career Fields/MOSs associated with
or provide support to Combat formations (Chemical, Armor, Medical,
Military Intelligence, Aviation, & Communications).
The findings for 2022-2023 were consistent with the previous decade
in that Combat-Arms formations (Stryker, Armor, and Infantry) are at an
elevated risk for suicide compared to the other units. Over this
period, Stryker Brigade Combat Teams experienced approximately a 52/
100K rate of suicides; Armor Brigade Combat Teams experienced
approximately a 45/100K rate of suicides; and Infantry Brigade Combat
Teams experienced approximately a 39/100K rate of suicides.
The Army is implementing an integrated primary upstream prevention
model designed to enhance leader engagement; strengthen individual,
unit, and community resilience and connectedness; and mitigate
stressors that may culminate in a suicide. This starts with engaged
leadership and cohesive teams. In addition, the Army emphasizes and
invests in upstream prevention efforts like quality-of-life
improvements, sponsorship for new Soldiers coming into a new unit, and
financial readiness to enable Soldiers and Families to better weather
unexpected life events and anticipated milestones.
The Army is focused on ensuring that commanders have access to the
right resources to address stressors that impacts Soldiers and
families. Programs like Mission 100 in Alaska, 1ID Operation Victory
Wellness, and 10 MTN Care are ways in which commanders are scoping
programs to meet the unique challenges that their Soldiers and families
face.
Recognizing the operational demands on our BCTs, the Army adjusted
the ReARMM model and changed rotational deployments to the Republic of
Korea from Armor to Styker BCTs. These efforts were aimed at reducing
demands on some of the highest in-demand formations. The Army's Total
Army Analysis changes will further assist in reducing OPTEMPO demands
by ensuring that formations are manned at higher levels than they were
in the past and growing many in-demand capabilities.
Mr. Bacon. A recent Army Times article brought to light the high
rate of suicide among the Armor units due to long training hours and
continuous deployments. According to this reporting, six soldiers from
the 1st Battalion, 66th Armor Regiment, died by suicide over a 14 month
period.
1) Which Army unit types and military occupational specialties have
experienced the highest suicide rates over the last two years?
2) What are the respective numbers of suicides within Armor,
Stryker and light infantry formations over the last two years?
3) What is the Army doing to prevent and reduce suicides in these
formations and across the Army generally?
General George. The unit types with the highest suicide rates in
2022-2023 were Stryker Brigade Combat Teams (BCT), Engineer Groups,
Military Intelligence (MI) Brigades, Armored BCTs, and Infantry BCTS,
and all were above the Regular Army average. Recognizing the
operational demands on our BCTs, the Army adjusted the ReARMM model and
changed rotational deployments to the Republic of Korea from Armor to
Stryker BCTs.
These efforts were aimed at reducing demands on some of the highest
in-demand formations. The Army's Total Army Analysis changes will
further assist in reducing OPTEMPO demands by ensuring that formations
are manned at higher levels than they were in the past. They will also
grow in-demand capabilities.
The Career Fields/Military Occupational Specialty (MOS) with the
highest rate was Infantry (11 series MOS). Many of the other Regular
Army's highest suicide rates were in Career Fields/MOSs associated with
or provide support to Combat formations (Chemical, Armor, Medical,
Military Intelligence, Aviation, & Communications).
The findings for 2022-2023 were consistent with the previous decade
in that Combat-Arms formations (Stryker, Armor, and Infantry) are at an
elevated risk for suicide compared to the other units. Over this
period, Stryker Brigade Combat Teams experienced approximately a 52/
100K rate of suicides; Armor Brigade Combat Teams experienced
approximately a 45/100K rate of suicides; and Infantry Brigade Combat
Teams experienced approximately a 39/100K rate of suicides.
The Army is implementing an integrated primary upstream prevention
model designed to enhance leader engagement; strengthen individual,
unit, and community resilience and connectedness; and mitigate
stressors that may culminate in a suicide. This starts with engaged
leadership and cohesive teams. In addition, the Army emphasizes and
invests in upstream prevention efforts like quality-of-life
improvements, sponsorship for new Soldiers coming into a new unit, and
financial readiness to enable Soldiers and Families to better weather
unexpected life events and anticipated milestones.
The Army is focused on ensuring that commanders have access to the
right resources to address stressors that impacts Soldiers and
families. Programs like Mission 100 in Alaska, 1ID Operation Victory
Wellness, and 10 MTN Care are ways in which commanders are scoping
programs to meet the unique challenges that their Soldiers and families
face.
Recognizing the operational demands on our BCTs, the Army adjusted
the ReARMM model and changed rotational deployments to the Republic of
Korea from Armor to Styker BCTs. These efforts were aimed at reducing
demands on some of the highest in-demand formations. The Army's Total
Army Analysis changes will further assist in reducing OPTEMPO demands
by ensuring that formations are manned at higher levels than they were
in the past and growing many in-demand capabilities.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. The initial version of the ACFT, to address lessons
learned in combat in Iraq and Afghanistan, represented a significant
challenge for the force. One way to fix this would have been to give
soldiers time and resources to rise to the challenge. Instead the Army
chose to remove the leg tuck, and to rewrite score charts to guarantee
most soldiers passed.
Despite the congressionally mandated 2022 RAND Corporation Report
finding that the ACFT passing scores were designed to be easier than
real-life tasks facing soldiers, and observing that it was already
improving Army fitness culture, leaders were extremely concerned with
initial pass rates.
Noting the newly lower standards in the FY24 NDAA we (Congress)
directed the Army to establish higher passing scores for combat roles.
Previous iterations of the ACFT did exactly that, establishing a
single baseline Army standard, but holding more physically demanding
jobs to higher requirements. (ex: 2020 standard- 2 mi run male/female
17-21 was 21 min); (2024- 2 mi run male/female 17-21 was is 22 min for
male and 23 min, 22 seconds for female soldiers). The passing score for
run times was not increased because they were unrealistic, they were
changed because of outcry when people found them challenging.
In combat, we must maintain standards (both male and female).
Combat does not discriminate.
Why are we still having a problem maintaining fitness standards (in
fact we are lowering standards)? Are you looking to modify the CFT
standards based on MOS (for Cyber warriors vs. infantry)?
Why are waiting until December to start the Gender CFT study at the
University of Iowa? Why is the data from the past 20 years of combat
operations in Afghanistan and Iraq not sufficient?
Secretary Wormuth. Performance on the ACFT across the Total Force
indicates Soldiers are maintaining fitness standards. The ACFT has
positively impacted the health and fitness of the close combat force.
The data we have collected through December 2023 indicate that combat
Soldiers are motivated to exceed the minimum standards. On average, a
Soldier in the close combat force scores around a 500 out of 600
possible points; performs a deadlift of 275 lbs.; completes  40 hand
release pushups; and runs two miles in 16:30.
In line with Army governance policies, and in response to
congressional requirements, the Army continues to improve the ACFT. Our
focus this year is improving the empirical grounds for event
performance standards based on the now nearly one million record tests.
The Army, supported by RAND, will test increased standards based on
robust health and fitness data. This study will include additional data
from 45k Soldiers from the close combat force and ensure the Army
complies with the requirements set forth in FY 2024 NDAA.
In line with the FY 2024 NDAA, the Army is increasing fitness
standards for close combat forces in Infantry (11A, 11B, 11C, 11Z),
Engineers (12A, 12B, Field Artillery (13A, 13F), Special Forces (18A,
18B, 18C, 18D, 18E, 18F, 18Z), and Armor (19A, 19C, 19D, 19K, 19Z). The
Army, supported by RAND, will test increased standards based on robust
health and fitness data. This study will include additional data from
45K Soldiers from the close combat forces and ensure the Army complies
with the requirements set forth in FY 2024 NDAA.
The Army is not waiting until December to start working with the
University of Iowa. In April 2024, the Army and the University of Iowa
completed the initial planning conference for a joint study correlating
combat-related tasks to empirically derived minimum standards for ACFT
test events. The results of this study will not be available before
June 2025. The Army wants to ensure the development of the test is data
driven.
Mr. Waltz. Russia continues to upgrade its large-scale Arctic
military capabilities. At the same time, China is growing its economic,
military, and scientific activities in the region. I am glad that the
Army is developing Arctic-focused doctrine due out later this year.
Canada, Norway, Finland, Sweden, and Denmark are being consulted for
their expertise.
We really haven't seen any large-scale military engagements in
colder environments since the Korean War. Can you describe any gaps in
our capabilities that our partners have helped us address? Have these
consultations included industry to ensure our soldiers have the
equipment that can withstand the difficult weather conditions?
I understand the 11th Airborne Division will be testing these
concepts during its Joint Pacific Multinational Readiness Center
rotation and will replicate large-scale combat conditions. Do you
anticipate more units, particularly the Alaska National Guard, to
participate in these exercises in the future? How many of our units are
currently acquainted with arctic warfighting scenarios? The Navy
recently completed their annual ICEX exercises in the Arctic Circle.
Are you consulting your Naval counterparts on their experiences,
particularly on survivability and logistics?
General George. The gaps in our capabilities that our partners have
helped us address are: - Norway and Sweden would like to provide their
high-tech knowledge to the U.S. - Norway could provide a Nordic Hub and
testing material needed in arctic (snow, ice, and bad satellite
reception) conditions. - Norway has great testing grounds and would
like to assist Army Futures Command. - Nordic offers cold weather
training (not how to survive, but how to fight in cold weather
conditions); prepositioning and development of future research -
Partnerships with our Japanese and Indian allies in the Pacific are
providing valuable insight into fighting in extreme cold weather
conditions.
Yes, the Alaska National Guard plays a vital and intricate role in
the execution and support to 11th Airborne Division Arctic warfighting
capabilities / expertise-living, operating, and fighting in extreme
cold weather, mountainous, and high-altitude environments. This
includes Arctic search and rescue training for aviation units. In
addition, the Vermont National Guard conducts cold weather mountain
training and the Michigan National guard conducts a small scale
Northern Strike rotation.
The 11th Airborne Division conducts individual and collective
training with other Divisions. The training consists of 15K - 20K plus
Soldiers from 15+ units including 8-10 partner Nations. As the Arctic
becomes more competitive, Army forces must be able to operate in these
extremely demanding environments to fulfill operational demands across
the competition continuum. U.S. Army Pacific utilizes its exportable
Joint Pacific Multinational Readiness Capacity (JPMRC) in Alaska to
execute the Army's top-tier collective live training events in arctic
conditions.
Army units acquainted with arctic warfighting scenarios include:
11th Airborne Division, 10th Mountain Division, VT ARNG, MN ARNG, MI
ARNG. The Army builds individual and Institutional expertise in various
elements of arctic warfighting at the Vermont Army National Guard's
Mountain Warfare and at the Fort Greeley, AK Northern Warfare Training
Center. USAREUR assigned or attached units regularly train with NATO
allies in arctic conditions (high altitude, low temperatures,
mountainous terrain), most recently in an exercise with 3rd Brigade,
10th Mountain Division in Finland.
The Army, through USARPAC and FORSCOM's Joint Readiness Training
Center (JRTC), exports a training mission to Alaska each winter from
the Joint Pacific Multinational Readiness Center (JPMRC) that provides
a Brigade-level unit and enablers with a collective live training event
in contested arctic conditions. However, no Alaska National Guard units
are scheduled to participate in any Alaskan JPMRC exercises in the near
future.
The Army has not consulted with the Navy on their most recent ICEX
exercise in the Arctic Circle, but will engage to ensure we incorporate
their lessons.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MRS. MCCLAIN
Mrs. McClain. The benefits of commercial off-the-shelf technology
have proven to be undeniably important as we work to achieve full Army
modernization. The Infantry Squad Vehicle (ISV), which achieved full-
rate production last year, is a proven platform that clearly
demonstrates how leveraging COTS products leads to efficiency in
schedule, procurement, and cost.
The Army recognizes the value of this platform and requested in
their Fiscal Year 2025 Unfunded Priority List (UPL) an additional
$44.1M in procurement dollars for the ISV to supplement that
President's base budget of $34.4M.
Given the ISV UPL request, can Congress assume that this platform
is needed at a more rapid fielding pace than originally planned and
will the acceleration of ISV help the Army achieve its latest force
design initiative? As the Army looks to modernize several fleets of
older and less agile vehicles, including the HMMWV, is the Army
considering taking the best of this COTS platform and leveraging its
different variants beyond the traditional ISV-9 to procure one vehicle
that can answer the call to many missions?
Secretary Wormuth. In May 2019, the Army decided to procure 649
ISVs, 11 sets of 59. We have currently fielded 7 of the 11 sets of
ISVs. The Army is currently conducting a mobility and force design
assessment with 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 101st Airborne Division (Air
Assault) through 4th quarter FY 2024 to better inform ISV densities/
fielding in 1st quarter FY 2025 that support the entirety of the IBCT
mission roles. We currently have a fielding plan approved by the Army
staff through FY 2025.
The Army must balance many competing demands and is focused on
providing the best Army with the resources it has. The CSA is required
by law to submit a UPL. ISV was included on the UPL in order to
accelerate procurement, in the event that Congress desires to
appropriate additional money above the PB request. We urge Congress to
fully fund the base budget first.
The ongoing mobility and force design assessment will include a
recommendation on potentially using the ISV as a replacement for
HMMWVs/ MRAPs/JLTVs in select mission roles in IBCTs, and for variants
other than the current nine-seat troop transport configuration. A
common vehicle in an IBCT has always been part of the consideration to
reduce maintenance, sustainment, and parts burdens while mitigating
safety concerns with standardized drivers training.
Mrs. McClain. As part of efforts to modernize its tactical wheeled
vehicle fleets, the Army is looking into leveraging the benefits of
hybrid propulsion technology and vehicle electrification, as seen e
Electric Light Reconnaissance Vehicle (eLRV) platform. Hybrid
propulsion systems integrate traditional combustion engine technology
with battery technology to enhance lethality by reducing acoustic and
thermal signatures.
The most important, and often undervalued, benefits these
propulsion systems offer the soldier all relate to increased lethality:
a substantial increase in time on missions and time on station with
reduced risk of detection, reduced logistical burdens, and the option
to offboard power to additional pieces of soldier kit.
Can you provide answers to the following: What are the primary
mission capabilities and roles envisioned for the Electric Light
Reconnaissance Vehicle (eLRV) within the Army's operational framework?
Is the eLRV proposal timeline and award on pace with the current plan
or do you anticipate that program slipping to the right? How does the
hybrid electric propulsion technology impact the operational range and
endurance of the tactical wheeled vehicles, especially in comparison to
conventional propulsion systems? Are there any notable benefits or
limitations associated with the adoption of hybrid electric propulsion
technology in tactical wheeled vehicles, and how are these being
addressed?
Secretary Wormuth. The eLRV's primary mission capabilities and
roles include enabling both mounted and dismounted Reconnaissance and
Security (R&S) missions, while complementing he M10 Booker Combat
Vehicle and Infantry Squad Vehicle (ISV) to enhance the lethality,
mobility, and survivability of the Infantry executing Cross-Domain
Maneuver. The requirement was rescinded on 29 March 2024. This decision
is a result of the Army's ongoing analysis of lessons learned from the
war in Ukraine and conflict in the Middle East. Reductions outlined in
Army Structure (ARSTRUC) Memorandum 2025-2029, reduces the requirement
for an Infantry Brigade Combat Team six-seat reconnaissance/heavy
weapons vehicle as the Army will conduct reconnaissance with a layered
system of space-based and aerial assets.
As highlighted in the earlier question, the requirement was
rescinded on 29 March 2024. This decision is a result of reductions
outlined in Army Structure (ARSTRUC) Memorandum 2025-2029, which
reduces the requirement for an Infantry Brigade Combat Team six-seat
reconnaissance/heavy weapons vehicle.
Series Hybrid electric propulsion increases both the operational
range and duration as compared to conventional internal combustion
engines from 30% to 60% at standard temperature and grade.
Hybrid electric propulsion will provide a substantial competitive
advantage through silent mobility and silent watch capabilities,
reduction in acoustic and thermal signature, onboard and exportable
power, increased operational duration, and sustainment demand
reduction. Limitations include impacts to facilities, maintainers, and
transportation.
Mrs. McClain. In last year's NDAA, the Army was directed to develop
a tactical wheeled vehicle strategy that will help Congress understand
the necessary tactical wheeled vehicle force structure capabilities
that meet the national security strategy requirements. While developing
that strategy, the Army was directed to examine a variety of objectives
ranging from fleet operations, mobility, the industrial base,
technological advances that may increase efficiency and reduce fuel
demand, and existing commercial technologies such as vehicle
electrification, autonomous capabilities, and predictive maintenance
that could improve the readiness and capabilities of the tactical
wheeled vehicle fleet.
I am further aware that the Army currently has in its kit the
Infantry Squad Vehicle that incorporates the best of advanced
commercial technology into a light and agile platform that excels in
areas of operations where maneuverability and reduced logistical
burdens is critical, such as the Indo Pacific.
After accounting for these objectives and examining the current
fleet configuration, did the Army decide to shift direction on
previously planned vehicle procurement strategies?
Has a deeper consideration of the benefits of leveraging commercial
technologies and needs to reduce readiness burdens highlighted gaps or
need for acceleration in some families of light tactical vehicles?
Secretary Wormuth. The Army is currently reviewing its tactical
wheeled vehicle strategy and will submit a comprehensive report as
requested by the FY 2024 National Defense Authorization Act no later
than July 1, 2024. This report will outline the current and future
investment strategy for light, medium, and heavy tactical vehicles, and
the plan for leveraging commercial technologies as we modernize the
fleet of tactical wheeled vehicles.
Mrs. McClain. Can you explain how is the Army's Contested Logistics
CFT is informing the Army's force structure planning and major program
priorities relative to reducing fuel demand and increasing the reach
(both vehicle and weapon range) of our combat forces? I'd like to also
understand if reduced thermal and acoustic signatures, which add
several layers of protection and ultimately increase mission success,
are being incorporated into that planning and prioritization. I'd like
to better understand how you are analyzing and weighing the
vulnerability of the logistics forces ABCTs, SBCTs and IBCTs and if
those vulnerabilities are causing you to re-think or examine future
logistics forces needs, with specific emphasis on weight, fuel, and
signature reduction?
Secretary Wormuth. The Contested Logistics (CL) CFT and FCC are
developing a concept for a semi/fully autonomous resupply network (sea,
air, ground capability). This concept will inform force structure
planning through optimized Human Machine Integrated formations
capitalizing on the strengths of both humans and machines to maximize
Commanders' operational reach and endurance.
Additionally, the CL CFT is working with partners across the Army
and Joint services to provide advanced power solutions and technologies
to reduce the tactical / operational logistics burden and are exploring
ways to utilize advanced manufacturing, alternative fuels, and new
materials that reduce weight and delivery time of required ammunition,
repair parts, fuel/energy resupply, and items like food & water.
The CFT is writing capability documents for Predictive Logistics /
Precision Sustainment which will enable commanders to make data
informed sustainment decisions. By employment of predictive and precise
sustainment, commanders will also be able to anticipate requirements in
denied, degraded, intermittent, and limited (DDIL) environments.
Through requirements and capabilities development processes, CL CFT
efforts will align with the need for platforms and formations to reduce
and manage thermal, acoustic, and electro-magnetic (EM) signatures to
navigate an environment of anticipated constant surveillance and
observation from peer adversaries. The CL CFT is also leveraging
industry best practices to seek solutions to these areas.
Mrs. McClain. The benefits of commercial off-the-shelf technology
have proven to be undeniably important as we work to achieve full Army
modernization. The Infantry Squad Vehicle (ISV), which achieved full-
rate production last year, is a proven platform that clearly
demonstrates how leveraging COTS products leads to efficiency in
schedule, procurement, and cost. The Army recognizes the value of this
platform and requested in their Fiscal Year 2025 Unfunded Priority List
(UPL) an additional $44.1M in procurement dollars for the ISV to
supplement that President's base budget of $34.4M.
Given the ISV UPL request, can Congress assume that this platform
is needed at a more rapid fielding pace than originally planned and
will the acceleration of ISV help the Army achieve its latest force
design initiative? As the Army looks to modernize several fleets of
older and less agile vehicles, including the HMMWV, is the Army
considering taking the best of this COTS platform and leveraging its
different variants beyond the traditional ISV-9 to procure one vehicle
that can answer the call to many missions?
General George. In May 2019, the Army decided to procure 649 ISVs,
11 sets of 59. We have currently fielded 7 of the 11 sets of ISVs. The
Army is currently conducting a mobility and force design assessment
with 2nd Brigade Combat Team, 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault)
through 4th quarter FY 2024 to better inform ISV densities/fielding in
1st quarter FY 2025 that support the entirety of the IBCT mission
roles. We currently have a fielding plan approved by the Army staff
through FY 2025.
The Army must balance many competing demands and is focused on
providing the best Army with the resources it has. The CSA is required
by law to submit a UPL. ISV was included on the UPL in order to
accelerate procurement, in the event that Congress desires to
appropriate additional money above the PB request. We urge Congress to
fully fund the base budget first.
The ongoing mobility and force design assessment will include a
recommendation on potentially using the ISV as a replacement for
HMMWVs/ MRAPs/JLTVs in select mission roles in IBCTs, and for variants
other than the current nine-seat troop transport configuration. A
common vehicle in an IBCT has always been part of the consideration to
reduce maintenance, sustainment, and parts burdens while mitigating
safety concerns with standardized drivers training.
Mrs. McClain. As part of efforts to modernize its tactical wheeled
vehicle fleets, the Army is looking into leveraging the benefits of
hybrid propulsion technology and vehicle electrification, as seen e
Electric Light Reconnaissance Vehicle (eLRV) platform. Hybrid
propulsion systems integrate traditional combustion engine technology
with battery technology to enhance lethality by reducing acoustic and
thermal signatures.
The most important, and often undervalued, benefits these
propulsion systems offer the soldier all relate to increased lethality:
a substantial increase in time on missions and time on station with
reduced risk of detection, reduced logistical burdens, and the option
to offboard power to additional pieces of soldier kit.
Can you provide answers to the following: What are the primary
mission capabilities and roles envisioned for the Electric Light
Reconnaissance Vehicle (eLRV) within the Army's operational framework?
Is the eLRV proposal timeline and award on pace with the current plan
or do you anticipate that program slipping to the right? How does the
hybrid electric propulsion technology impact the operational range and
endurance of the tactical wheeled vehicles, especially in comparison to
conventional propulsion systems? Are there any notable benefits or
limitations associated with the adoption of hybrid electric propulsion
technology in tactical wheeled vehicles, and how are these being
addressed?
General George. The eLRV's primary mission capabilities and roles
include enabling both mounted and dismounted Reconnaissance and
Security (R&S) missions, while complementing he M10 Booker Combat
Vehicle and Infantry Squad Vehicle (ISV) to enhance the lethality,
mobility, and survivability of the Infantry executing Cross-Domain
Maneuver. The requirement was rescinded on 29 March 2024.
This decision is a result of the Army's ongoing analysis of lessons
learned from the war in Ukraine and conflict in the Middle East.
Reductions outlined in Army Structure (ARSTRUC) Memorandum 2025-2029,
reduces the requirement for an Infantry Brigade Combat Team six-seat
reconnaissance/heavy weapons vehicle as the Army will conduct
reconnaissance with a layered system of space-based and aerial assets.
As highlighted in the earlier question, the requirement was
rescinded on 29 March 2024. This decision is a result of reductions
outlined in Army Structure (ARSTRUC) Memorandum 2025-2029, which
reduces the requirement for an Infantry Brigade Combat Team six-seat
reconnaissance/heavy weapons vehicle.
Series Hybrid electric propulsion increases both the operational
range and duration as compared to conventional internal combustion
engines from 30% to 60% at standard temperature and grade.
Hybrid electric propulsion will provide a substantial competitive
advantage through silent mobility and silent watch capabilities,
reduction in acoustic and thermal signature, onboard and exportable
power, increased operational duration, and sustainment demand
reduction. Limitations include impacts to facilities, maintainers, and
transportation.
Mrs. McClain. In last year's NDAA, the Army was directed to develop
a tactical wheeled vehicle strategy that will help Congress understand
the necessary tactical wheeled vehicle force structure capabilities
that meet the national security strategy requirements.
While developing that strategy, the Army was directed to examine a
variety of objectives ranging from fleet operations, mobility, the
industrial base, technological advances that may increase efficiency
and reduce fuel demand, and existing commercial technologies such as
vehicle electrification, autonomous capabilities, and predictive
maintenance that could improve the readiness and capabilities of the
tactical wheeled vehicle fleet.
I am further aware that the Army currently has in its kit the
Infantry Squad Vehicle that incorporates the best of advanced
commercial technology into a light and agile platform that excels in
areas of operations where maneuverability and reduced logistical
burdens is critical, such as the Indo Pacific.
After accounting for these objectives and examining the current
fleet configuration, did the Army decide to shift direction on
previously planned vehicle procurement strategies?
Has a deeper consideration of the benefits of leveraging commercial
technologies and needs to reduce readiness burdens highlighted gaps or
need for acceleration in some families of light tactical vehicles?
General George. The Army is currently reviewing its tactical
wheeled vehicle strategy and will submit a comprehensive report as
requested by the FY 2024 National Defense Authorization Act no later
than July 1, 2024. This report will outline the current and future
investment strategy for light, medium, and heavy tactical vehicles, and
the plan for leveraging commercial technologies as we modernize the
fleet of tactical wheeled vehicles.
Mrs. McClain. Can you explain how is the Army's Contested Logistics
CFT is informing the Army's force structure planning and major program
priorities relative to reducing fuel demand and increasing the reach
(both vehicle and weapon range) of our combat forces?
I'd like to also understand if reduced thermal and acoustic
signatures, which add several layers of protection and ultimately
increase mission success, are being incorporated into that planning and
prioritization.
I'd like to better understand how you are analyzing and weighing
the vulnerability of the logistics forces ABCTs, SBCTs and IBCTs and if
those vulnerabilities are causing you to re-think or examine future
logistics forces needs, with specific emphasis on weight, fuel, and
signature reduction?
General George. The Contested Logistics (CL) CFT and FCC are
developing a concept for a semi/fully autonomous resupply network (sea,
air, ground capability).
This concept will inform force structure planning through optimized
Human Machine Integrated formations capitalizing on the strengths of
both humans and machines to maximize Commanders' operational reach and
endurance.
Additionally, the CL CFT is working with partners across the Army
and Joint services to provide advanced power solutions and technologies
to reduce the tactical / operational logistics burden and are exploring
ways to utilize advanced manufacturing, alternative fuels, and new
materials that reduce weight and delivery time of required ammunition,
repair parts, fuel/energy resupply, and items like food & water.
The CFT is writing capability documents for Predictive Logistics /
Precision Sustainment which will enable commanders to make data
informed sustainment decisions. By employment of predictive and precise
sustainment, commanders will also be able to anticipate requirements in
denied, degraded, intermittent, and limited (DDIL) environments.
Through requirements and capabilities development processes, CL CFT
efforts will align with the need for platforms and formations to reduce
and manage thermal, acoustic, and electro-magnetic (EM) signatures to
navigate an environment of anticipated constant surveillance and
observation from peer adversaries. The CL CFT is also leveraging
industry best practices to seek solutions to these areas.
Mrs. McClain. I'm very supportive of the Abrams' modernization and
think it's critical to ensure the Abrams remains the world's premier
battle tank.
Given the Department's resource constraints, how is the Army
evaluating modernization of major subsystems that reduce risk to the
M1E3 development and is applicable to the Abrams SepV3 and the M1E3?
General George. The Army's objective is to develop the M1E3 Abrams
as a lighter, more survivable main battle tank. The Abrams team is
reducing program risk by evaluating current technologies, coupled with
Soldier touchpoints, while complying with the latest architecture
standards to facilitate quicker technology upgrades.
The Army anticipates competition for the replacement and upgrade of
major subsystems. Activities to date have informed reduced crew
operations, full digital vehicle control, and delivered a government
owned open systems architecture to enable fast software and hardware
iterations for improved operating capability. This approach enables the
Army to rapidly design an Abrams M1E3 that is both initially more
effective and retains overmatch on future battlefields.
It will also enhance the efficacy and maneuverability of Armored
Brigade Combat Teams in conflicts across the globe through a reduced
sustainment footprint and increased operational and tactical mobility.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GIMENEZ
Mr. Gimenez. Where does the role of AI play out in the Army's
Modernization Strategy? How important will AI be in the next war? How
are you budgeting and accounting for this technology for the fight
tomorrow, in 10 years, and for the Army of 2040?
Secretary Wormuth. AI will play an integrating role in Army
capability modernization and transformation efforts. Whether it is
through automation of workflows and gaining efficiencies for Army
capabilities as we transform in contact.
Or through reducing cognitive and physical burdens through
employing Human Machine Integrated Formations and AI enabled command
and coordination as we conduct deliberate transformation. Or even
aligning AI concepts and capabilities into the design of concept driven
transformation, AI will integrate with and enhance the abilities of
Commanders and the formations they lead to understand themselves and
our adversaries, and act on the massive amounts of data that drive
their decisions and actions at speed.
This manifests through investing in digital transformation and the
modernization of the Army's underlying network and computer
infrastructure. These investments will allow the Army to take advantage
of machine learning, AI technologies, and applications to understand,
visualize, decide, and direct faster than our competitors.
AI will be relevant to the next war as evidenced by what we are
seeing in current conflicts and broad industry and societal adoption.
AI is enabling the gathering and processing of information at speeds
beyond human capacity and distances beyond physical line of sight
enabling employment of robotic and autonomous systems in ways that are
preserving the Army's ability to employ our most important capability,
the Soldier in a manner that retains the ability of the commander to
align human effort to the things that humans are proficient at and
machines to those tasks that they are suited for.
The Army is focused on delivering AI solutions at the speed and
place of relevance, so that commanders can make informed, ethical
decisions while staying ahead of competitors.
The Army is aligning resourcing to efforts that are enabling
exploration and demonstration of how the Army will integrate AI into
modernization and efforts to transform formations. We are seeing the
fusion of AI into capabilities ranging from the strategic support area
to formations at the tactical edge. Experimentation and study efforts
will harvest the best approaches and associated materiel and non-
materiel capabilities for incorporation into the design of the future
force.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. FINSTAD
Mr. Finstad. As the Army moves forward with the M1E3 Abrams
modernization program. I understand part of the program's intent is to
improve mobility by reducing the vehicle's weight by 10-15 tons and
increasing fuel efficiency by up to 50% compared to the current tank
configuration.
a. How did the Department establish the fuel efficiency
requirement? b. The weight savings alone would significantly improve
fuel efficiency. What is the analysis of the weight savings on fuel
efficiency? c. Did you consider the increased fuel efficiency achieved
through weight savings when establishing the M1E3 fuel standards? d.
Are you considering factors beyond fuel consumption to include 1)
engine power relative to volume and mass, 2) heat and acoustic
signature, 3) operational capabilities such as acceleration and multi-
fuel consumption, and 4) maintainability? 5) retrofitability, and 6)
life-cycle cost?
General George. The Army did not establish a new fuel efficiency
requirement but is returning to the original range requirements for
Abrams. The intent for the upgrades with M1E3 Abrams is to achieve that
range with lower fuel consumption. The Army conducted experiments at
the Maneuver Battle Lab and Detroit Arsenal which demonstrated the
operational benefits of more fuel- efficient tanks (M1E3) which require
fewer refueling operations to complete their mission.
Analyses conducted to date demonstrates fuel efficiency is slightly
improved with weight savings. Detailed engineering studies conducted at
Detroit Arsenal conclude that achieving the desired increased range
will require lighter vehicle weight and a more fuel efficient
powerpack.
Fuel efficiency standards have not been established for M1E3, nor
any previous version of M1 Abrams tanks. However, the positive effect
of weight savings is a key component of achieving the desired range
requirements, along with more fuel-efficient powerpacks.
The Army is considering all of the above factors as program
decisions are not driven by one factor but by multiple factors to
include fuel efficiency, weight, life-cycle costs, survivability,
sustainability and maneuverability. All these considerations combine to
meet the desired end state and produce the best platform. In
conjunction with the RDTE efforts led by GVSC and the acquisition
activities led by PEO GCS; including their partnerships with industry,
we are exploring advanced capabilities in both modern internal
combustion engines as well as the capabilities noted in hybrid electric
engines.
These initiatives directly contribute to advances in acceleration
and vehicle sprinting, heat reduction, and acoustic signature
reduction. Additionally, these modernization initiatives are focused on
enabling predictive maintenance diagnostics to increase the
maintainability of the overall system.
Mr. Finstad. I understand the Army is exploring a diesel engine to
power the M1E3. Can you detail the rationale for this decision? a. Did
the Army conduct a comprehensive business case analysis that influenced
the decision? If so, did the BCA consider the associated switching
cost?
General George. The Army has not made a decision on a specific
powertrain configuration for M1E3 but is assessing multiple technical
approaches to ensure the Abrams M1E3 program reduces the logistical
footprint and energy consumption. The Abrams M1E3 program is evaluating
powerpack packaging improvements to reduce the integration burden and
increase efficiencies. The Abrams M1E3 program is looking to maximize
commerciality which in turn reduces cost and lowers performance risk.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. SEWELL
Ms. Sewell. We've seen the increasing use and proven effectiveness
of unmanned systems in present day conflicts, such as the war in
Ukraine, the conflict in Israel, and the South China Sea. How is the
Army investing in Fort Novosel to ensure that our current and future
Army Aviators are fully equipped, trained, and ready to effectively
defend against these threats?
General George. The Army is actively adapting and implementing new
strategies in response to insights gained from ongoing conflicts and
projections for future large-scale combat operations. These changes aim
to enhance the Army's capabilities through the increased integration of
drones, robotics, and artificial intelligence.
To accomplish these changes the Army is investing in unmanned
aircraft systems (UAS) and counter-UAS (C-UAS) initiatives across the
Army that are designed to ensure we are equipped and trained to win in
future conflicts. We need to integrate these capabilities and lessons
learned in all of our formations, at all of our installations.
Examples of the Army's equipping and training investments for UAS
and C-UAS include: start fielding the Future Tactical Unmanned Aircraft
System (FTUAS) by FY 2025; ongoing fielding of Short Range
Reconnaissance (SRR) tranche 1 systems to formations across all Army
Components (COMPO); Commercial-Off-the-Shelf (COTS) UAS initiatives
designed to augment training and innovation across formations; USAACE
and Army professional development program of instruction changes to
build awareness of UAS systems, threats, and considerations across Army
formations; the Army Maneuver Center of Excellence expansion of the UAS
Master Trainer Course to provide UAS expertise within units; inclusion
of a modular open systems architecture (MOSA) within UAS and other
systems that allows addition, modification, replacement, and removal of
system components across the life cycle of a platform; experimentation
with C-UAS and counter-swarm capabilities by employing improved sensors
and off-board LE survivability drones; investment in proximity fused
munitions that are compatible with current launchers in the fleet and
specifically designed to destroy airborne threats; and numerous
counter-UAS programs and training being led by the Army Fires Center of
Excellence with accelerated resourcing and training.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. HORSFORD
Mr. Horsford. Given the increasing desire and need for improving
digital literacy and skills for the warfighter, and Army's recent
announcement of the sunsetting of e-learning, what are the Army's plans
for digital literacy and cyber training? Do you anticipate looking
across the DoD to see how other organizations are addressing this
challenge? How will these plans be funded in order to deliver the tools
and training needed?
Secretary Wormuth. The U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command
(TRADOC) is charged with adding data literacy learning objectives to
common core professional military education (PME) at basic,
intermediate, and senior levels so that all Soldiers have increased
data literacy knowledge and skills as they advance in their careers.
TRADOC will begin initial implementation in June 2024 with full
implementation by 2025. Common core PME data literacy education focuses
on data literacy concepts and not on only technical or product-specific
skills (*digital literacy). Funding will be provided through the Army
Program Objective Memorandum process.
Additionally, in coordination with TRADOC, the Army Research
Institute is developing a rank agnostic, multi-purpose (developmental,
diagnostic, and predictive) data literacy assessment appropriate for
use in PME and the operational force.
Regarding cyber training, the Army's annual Cyber Awareness, online
training, is not affected by the sunsetting of distant digital
education capabilities, nor is the Cyber Center of Excellence's ability
to train Signal and Cyber warriors in the areas of Network
Communication, Signal Operations Support, Information Technology,
SATCOM Systems Operations Maintenance, Data Systems Engineering,
Network Systems Engineering, Data Operations, Network Operations,
Cyberspace Defenses, Cyber Warfare, Capability Development and
Electromagnetic Warfare within established programs of instructions.
This education and training supports the objective to ensure the
Army becomes more data-centric and can conduct operations in contested
environments, which will enable our ability to prevail on the future
battlefield. Distant digital education will continue at a high level
due to the requirement to meet specific needs of Soldiers in other
components of the Army and our Army Civilian Professionals. The Army
still values less travel and more learning, which is why we will
continue to use digital learning systems and processes for the
foreseeable future.
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. MILLS
Mr. Mills. As warfighter lethality is increased through enhanced
capabilities such as the Next Generation Squad Weapon and Integrated
Visual Augmentation System (IVAS), how does the Department plan to
invest in new ballistic material technologies that are needed to reduce
the soldier weight burden in an ever-increasing threat environment?
General George. The Army currently fields the Vital Torso
Protection (VTP) subsystem of the Soldier Protection System (SPS)
Program of Record (PoR) to provide the Soldier with protection against
an array of rifle fired rounds. The current fielded plate is the VTP
Enhanced Small Arms Protection Insert (ESAPI). Current technology
allows for lighter weight plates (Ultra High Molecular Weight
Polyethylene and VTP SAPI plates) while providing protection against a
sub-set of the threats currently provided by VTP ESAPI. (Actual threats
and ranges of protection are classified and can be provided in a
separate document).
The current consensus of the S&T, Requirements, and Materiel
Development activities, as informed by the intelligence community, is
the VTP SAPI is the body armor plate the Army should use to equip the
Close Combat Force (CCF). It represents a significant reduction in
weight over VTP ESAPI and XSAPI while still providing protection
against the most relevant threats of our potential peer/near-peer
adversaries. The Army should also retain the VTP ESAPI to serve as a
higher level of protection for both CCF and non-CCF, as required.
There is also an ultra-lightweight plate (VTP ULWSAPI) that could
also serve as one of a family of plates when the threat is well known
and Soldier load factors into the risk profile. The AFC team will
continue to investigate body armor requirements and specifications to
continue to drive all weights down over time.
Mr. Mills. I understand that the Army's High Accuracy Detection and
Exploitation System (HADES) program has an unfulfilled alt-navigation
requirement. What is the Army's plan to fill this critical requirement
gap and ensure HADES is able to accomplish its critical intelligence-
gathering mission in a GPS-denied environment?
General George. HADES will rely on multiple technologies to
continue mission operations in GPS-contested and denied environments.
HADES will be equipped with the LN-251 Inertial Navigation System
(INS)/GPS with Selective Availability/Anti-Spoofing Module (SAASM), the
Advanced Tactical Navigator (ATACNAV) system, and the Multi-Platform
Anti-Jam GPS Navigation Antenna-Federated (MAGNA-F).
The LN-251 Inertial Navigation System/GPS fiber-optic gyro (FOG)
employs one of three independent navigation solutions as operational
conditions dictate: blended INS/GPS, INS-only, and GPS-only. The
Advanced Tactical Navigator (ATACNAV) is a high-accuracy inertial
navigation system that produces a pseudo-GPS signal to enable continued
operation of onboard GPS-based system elements during denied/degraded
GPS environments.
The MAGNA-F antenna provides a high level of assurance and protects
GPS signals supporting PNT to different receivers simultaneously. HADES
will also be equipped with precise timing through a Chip Scale Atomic
Clock (CSAC).
The Special Electronic Mission Aircraft Product Office is employing
an incremental acquisition strategy coupled with a modular open system
architecture (MOSA). This approach will facilitate continuous
capability enhancement matched with available technology and resources,
to include: celestial-aided navigation, vision-aided navigation, and
magnetic anomaly-aided navigation. All of these would increase the
navigation assurance and redundancy in GPS-denied operational
environments.

[all]
