[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.
[H.A.S.C. No. 118-29]

HEARING

ON

NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

AND

OVERSIGHT OF PREVIOUSLY AUTHORIZED PROGRAMS

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS HEARING

ON

FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST FOR MILITARY READINESS

__________

HEARING HELD
APRIL 19, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-874                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           JOHN GARAMENDI, California
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana              VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                MARC VEASEY, Texas

Patrick Nevins, Professional Staff Member
Jeanine Womble, Professional Staff Member
Ethan Pelissier, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative from California, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Readiness..............................     3
Waltz, Hon. Michael, a Representative from Florida, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Readiness......................................     1

WITNESSES

Allvin, Gen David. W., USAF, Vice Chief of Staff, United States
Air Force......................................................     8
Franchetti, ADM Lisa M., USN, Vice Chief of Naval Operations,
United States Navy.............................................     6
George, GEN Randy A., USA, Vice Chief of Staff, United States
Army...........................................................     4
Smith, Gen Eric M., USMC, Assistant Commandant, United States
Marine Corps...................................................     7
Thompson, Gen David D., USSF, Vice Chief of Space Operations,
United States Space Force......................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Allvin, Gen David. W.........................................    80
Franchetti, ADM Lisa M.......................................    42
Garamendi, Hon. John.........................................    28
George, GEN Randy A..........................................    30
Smith, Gen Eric M............................................    63
Thompson, Gen David D........................................    94
Waltz, Hon. Michael..........................................    27

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Mr. Gimenez..................................................   107

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Finstad..................................................   120
Mr. Garamendi................................................   119
Mr. Rogers...................................................   111
Mr. Strong...................................................   121
Mr. Waltz....................................................   115

FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST FOR MILITARY READINESS

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Readiness,
Washington, DC, Wednesday, April 19, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 3:44 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Michael Waltz
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MICHAEL WALTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
FLORIDA, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Waltz. Call to order this hearing of the Readiness
Subcommittee of the fiscal year 2024 budget request for
military readiness.
I ask unanimous consent that the Chair be authorized to
declare a recess at any time. Without objection, so ordered.
We obviously have a lot to discuss today and you all have--
everyone has my apologies for running a few minutes behind.
That is what happens when my team lets me disappear into a SCIF
[secure compartmentalized information facility] with HPSCI
[House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence].
We have a lot to, obviously we have a lot to discuss as it
pertains to readiness. I want to thank all of your for time in
having our one-on-one meetings in the run-up to this hearing.
Lots to talk about: pilot shortages, recruiting/retention,
weapon system sustainment, infrastructure management and
restoration, just to name a few. I would like to highlight the
detriments of operating under a continuing resolution. I want
to highlight that as much for my colleagues here, as all of our
Vices well know.
That without an on-time budget, the Department is unable--
and I think this is lost a lot of times in the conversation
here--that the Department is unable to begin any new projects.
I am convinced that there is an underlying belief here that the
Department gets a lot money. And if it gets the same amount of
money as last year, then everybody will be okay.
But not having those new starts is just critical and
devastating. I ask the witnesses to elaborate these, as you
make your--on these effects as you make your comments.
I do remain concerned with this administration's continuing
priority on climate change. I want to be clear that we have to
deal with climate change, that resiliency is absolutely an
important issue.
But as we had today with the Secretary of the Army, when we
are outfitting our bases and our fleet with things that come
from the--our greatest adversary, with panels, with turbines,
with technology, with software that it literally comes from
China, I have real concerns with our control of that supply
chain as we move towards transitioning our fleet.
In fact, you know, in addition to that, the Secretary of
the Navy recently stated that climate change is a top priority
of his. Yet we stand to have those same supply chain issues. I
am supportive of efforts to increase resiliency, I want to be
clear there. But these policies can't be an end to themselves.
I am also concerned, just to be candid here, and we have
had these conversations of what we are seeing within the
Department of the Navy with regards to amphibs [amphibious
assault ships]. And we want to talk about that today.
And in fact, the Marine Corps' number one unfunded
requirement is a ship for the Navy. And that is something that
we have to resolve. We will help you resolve it here.
But I think that is endemic of an ongoing issue. And years
of delayed maintenance due to high OPTEMPO [operations tempo]
frankly has gutted the readiness of our amphibs. This has led
to delayed deployments for ARG-MEUs [amphibious ready group-
Marine expeditionary units], and decreased capacity with our
ships at sea.
These are obviously critical capabilities to INDOPACOM
[U.S. Indo-Pacific Command] and that combatant commander, and I
remain somewhat baffled as to why these problems persist. I
applaud force modernization taking place across the services.
We support the Army's REARMM [Regionally Aligned Readiness and
Modernization Model] and the Marine Corps' Force Design 2030.
I am concerned, however, about the timeliness of these
efforts, and you will continue, Ranking Member Garamendi and I
think agree on this, that the timelines for the threats don't
match the timelines to get our readiness in shape and to get
our modernization in shape. And I am eager to hear how the
services have revised and accelerated these timelines to
counter China's ambitions.
And finally, taking care of our soldiers, taking care of
our service members across the board is the utmost
responsibility of everybody here in this room. Service
leadership continuously touts the rhetoric of people first. But
when we look at some of our facilities, when we look at some of
the living conditions for our service members, I still remain
skeptical of this actually being put into practice.
And so the condition of some of this housing truly is
outstanding. It no doubt affects retention. We must provide
safe barracks and housing to our service members and put their
welfare first to match, have our budget match the priority.
So I just look forward to hearing from everybody here
today. And I hand over to you, Mr. Garamendi, for your opening
comments.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Waltz can be found in the
Appendix on page 27.]

STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON READINESS

Mr. Garamendi. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am delighted to
work with you. I am pleased to hear your interest and support
for climate change issues. And you are quite right about
addressing that issue using Chinese materials.
That is why we wrote into almost--well, in all of the
infrastructure and the energy issues of the future very strong
buy-America requirements. And so we need to push the American
industry into the manufacturing of these systems, from solar
panels to turbines and the like.
And we can do that, and that is also an issue for the
military. Are they buying American-made equipment for their
ships and planes, or are they buying others. And complex issue,
but a very, very important one.
So each year as we prepare for this hearing, I am struck by
the vast jurisdiction of the Readiness Subcommittee. As I often
say, other subcommittees get to buy the new, bright, shiny
stuff, and it is left to us to maintain it and keep it
operating.
And so in this subcommittee, we need to pay particular
attention to the facilities that support this equipment, that
sustain the modernization of the weapon systems themselves, and
in which the men and women of the military are trained.
So we have an enormous task here. And over the years, both
the minority and the majority as it has changed over time have
paid attention to this issue, as you are Mr. Chairman, and I
thank you for that.
Now, we have also learned from Putin's immoral invasion of
Ukraine that many of the issues that we have dealt with over
the years here trying to make sure that the--that our military
is ready in every way has brought to the attention and to the
forefront many of our concerns.
We have been forced to think about the organic industrial
base, which was heretofore not with this committee, but with
the--even the larger committee often ignored.
And so in this budget request, I am finally seeing evidence
that we are getting serious about the modernization of the
depots, the shipyards, the infrastructure, the bases, the
housing, and all of the rest. And we need to continue to push
that.
I know that you intend to do that, Mr. Chairman, and I hope
that the members of this subcommittee will continue also with
that effort.
Through the media, we have also watched the cost of
Russia's other readiness failures for the Russians. We have
watched its equipment fail because it was poorly sustained and
maintained. And we have witnessed the cost of poorly trained
troops, Russian troops. We cannot let that happen, and it falls
to this subcommittee to make sure that as we go forward, that
we are fully prepared.
There is another piece of this puzzle that falls within the
jurisdiction beyond the training of the troops. And that is
that we have to make sure that the access to sustain the fight
is available. And so we will be working on that also.
Now, the Comptroller General has analyzed that the
readiness of our weapon systems over the course of years has
not been good enough. When we analyze the aircraft type, the
majority of the systems in our inventory fail to--by more than
10 percent below the Department's own mission capability rate
goals.
So we have to continue to work on this issue.
Cannibalization seems to be the way in which we keep most of
the fleet, whether that is an aircraft or it is a truck or a
plane or a tank, or a ship, cannibalization seems to be the way
in which we keep these things operating. That doesn't work for
long.
And so we need to pay attention to that as we have in the
past, and we must continue to make sure that all of the
equipment has the necessary parts and pieces on time when
necessary.
So I am looking forward to the hearing today, our witnesses
as they discuss these issues, what they have learned or the
lessons they have learned. And it will be displayed in this
year's budget.
And we are certainly seeing the lessons in Ukraine. More
importantly, what we are doing to operationalize those lessons
that have been learned from Ukraine and beyond.
So, look forward to working with you, Mr. Chairman. Look
forward to working with the members of the committee, the
subcommittee, and we will push along. Thank you very much.
Yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garamendi can be found in
the Appendix on page 28.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Garamendi. I'd like to again
welcome our witnesses and thank them for their participation
today.
We are joined by General Randy George, the Vice Chief of
the Army; Admiral Lisa Franchetti, the Vice Chief of Naval
Operations; General Eric Smith, Assistant Commandant of the
Marine Corps; and General David Allvin, Vice Chief Staff of the
Air Force; General DT Thompson, Vice Chief of Space Operations.
General George, over to you for your opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF GEN RANDY A. GEORGE, USA, VICE CHIEF OF STAFF,
UNITED STATES ARMY

General George. Okay, thanks, Chairman.
Chairman Waltz, Ranking Member Garamendi, distinguished
members of this subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the readiness posture of our Army.
Eighty years ago, American troops were fully engaged in the
allied war effort in Europe, in Africa, and in the Indo-
Pacific. Among them was a company of soldiers holding a
roadblock near a village at Sanananda in northern New Guinea.
They were enduring malarial fevers, venomous snakes, torrential
rains, and holding off a perpetual onslaught of competent enemy
fighters.
I reflect on this because it reminds me that our Army must
be ready for anything. We must be ready to deter war, and if
deterrence fails, to take the fight to the enemy anywhere
around the globe, even in the most hostile environments, just
as we have always done.
It also reminds me that warfighting is a team effort. It
takes teams on the ground, like at Sanananda, and teams at
every echelon above providing a menu of lethal options to our
combatant commanders.
Our Army is focused on warfighting and training for battle
in which all domains are contested. And we are focused on
supporting our combatant commands with ready formations around
the world. And right now we have 137,000 soldiers in over 140
countries.
We are strengthening our partnership with defense industry
and rapidly modernizing our organic industrial base to increase
productivity and ensure that we have the stocks to fight when
called upon.
We are deterring the pacing challenge China by exercising
and campaigning across the Indo-Pacific theater and holding the
line in the European theater along our NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization]--alongside our NATO partners. All the
while, adapting in real time to lessons learned from the war in
Ukraine and rapidly incorporating new tactics into our doctrine
and our training.
But readiness for today is not enough. Our Army is also
transforming, because honestly we don't have an option. Warfare
is changing, and we must change because of it to ensure we stay
ahead of our potential adversaries.
So among many things, we are modernizing long-range
precision fires, air and missile defense, ground combat
capabilities, and developing counter-UAS [unmanned aerial
systems] capabilities and doctrine.
Finally, we are building the team. And like I said,
warfighting is a team effort. This includes providing
commanders with the resources they need to support soldiers'
mental and physical well-being, to maintain a healthy command
climate, and to built cohesive teams.
And it means investing in the quality of life of our
soldiers and our families, ensuring that they have safe housing
in barracks, adequate childcare, and spouse employment
opportunities.
I will end with recruitment, a critical readiness priority
for us right now. We are challenged by the fact that a small
number of young Americans, 23 percent, are qualified to serve.
Fewer still, we are finding, are interested in serving. And
that is something that we are working very hard to change.
Our Army remains a great place to be, and I think our high
retention rates speak to that. The trouble is, many Americans
don't realize it or believe it.
Military service to many people seems like a life setback.
In reality, it is a life accelerator. That has certainly been
my experience since I enlisted as a private right out of high
school.
It is a great team with an important mission and ample
opportunity to learn, grow, and make an impact. And we have to
get that story out, and we are pouring all of our energy into
that effort. And we appreciate Congress' assistance in
amplifying our call-to-service message.
And Chairman, the last on--to answer your question on a
continuing resolution, I will just give you an example from
last year. Over 3 months, we had about 25 new starts that we
were looking to get going and we couldn't because of the
continuing resolution impacted about 1.9 billion.
And you can imagine some of that in there, for example, was
OIB [organic industrial base] modernization that we were trying
to get started. So as you mentioned up front, it is the new
starts that a continuing resolution would be a problem for us.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General George can be found in
the Appendix on page 30.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, General.
Admiral Franchetti, your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ADM LISA M. FRANCHETTI, USN, VICE CHIEF OF NAVAL
OPERATIONS, UNITED STATES NAVY

Admiral Franchetti. Chairman Waltz, Ranking Member
Garamendi, and distinguished members of the committee, good
afternoon. On behalf of the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief
of Naval Operations, thank you for the opportunity to discuss
Navy readiness with you today.
The United States is a maritime nation. Our security and
prosperity depend on the seas. For the past 247 years, your
Navy has stood the watch.
We are America's away team, operating forward to deter war,
protect our economic interests, uphold international law,
ensure freedom of and access to the seas, and respond to crises
and natural disasters. We provide our Nation's leaders with
decision space and options and stand ready to fight and win
when called to do so.
Over the past year, we have safely executed 22,000 steaming
days, almost 1 million flight hours, and participated in nearly
100 exercises. With operations spanning the globe, we have
supported the allied response to Russia's illegal and
unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, conducted freedom of navigation
operations, interdicted illegal narcotics traffickers, and
provided humanitarian assistance.
As I speak, our sailors and Marine Corps counterparts are
deployed on more than 100 ships and submarines around the
world, ready to meet the security needs of our Nation. Our
fiscal year 2024 budget request is consistent with CNO's [Chief
of Naval Operations'] priorities of readiness in sailors, then
capability, then capacity, with the Columbia SSBN [nuclear
ballistic missile submarine] program as our number one
procurement priority.
We continue to prioritize readiness to sustain our forces
through better maintenance performance, more training, improved
parts availability, and increased weapons inventories.
Navy readiness begins with our people, the sailors,
civilians, and families who are the foundation of our true
warfighting advantage. We are committed to improving their
quality of service and personal resilience, investing in
initiatives such as quality housing and childcare, access to
the full continuum of mental healthcare, improved education,
and an environment free of sexual harassment and sexual
assault.
In this 50th anniversary of the All-Volunteer Force, we
continue to focus on recruiting, retention, and reducing gaps
in our billets at sea.
Navy readiness is also centered on the readiness of our
platforms. Using data analytics, improving our planning
processes, and procuring long lead time materials, we have
decreased maintenance delays in public and private shipyards.
But there is more work to be done.
Our budget request fully funds public and private ship
maintenance, aviation depot maintenance, increases parts and
spares, and continues to grow our highly skilled public
shipyard workforce.
Finally, Navy readiness is also driven by the readiness of
our bases. Shore infrastructure is critical, and we continue to
fully fund the once-in-a-century recapitalization of our four
public shipyards through the Shipyard Infrastructure
Optimization Program.
Our budget request supports increased sustainment of our
shore infrastructure while prioritizing restoration and
modernization for water, electrical, and safety systems.
As our strategic competitors continue to improve and
enhance their capabilities, maintaining a responsive, combat-
ready, worldwide deployable Navy is our first line of defense
and deterrence. Sustained readiness investments in today's Navy
are a down payment on American's future security.
I thank the committee for your leadership and partnership
in keeping the world's greatest maritime force ready to fight
and win at sea, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Franchetti can be found
in the Appendix on page 42.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you.
General Smith, your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GEN ERIC M. SMITH, USMC, ASSISTANT COMMANDANT,
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS

General Smith. Chairman Waltz, Ranking Member Garamendi,
and distinguished members of this subcommittee, I am pleased to
appear before you today to discuss Marine Corps readiness and
the fiscal year 2024 budget.
Your Marine Corps remains the Nation's force in readiness.
We are ready to deter adversaries, and when that deterrence
fails, we are ready to strike and enable others to strike.
We also provide the crisis response forces that American
citizens abroad and our allies have come to expect from their
Marines. We provide this expeditionary combined arms force
utilizing the minimum 31 amphibious warships that Congress has
directed.
Those ships provide the organic mobility required to bring
all of our assets to bear at the critical time and place for
our combatant commanders. The most important asset we bring to
bear remains the individual Marine.
Our modernization efforts, known as Force Design, ensure
that we are manned, trained, and equipped to deter a peer
adversary and to campaign to a position of advantage should
deterrence fail and lethal force be needed.
Our modernization efforts are required to fight and win on
future battlefields. About that, we can make no mistake. Our
aviation readiness has increased more than 10 percent in the
past few years, thanks to the work of this subcommittee to
provide us with the operations and maintenance funding we need,
and due to our aviation modernization and reorganization
efforts.
When a Marine expeditionary unit deploys on a big-deck L-
class amphibious warship today, they provide the combatant
commander with 66 percent more fifth-generation aircraft than
before we made Force Design changes.
Our efforts to modernize our training and education are
bearing fruit as we produce an even more lethal Marine. From
our basic rifleman training to our service-level training
exercises, we are becoming more lethal.
Our new training integrates our joint and organic fires,
improved communications, and updated ISR [intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance] to sense, make sense, track,
and destroy targets at ranges and complexities never before
seen by our Marine Corps.
Our individual Marine remains the most lethal weapon on the
battlefield. Our efforts to improve the quality of life for
those warriors, to retain them once we train them, are vital
and important. Your continued support matters to them and their
families, so thank you.
Finally, to your point, Mr. Chairman, I would note that of
the past 10 years, approximately 4 have been spent in a
continuing resolution status. During any CR, we are unable to
improve as rapidly as we might have otherwise done. Our
adversaries don't have that problem.
Your help to deliver on-time and predictable funding to the
18- and 19-year-old lance corporals who do the fighting for our
Nation is sincerely appreciated.
As an example, in the past we had the opportunity to
procure our Amphibious Combat Vehicle faster, but were unable
to do so because of a CR. That leaves older equipment in the
hands of the 18- and 19-year-olds who will fight for us. So the
continuing resolution is absolutely detrimental.
I look forward to answering your questions, and I am
grateful to appear before you.
[The prepared statement of General Smith can be found in
the Appendix on page 63.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, General Smith. General Allvin for
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GEN DAVID. W. ALLVIN, USAF, VICE CHIEF OF STAFF,
UNITED STATES AIR FORCE

General Allvin. Chairman Waltz, Ranking Member Garamendi,
and distinguished committee members, on behalf of our Air Force
Secretary and Chief of Staff, thank you for the opportunity to
discuss the critically important topic of readiness.
We greatly appreciate this body's continued partnership and
support in delivering the resources necessary for the Air Force
to respond to today's threats while preparing for tomorrow.
The events of the past year remind us that global actors
have the capability and intent to challenge peace and
stability. In the case of the pacing challenge, the People's
Republic of China, the speed at which they are developing
advanced capability and capacity should serve as a warning for
us to act with a greater sense of urgency.
We must maintain the necessary advantage to deter them from
violent pursuit of objectives at odds with our national
interests. Your Air Force is laser-focused on this task.
Readiness starts with our airmen, both uniformed and
civilian, who consistently prove to be our greatest strength
and competitive advantage. Since the beginning of the All-
Volunteer Force 50 years ago, we have been fortunate enough to
attract the best of America's youth in sufficient numbers. But
recent realities have put this under pressure.
As a result, we will likely not meet our recruiting goals
this year. We are aggressively exploring multiple options while
streamlining processes to attract a broader pool of those
talented Americans into our formation.
We also know that a ready airman is a focused and resilient
airman. And we must demonstrate that we continue to value our
service members and their families. We will continue to explore
opportunities to expand or initiate programs that better
support quality of life, and we greatly appreciate this
committee's support for these efforts.
The aircrew deficit persists due to several factors, but
this shortage has not extended into the operational units or
the pilot training bases. We are continuing on the path to
transform our approach to pilot training to increase production
while leveraging numerous monetary and non-monetary programs to
retain the experience of those trained aviators.
We look forward to working with the committee on these
programs, as well as our pursuit of targeted relief from
current legislation to enable the hiring of contract simulator
instructors to maximize training and optimize our manpower to
produce those pilots.
While the proposed budget increase--increases weapon system
sustainment funding by $1.1 billion over last year, this will
only still resource 87 percent of the estimated requirement due
to sustainment challenges of our ever-aging fleet, inflation,
supply chain issues, and labor costs.
We are pursuing improvements in reliability and
maintainability, supporting initiatives that advance data-
driven decisions. This drives efficiency in what we do today,
and it enables responsiveness in dynamic wartime environments.
Significant challenges and tough decisions still lie ahead.
We must be thoughtful in adequately funding our readiness
accounts while pursuing the right investments to develop
advanced capabilities to meet future threats. This year we feel
we have struck the right balance.
In closing, I would offer this Congress can make the most
positive impact on our readiness through a timely budget
appropriation. An extended continuing resolution would result
in the inability to start critical new programs and continue
the momentum that we are building to meet the pacing challenge.
It also creates instability in support to our airmen and
families at a time when this has never been more important. A
CR will essentially rob us of something both critical and
irreversible as we face growing threats to our Nation, and that
is time.
So Mr. Garamendi, to your point as well, specifics, and
Chairman Waltz, on a CR. We estimate that the CR will decrease
our buying power for the United States Air Force by $5.4
billion, an extended CR.
The key things that we are looking at that will directly be
impacted by a continuing resolution are the initiation of a
research and development in collaborative combat aircraft. This
is integral to our design to have affordable mass against the
People's Republic of China to be able to gain and maintain air
superiority in a highly contested environment.
These collaborative combat aircraft, we are working not
only the platforms, but developing the autonomy to ensure we
can leverage them with our crewed aircraft, as well as
experimental operational units that we have funded in 2024 to
be able to better integrate into our formations.
And as I mentioned, with the uncertainty, we see this in
every CR. Families that are getting ready to PCS [permanent
change of station] and prepare their families for the schools
they are going to go into, if we don't have the certainty of
being able to do that on time, that just puts more tension into
the families, and it doesn't show that we support them the way
that we should.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Allvin can be found in
the Appendix on page 80.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, General Allvin. And those specifics,
General Smith, yours as well, are incredibly important for us
as we go out to our respective caucuses as we try to get the--
as we try to get this done.
General Thompson.

STATEMENT OF GEN DAVID D. THOMPSON, USSF, VICE CHIEF OF SPACE
OPERATIONS, UNITED STATES SPACE FORCE

General Thompson. Chairman Waltz, Ranking Member Garamendi,
and distinguished members of the subcommittee, on behalf of the
Secretary of the Air Force and Chief of Space Operations, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today regarding the
readiness of the Space Force.
In examining the readiness of the Space Force to accomplish
its missions, the overriding consideration remains the dramatic
shift to the space domain from a comparatively benign military
environment to one that is undeniably contested.
Given that the capabilities and benefits provided from
space are essential to our way of life and crucial to effective
military operations in every other domain, this shift was the
compelling reason for the creation of the Space Force 3\1/2\
years ago.
Since then, with the tremendous support of Congress, the
Space Force, Department of the Air Force, and broader
Department of Defense have moved out aggressively to address
the challenges the Nation faces in space. We have begun to
pivot to more resilient and defendable space architectures that
ensure soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines can count on
space forces across the spectrum of conflict.
We have begun designing and developing satellite
constellations that address the migration of missions to space,
including moving target indication, domain awareness on the
land, at sea, and in the air. Key elements of command and
control and the movement of the data and information enables
the joint force in the way it expects to fight in the future.
Finally, the Space Force has begun to shift to a new
training and readiness approach that I described last year as
the Space Force Generation Model. We achieved initial
capability for this approach on October 1 of last year. Once
complete, it will ensure space forces are combat-ready against
the pacing challenge.
While much remains to be done in each of these areas, the
main challenges of Space Force readiness today are twofold. The
first is creating a combat-ready force that--the first to
creating a combat-ready Space Force is an advanced full-
spectrum test and training infrastructure.
This infrastructure will be a system of systems that
provides test and training opportunities with high-fidelity
mission simulators and threats, a professional aggressor force,
and a suitable range. It will allow us to validate tactics,
test system limitations, and train operators in a live and
synthetic environment against a thinking adversary.
Without this infrastructure, Guardians would not have
defendable systems, proven tactics, or the confidence and
competence they need should it come to conflict in space. The
operational test and training infrastructure will be a force
multiplier, allowing Guardians to maintain and improve our
strategic advantage in space.
The second primary challenge of Space Force readiness lies
in whether budgetary resources will be available in a timely
manner to execute all we are planning to do. As I stated
previously, Congress has been a tremendous partner in defining
and building the Space Force.
In each year since its existence, the Space Force has seen
12-15 percent increases in its budget year over year. The 2024
request is nearly $4 billion more than it was in 2023, a 15
percent increase. In the event of a continuing resolution, that
increased budget authority would not be available to meet our
needs.
This budget request includes at least 17 new initiatives,
many of which are focused on this operational test and training
infrastructure.
Beyond that, new initiatives that were begun in 2023,
already delayed because of the continuing resolution this year,
are programmed for increases in 2024. As a specific example,
the missile warning system that will track advanced hypersonic
threats was begun in 2023. The budget for this vital capability
doubles in 2024, allowing us to deliver real global capability
by 2027.
None of that additional authority and none of the new
starts required for the test and training infrastructure can be
begun during a CR.
The President's fiscal year 2024 budget request affirms the
DOD and Space Force's commitment to a bold, threat-informed
shift. It acknowledges the need for a more robust proliferated
architecture, intelligence-driven space domain awareness,
aggressive cybersecurity, measured investment in space
superiority, and combat-credible forces anchored in a full-
spectrum training enterprise.
The most important thing Congress can do to help us in this
endeavor is pass an on-time budget. Thank you all for your
steadfast partnership and support. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of General Thompson can be found in
the Appendix on page 94.]
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, General. I'm just going to dive right
in. I just have one question, I want to get to other members
that we--since we have votes looming.
Can we just go down the line. I'll start with you, General
George. What are your current projections for your recruiting
shortfalls this year?
General George. Chairman, right now we are doing better
than we were doing. I would say right now we are probably
projecting to be about 55,000. We had set our goal up to be
65,000 this year, which is higher than what we did last year.
So that is where I expect we will----
Mr. Waltz. About 10,000 short.
General George. Yes, sir.
Mr. Waltz. Admiral.
Admiral Franchetti. Chairman, we expect to be about 6,000
short. Also doing better than we started, but about 6,000 short
is our projection.
Mr. Waltz. General.
General Smith. Chairman, the Marine Corps will meet its
recruiting mission this year, as we did last year.
Mr. Waltz. Roger that. Semper fi.
General Allvin. The total force Air Force will be coming in
approximately on this path 10,000 short. That is about 3,400 in
the Active Duty, 3,100 in the Guard, and a little over 4--in
the Reserves, and a little over 4,000 in the Guard.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. General.
General Thompson. Chairman, we have a little different
challenge than the other services. We need about 700 new
recruits off the street, but we still need and will for the
next several years need about 700 interservice transfers from
the other services.
And while we are doing very well in recruiting off the
street, as the other services have challenges in their
recruiting, it becomes more difficult for them to release folks
for interservice transfer.
Mr. Waltz. So will you fall--are you projecting to fall
short in those transfers?
General Thompson. Don't know yet. We will meet our off-the-
street needs. The question will be working with services, how
much can they afford to give us. And we just don't know that
yet. We will need to wait and negotiate later this year.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. And minus the Army, because you are
already doing it, in terms of polling and collecting data on
why we are in this crisis that we are in, will all of you
commit to the committee to begin collecting data, look at
programs, initiate programs to start understanding why this
shortfall is happening?
So I am looking at Navy, Air Force.
Admiral Franchetti. Yes.
General Allvin. Absolutely, Chairman. That is underway and
will continue.
Mr. Waltz. Great, thank you.
Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have had the privilege of meeting with each of the
presenters today ahead of this meeting, and I am going to turn
over my time to Ms. Sherrill.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you. And thank you all for your service
and for your support to our troops across the globe.
It is important that we build and procure clean energy
sources appropriately without influence and ties to our
strategic competitors, who use forced labor, conduct
intellectual property theft, and forced technology transfers.
It can be done. GAF, a national roofing company
headquartered in my district, has been able to successfully
transition from Chinese suppliers to manufacturing and
producing solar panels in domestic facilities in Texas and
California, as well as in Southeast Asian nations including
Vietnam, Cambodia, and Taiwan.
As we work on increasing our energy resiliency, we need to
ensure our Armed Forces are looking at all energy options
available.
And General Smith, we had a discussion yesterday about how
this impacts logistics. Can you talk a little bit about that
discussion and how energy options can improve your logistics
challenges?
General Smith. Yes, ma'am. Logistics is the pacing function
against the pacing threat in the expanse of the Pacific. As a
warfighter, I don't want to move 1 pound that I don't have to
move. I want to reserve every poundage of movement for
lethality.
So if I am, for example, if I don't need to bring diesel to
operate a reverse osmosis water purification unit to produce
water in the middle of the South China Sea, which doesn't seem
to make sense to me to ship water, I want to produce it there,
and I can do that via some other means?
It is about, for me it is about lethality. Because that 8
pounds give or take per gallon, that is 8 pounds of a warhead
that I can bring.
This is about lethality for us. And anything we can do to
move less, and polymer ammo means I could bring more bullets
instead of more casings, that is what we want to do because it
is about warfighting and lethality.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you for that plug for polymer ammo. We
are working on that in my district.
And with that, I will turn it back in the interest of time.
Thank you.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Ms. Sherrill. Mr. Wilson
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank each of you.
I particularly appreciate your service as a 31-year veteran
myself.
And, but I am really grateful to be a Army dad of three
sons who served in Iraq, Egypt, and Afghanistan. I also can
claim the Navy, a son that served in Baghdad. And so I am
really grateful as a doctor. And then I have a nephew in the
Air Force. And one day I will have somebody in the family smart
enough to be in Space Force.
So, but I thank you all for what you do.
And General George, I am so grateful to represent Fort
Jackson. It trains over 50 percent of all soldiers in the basic
combat training facility.
And I am also grateful that what you are doing is
providing, all of you--are providing opportunity for young
people to achieve to their highest level and to be so
meaningful. And that is why I appreciate what you are doing.
And General, there is the Future Soldier prep course. And
can you explain what that is, and how successful it has been?
General George. Yes, sir. It has been very successful for
us. We have come into this, we did not want to lower our
standards. And so the idea of the Future Soldier prep course is
actually to get people to meet our standards.
So they basically come there on average, I would say they
are there 4 or 5 weeks. We have some that need help with the
ASVAB [Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery] testing.
Some that need help with the body fat. And we have seen about a
97 percent success rate, 96, 97 percent on both of those
accounts getting to basic training. So we are really proud of
that program down there at Fort Jackson.
Mr. Wilson. And in lieu of a question because of time, I
just want to commend all of you for the placement of troops in
Eastern Europe to provide for peace through strength with
deterrence. I have met with the military personnel in Poland.
President Donald Trump was ahead of the curve to put troops
there.
I have met with our American troops working at Novo Selo in
Bulgaria with young Bulgarians to be at MK Air Base in Romania
to see success there. And Larissa and Greece. And so over and
over again, to me it is just so important that we have
sufficient military effectiveness backing up our NATO allies to
back up the very courageous people of Ukraine.
So thank you for what you have done. And any other
enterprising maneuvers you can do to back up the people of
Ukraine, I know the chairman and I would appreciate it. Thank
you.
I yield back.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Wilson.
Ms. Tokuda.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
In the interest of time, I am just going to go over a few
questions. Admiral Franchetti, in February the Navy closed
three dry docks at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, and another at
the Trident Refit Facility in Bangor due to seismic concerns, I
believe.
This means that at least right now, of 18 dry docks in our
4 public shipyards, almost a quarter of them are offline at a
time when over one-third of the Navy's attack submarine fleet
desperately needs maintenance and repair.
Admiral Franchetti, given our already limited shipyard
capacity and the growing demand for ship maintenance, what is
the Navy doing to address the challenges posed by these
closures and continue to meet our shipyard needs?
Admiral Franchetti. We are very focused on our shipyards in
general, the focus through SIOP [Shipyard Infrastructure
Optimization Program], but specifically to the shipyards in
Puget Sound. So there are three dry docks that are being
repaired right now.
One of them is already complete and in testing. The other
one should be complete by the beginning of June, and the other
one by late June. So right now we don't see any impact to the
closures of those dry docks.
Separately from that, we are continuing to work through all
of our public shipyards to improve their performance through
project management, fundamentals, workforce development, and
taking a big effort to buy long lead time supply materials in
advance that will help us get our shipyards out--our submarines
out on time.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you, that is very good to hear. Related
to the SIOP and shipbuilding industry industrial base, recently
you may have heard the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural
Resources issued a letter to Navy Region Hawaii about the
discovery of an invasive octocoral, or soft coral species, in
Pearl Harbor.
What was initially 10 acres when discovered back in August
2020 has now grown to be at least 20 acres and is estimated to
be potentially impacting 90 acres.
Unmitigated, the spread of this invasive species has
potential risks to operations at Joint Base Pearl Harbor-
Hickam, including the new Dry Dock 5 at Pearl Harbor Navy
Shipyard. And obviously poses serious threat to our native
corals, but more importantly just the operation of this area.
Can I get your commitment that the Navy is going to work
quickly with us to address and mitigate this invasive soft-
tissue coral so that we can continue operation, and of course
the new dry dock at Pearl Harbor?
Admiral Franchetti. Yes, as part of the SIOP program, the
Navy has been working with the National Marine Fisheries, all
of the interagency, to better understand the problem and
develop that mitigation plan originally for the 9 acres of this
invasive coral. And the cost for that removal effort was
included in the MILCON [military construction].
We are also looking at how do we adopt biosecurity
protocols to mitigate any risk of spreading of the coral for
any work we do there. Right now, we don't anticipate that there
will be impacts to Dry Dock No. 5, but we are continuing again
to work, and you have my commitment, to work with your team and
with everyone to make sure that that does not spread any
further.
Ms. Tokuda. Thank you very much. As you can see, it is
exponentially increasing, and we want to get this addressed
before it impacts. Thank you.
I yield back, Chair.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for being here. I want to
piggyback a little bit on what Ms. Sherrill said just a second
ago. Less than 15 days after China flew a spy balloon across
the United States of America, Ford Motor Company announced a
partnership with Communist China and CATL battery technology.
I want to just make sure that none of our DOD funds are
going to purchase Chinese battery technology or any other
technology that is coming from China. I think that you will see
language to that effect coming in the NDAA [National Defense
Authorization Act]. We are not going to spend U.S. tax dollars
to support Communist China or CATL battery technology.
I don't need you to comment on it, I just need you to be
prepared for it. And if Ford Motor Company decides that is who
is going to develop their batteries, this is America, they have
got the right to decide who is going to develop their
batteries. But we are not going to buy them.
General Allvin, I am going to focus on the Air Force if I
could. Seven months ago, General Kelly, commander of Air Combat
Command, said that he has 48 fighter squadrons, 9 attack
squadrons doing the work of 60 squadrons, 3 squadrons short of
what he needs.
He said he needs 28 fighter squadrons to project power in
the Indo-Pacific region, Europe, and the Middle East; 8
squadrons to respond to an unfolding crisis; 16 squadrons for
homeland defense; 8 squadrons for modernization and training.
We are in pretty much peacetime right now as we speak. Do
you agree with his assessment?
General Allvin. I do, Congressman. And I think the point
that General Kelly was trying to point out is not only that we
can't just count the numbers, but the missions that those
were--are tasked to do. So those 9 attack squadrons are
primarily the A-10 squadrons that aren't as survivable and they
aren't multi-role.
So that is why we are aggressively, in the fiscal year 2024
budget, we are asking for 72 fighters, front-line fighters, to
include 48 F-35s and 24 F-15 EXs, which will enable us to be
able to do those missions and be able to compete and succeed in
the Indo-Pacific theater.
Mr. Scott. But the A-10s are deployed right now, correct?
General Allvin. I'm sorry, sir?
Mr. Scott. A-10s are deployed right now, correct?
General Allvin. They are right now on their--I don't think
they are in CENTCOM [U.S. Central Command], but they are set to
go to CENTCOM in a single-role mission, and they are adapting
to that as we speak.
Mr. Scott. Quantity to me is a quality in and of itself in
some cases, and I do worry about standing down fighter
squadrons when we have an acknowledged need for more squadrons.
But I understand the A-10 is an old platform and it is not
going to be the platform of the future.
You did say over the past two decades that we have offered
forces to the joint force in an unsustainable manner, and the
readiness impact is becoming more apparent in the face of our
pacing challenge.
I assume that means it is safe to say the Air Force needs
more resources to maintain current levels of readiness, and
that our current levels of readiness are not what they have
been in the past?
General Allvin. Congressman, I would say for sure to the
latter, that our readiness is not what it has been in the past.
That is a reference to my written statement.
Primarily the point we are making is in addition to
additional capacity and more modernized capacity, what we do
need is also to reimagine ourselves and understand to be ready
for what? To optimize our training, to make sure we are
generating and presenting the forces in the best way.
In the past, we had just been all in without really looking
at how to focus on the high-end readiness. And so our new Air
Force Generation Model is enabling us to see that and really
hone in on our new mission-essential tasks and get the very
best readiness out of every flying hour that we can get.
Mr. Scott. So when we talk about the best readiness, one of
the concerns I have is when I look at the readiness rate, it is
significantly below where any of us in this room want it to be.
And yet there are two different definitions of readiness.
One of them is able to perform one of the primary missions.
And the other one is able to perform all of the primary
missions.
My understanding is that we are using the definition when
we talk about readiness that they are able to perform one of
the primary missions, not all of the primary missions. Is that
correct?
General Allvin. That is correct in some cases. The
readiness is really talking about the mission-essential tasks,
which as I mentioned, we are rewriting specifically to go
against the China threat. So there is both a shortage of being
able to do the full spectrum of missions----
Mr. Scott. So if I could, again, it is written specifically
for the China threat.
General Allvin. We are adapting it to make the primary
mission the China threat.
Mr. Scott. Okay. And I, again, Mr. Chairman, if I may, in
the--the primary mission being the China threat, and yet less
than 15 days after China flies a spy balloon across the United
States of America, we have one of America's most iconic brands
announcing a multibillion dollar partnership to buy Chinese
battery technology, which they intend and think that they are
actually going to sell to the DOD in some cases.
And I would just encourage you to make sure that you are
not preparing to buy any CATL batteries. Thank you.
Mr. Waltz. I think your sentiment is shared across multiple
supply chains.
Mrs. Kiggans.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And briefly, I know that votes are happening, but just to
echo Mr. Scott about having the corporate buy-in for, I mean,
you guys are doing a great job on the ground and with people
and weapons and lethality. But getting that corporate buy-in.
We are not, this is not a, just a military fight with
China. We have got to get the corporate buy-in as well. So I
fully support everything he just mentioned.
And also to echo the previous comments about ship repair
and shipyards. In my district, I am Hampton Road, so Virginia
Beach, Norfolk. And I hear from those guys all the time about
challenges.
And I know it is, that is multifaceted too, from workforce
to supply chain. But scheduling, gosh, and it is like this,
they want to blame the Navy and the Navy wants to blame them.
So if we could get it together on that front. And I don't
know if that is doing a better job at repairs out at sea
internally what we are doing. But then when they come to port,
making sure that we are staying on schedule.
Because we can't keep this old fleet of ships that is
already fewer numbers that I wish we had at sea if we don't get
our ship repair industry behind. It is not just the shiny new
ships and toys, but we have got to keep those old ones out
there too. So that is important in my district, whatever you
can do to help that.
I just specifically and real quick want to ask about pilot
training. I have asked about this before, but we know that all
of those new toys and wonderful things that we can purchase go
nowhere without the people behind, specifically the pilots,
which I know Army, Navy, and Air Force and Marine Corps, you
know, all of us.
So how long does it take, and if you guys could answer just
in order, how long does it take to train a pilot from
commissioning time 'til the time they touch a gray, combat-
ready aircraft?
General George. Ma'am, that does depend a little bit on the
aircraft. But I would say on average a year to 15 months, you
know, for helicopter pilots that are down at Fort Rucker after
they do their other initial training.
Mrs. Kiggans. And do those commissioned pilots start right
away, or is there a lag time before they actually start flight
training?
General George. No, they go down to, like for us, they go
down to Fort Rucker and go to their basic course for aviation,
and then get started, you know, soon thereafter.
Mrs. Kiggans. How about the Navy?
Admiral Franchetti. I will get back to you with the exact
number. It is roughly 2 years. And of course, we have a pilot
delay right now in training, backlog, which we are working
through as rapidly as possible.
Mrs. Kiggans. So actually closer to four. We were in
Kingsville about 2 weeks ago, and they will tell me 4 years
from the time that they get commissioned from the Naval Academy
or ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] 'til the time that
they are actually flying a fleet-ready F-18.
That is 4 years--that is too long. We are not going to be
able to, God forbid, replace or have the pilots that we need if
we continue to have a 4-year lag time. I think the Army is a
little bit better.
How about the Marine Corps? Well, you guys run with the
Navy, so.
General Smith. What is different for us is every Marine
lieutenant goes to The Basic School for 6 months----
Mrs. Kiggans. Right.
General Smith [continuing]. To learn to be an infantry
platoon commander. Then we begin flight school or any other MOS
[military occupational specialty]. So it is in excess of 2
years, depending on the airframe.
Mrs. Kiggans. Right.
General Smith. And those delays from everything from
weather to aircraft availability all contribute to that. Which
is why those 6- and 8-year commitments post-wings are so vital
to us. And we are not having any problems with those who wish,
we just need the additional bonuses and help because the
airline industries can hire them faster than I can.
Mrs. Kiggans. Yes, yes. Air Force.
General Allvin. Ma'am, to your point, from when they enter
pilot training to when they are flying a gray tail, if it is
mobility, it is about 18 months. If it is a fighter/bomber, it
is closer to beyond 24 months.
But to your point about from the time they are
commissioned, because of the challenges we are having with T-6
and T-38, we have a little bit of a backup. And it can be as
many as 4 years.
So almost an 18-month to 24-month wait just to get into
pilot training. So that is why we are trying to accelerate, and
our budget asks for more help with the T-38 engines and the T-
6, to move those through.
Mrs. Kiggans. Yes, you guys have had kind of comparable
challenges with the Navy, and I am a little bit more familiar
with the Navy side, but with the T-45 and some of those OBOGS
[On-Board Oxygen Generating System] issues, the blade issues. I
mean, we are--and COVID [coronavirus disease] issues.
But we are seeing those challenges now become where
instructor pilot shortage, you know, we are short instructor
pilots. So now we can't train the naval aviators and all the
other aviators that we do need because we don't have the
teachers. So now we are robbing the fleet to get those
teachers.
And you talk about retention and competing with airlines
and whatnot, we have got to do a better job at this. And I
think part of it is the onus is on us. And I echo and agree
with everything you said about continuing resolutions and how
detrimental that would be.
But having the right training equipment in place, and you
guys tweaking the syllabuses too. But so that we can tighten it
up. I just, I want to do it faster. We need more, we need
faster. So I think every service branch has its challenges. I
am mindful of it, but it is something that I just want to
prioritize.
So thank you very much.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. Mr. Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to
everybody here.
If you really want to scratch your head, it has come
under--somebody gave me information that the VA [U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs] just bought $430 million worth
of computers from Lenovo. Lenovo is a Chinese computer company.
So I will ask an overhead question. Are any of the services
looking at buying large purchases of computers in the near
future? And if you are or if you have bought some, have
anybody--has anybody bought Lenovos, Chinese computers?
General George. I am going to have to take that one. I
don't know right off. I mean, we do buy tech and computers, but
I can't answer that one, sir. I will take that for----
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 107.]
Mr. Gimenez. I would certainly hope that whatever
technology you buy, any computers you buy, any printers you
buy, etc., are American-made and not made in China. Every
taxpayer dollar that goes to China is just funding more
equipment, more military capability against ourselves, which is
ludicrous.
So I will be looking into this VA thing. And I hope that I
am wrong, but that is the information I am getting.
On the question of pilots, is it fair to say we have more
airframes than pilots, or do we have more pilots than
airframes?
General Allvin. By broad numbers, we have many more pilots
than airplanes.
Mr. Gimenez. Okay, so but you do have a pilot shortage, is
yes or no?
General Allvin. Well, we have a pilot shortage in the
pilots that we want throughout our entire Air Force. We do not
have empty cockpits. So in order to have a healthy pilot--a
professional force, you need first and foremost the combat
cockpits filled, then you need the trainer cockpits filled,
then you need the test cockpits filled.
And after you fill all the cockpits, then you go to those
that our next priority is the leadership, you want the
leadership positions filled. And then after you have all those
filled, then you go to the staff positions. That is where we
are currently absorbing our shortage, is in the staffs.
So where you would traditionally want pilot experience,
rated experience, we are manning those are somewhat less than
70 percent. So we are not sacrificing our front-line units.
But if this sustains over time, then we will have a sort of
misshapen force where you won't be able to have professionally
developed enough of the rated membership to provide that
expertise in the leadership at the higher level.
But for right now, we have not had any of our combat
training or test cockpits go empty.
Mr. Gimenez. What about Reserve units? Have you looked at
the expanding Reserve units or adding Reserve pilots to the
force?
General Allvin. Frankly, the Reserves are having about the
same issue that we are having with respect to shortage overall.
Now, I believe as--we are, in the Active Duty, we are
advantaged by retention.
But in our total force we are disadvantaged because as the
retention in the Active Duty goes, a large part of their sort
of business model in the Guard and Reserves is those who want
to continue to affiliate with the military will go from the
Active Duty to the Guard and Reserves.
And so oftentimes when the retention becomes poor, people
still want to stay affiliated with the Air Force, the Guard and
Reserves will get a little bit healthier. But as of right now,
they are feeling about the same pain as we are.
Mr. Gimenez. Your Reserve bases, are they based in large
urban areas where you would have a good, I guess a pool of
folks that may be wanting to be, are interested in serving in
the Reserves? I mean, if you have a Reserve base somewhere in
the middle of nowhere, it is hard to find I guess reservists
that actually live around the area.
So how do you make your bases on Reserve bases versus
Active bases?
General Allvin. For the most part, we take advantage of
being able to leverage both historical old fields which used to
be Active Duty. So some of them are just, they are sort of
godfathered from--or grandfathered from being existing old
Active Duty air bases and take advantage of infrastructure
there. Those are the ones that have been around 30, 40 years.
Oftentimes what we have now is the associations that the--
we have Reserve members flying on what are sort of owned and
maintained, these classic associations, by the Active Duty. So
it really is a mix of those that are just on Active Duty bases.
I am trying to go through my head and see if there are any
remote, very remote and isolated Reserve-only bases, and none
come to mind, frankly.
Mr. Gimenez. Fair enough. Okay, I guess most of my time is
up. I yield back.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Gimenez.
Thank you again to our witnesses. Obviously the vote
schedule is getting in the way of a more fulsome conversation
here. But I think if you hear a theme, obviously it is a real
concern about the recruiting crisis that we are in. And I know
you share those concerns, are getting after it.
And secondly, though, I am just not sure the Department as
an institution and all the way down through the services and
through our contracting officers are really looking at the
supply chain issue.
And I think you are hearing bipartisan concern across the
board in having that supply chain surety. One, having
visibility on it, but then two, driving our practices along
those lines in a systematic way. I know I think the committee,
and I share Mr.--I think I can speak for Mr. Garamendi here,
looks forward to working with you on that.
I hope that is something that the services and the
Department can get ahead of, rather than really it being driven
by this side of the foxhole. Because I certainly look forward
to hearing what you are doing in that regard as we move forward
through the defense bill.
With that, the hearing is adjourned. And thank you,
genuinely, thank you again.
[Whereupon, at 4:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 19, 2023

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 19, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

April 19, 2023

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. GIMENEZ

General George. The Army is not actively pursuing a large contract
purchase of Lenovo computers. As of April 24, 2023, Army Cyber Command
reported 1,840 out of 735,105 systems on the unclassified system were
Lenovo, and 316 systems out of 35,448 on the secret network were
Lenovo. Under current authorities, policies, and regulations, Lenovo is
not a prohibited source.
Army Cyber Command is providing direction to commands and
organizations to provide a holistic understanding of security risks and
operational impact regarding the Lenovo systems currently on Army
networks. The Army understands the importance of the potential security
threat and will ensure a comprehensive review.   [See page 19.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

April 19, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. According to the Department, DOD is the third largest
city in the United States with 3.2 million people--placing it behind
Los Angeles and New York City and ahead of Chicago. From an emergency
services perspective, DOD manages 150,000 first responders, 220 public
safety answering points (PSAPs), and 1500 operators across 4200
installations. As you may be aware, states and communities are rapidly
transitioning from outdated, analog 9-1-1 systems to Next Generation 9-
1-1 (NG911) which will ``enhance emergency number services to create a
faster, more resilient system that allows voice, photos, videos and
text messages to flow seamlessly from the public to the 911 network
while also improving public safety answering points' ability to help
manage call overload, natural disasters and transfer of 911 calls based
on caller location data.'' According to the 2020 National 911 Progress
Report, 12 states have fully implemented NG911 while 9 are rapidly
approaching that threshold. However, DOD, whose installations are
connected to the surrounding communities, is not transitioning to NG911
at the same rate. As a recent Institute for Defense Analyses report
highlighted, ``NG911 is both an operational requirement and a strategic
capability supporting multiple missions.'' Migrating to NG911 will
enhance ``capabilities to save lives and protect property'' and will
have a ``direct, positive impact on several mission areas including
Public Safety, Emergency Management, Force Protection, Anti-Terrorism,
Mission Assurance, and Critical Infrastructure Protection.'' Failure to
migrate to NG911 in a timely manner will turn installations into
islands unable to coordinate with local partners and leverage modern
technology. As IDA concluded, ``This situation is likely to result in
higher risk to life and property, and degraded capabilities to fulfill
safety obligations to their military personnel and under the numerous
mutual aid agreements in place today.''
Questions: 1. Does DOD have a detailed NG911 rollout plan? If so,
please provide. 2. Specifically, what is the timeline associated with
the plan? 3. Does it include individual installations? 4. What
budgetary resources are needed to fulfill the plan? 5. What budgetary
resources are needed to implement NG911 at all DOD installations? When
will this be completed? 6. Are any installations currently fully NG911
operational? If so, which ones?
General George. Answer 1: In order to comply with federal laws
(e.g. the Ray Baum Act) and national standards, the Army has a fiscal
year (FY) 2025 plan to roll out Next Generation 911 (NG 911) as one of
the five interoperable Public Safety Communications (PSC) capabilities
that make up the Base Emergency Communications System (BECS). BECS will
modernize the Army's PSC and will increase interoperability between
first responders and mutual aid partners. It will provide them with the
ability to send, receive, and exchange information, data, imagery, and
video, thus enhancing the protection of life, health, and safety on
Army installations.
Background: On September 30, 2022, the Army approved the BECS
Capabilities Development Document, codifying BECS as an Army Program of
Record. Subsequently, on February 16, 2023, the Army identified the
Program Executive Office Enterprise Information Systems to lead the
BECS acquisition program for the Army.
Answer 2: The Army has already initiated its NG 911 incremental
implementation with the voice modernization project which improves
networks, voice, and data capabilities across our installations.
Concurrently, the geographic information system upgrades incorporate
residential addressing and mapping on Army installations. The FY 2025
comprehensive BECS acquisition strategy will begin with NG 911
implementation at a rate of five to ten installations per year.
Ultimately, the pace at which the Army can transition to NG 911 is
contingent upon its ability to: 1) fully resource the requirement; and
2) maintain synchronicity between the Department of Defense (DOD),
states, and our installation migration plans.
Answer 3: The BECS Capabilities Development Document estimates 93
Army installations will require NG 911.
Answer 4/5: The Army NG 911 implementation and sustainment plan
spans 12 years (FY 2025-FY 2036) and estimates a cost of  $18 million
annually across 93 installations, totaling approximately $216 million.
Answer 6: No Army installations are NG 911 fully operational at
this time.
Mr. Rogers. According to the Department, DOD is the third largest
city in the United States with 3.2 million people--placing it behind
Los Angeles and New York City and ahead of Chicago. From an emergency
services perspective, DOD manages 150,000 first responders, 220 public
safety answering points (PSAPs), and 1500 operators across 4200
installations. As you may be aware, states and communities are rapidly
transitioning from outdated, analog 9-1-1 systems to Next Generation 9-
1-1 (NG911) which will ``enhance emergency number services to create a
faster, more resilient system that allows voice, photos, videos and
text messages to flow seamlessly from the public to the 911 network
while also improving public safety answering points' ability to help
manage call overload, natural disasters and transfer of 911 calls based
on caller location data.'' According to the 2020 National 911 Progress
Report, 12 states have fully implemented NG911 while 9 are rapidly
approaching that threshold. However, DOD, whose installations are
connected to the surrounding communities, is not transitioning to NG911
at the same rate. As a recent Institute for Defense Analyses report
highlighted, ``NG911 is both an operational requirement and a strategic
capability supporting multiple missions.'' Migrating to NG911 will
enhance ``capabilities to save lives and protect property'' and will
have a ``direct, positive impact on several mission areas including
Public Safety, Emergency Management, Force Protection, Anti-Terrorism,
Mission Assurance, and Critical Infrastructure Protection.'' Failure to
migrate to NG911 in a timely manner will turn installations into
islands unable to coordinate with local partners and leverage modern
technology. As IDA concluded, ``This situation is likely to result in
higher risk to life and property, and degraded capabilities to fulfill
safety obligations to their military personnel and under the numerous
mutual aid agreements in place today.''
Questions: 1. Does DOD have a detailed NG911 rollout plan? If so,
please provide. 2. Specifically, what is the timeline associated with
the plan? 3. Does it include individual installations? 4. What
budgetary resources are needed to fulfill the plan? 5. What budgetary
resources are needed to implement NG911 at all DOD installations? When
will this be completed? 6. Are any installations currently fully NG911
operational? If so, which ones?
Admiral Franchetti. 1. The Navy is in the process of modernizing
information systems to include transition to internet protocol services
(IP). In 2015, the Navy awarded a contract to AT&T Government Services
to establish private IP networks to be used to route 911 calls
originating from existing Navy End Office TDM telephone switches, to
deliver them to one of seven regional 911 dispatch centers in the
United States and Guam. The Navy is working closely with the Defense
Information Systems Agency (DISA), the lead DOD agent, in implementing
modernized solutions that take advantage of the latest technologies
while ensuring the solutions maintain the integrity and security of the
networks employed by DOD.
2. The Navy is working closely with the Defense Information Systems
Agency (DISA) on the modernizations solutions and strategy to achieve a
cohesive 911 operating system, while maintaining the integrity and
security of Navy networks.
3. Should the Navy invest in upgrading its installation telephony
and switching infrastructure, we will make a phased investment that
includes individual installations.
4. All of the Navy's Public Safety Answering Points (PSAP), public
safety networks, and telephone infrastructure will require significant
investment to attain compliance with applicable laws. This improvement
will eliminate dependency on the third-party commercial service
providers which are not providing compliant NG911 solutions and carry
cybersecurity non-compliance risk if used for NG911 in its current
configuration. Naval Information Warfare Center (NIWC) Atlantic has
completed the design and cost estimates for implementing Location
Information Servers (LIS) with the Navy Voice-Over-IP (VoIP) upgrades.
The final plan from N2N6 will inform resource requirements.
5. Budgetary resources are required to upgrade the telephony and
switching infrastructure. There is no estimated completion date. Navy
seeks to balance the requirements for facility investment with the
requirements for continued investment in quality of life/quality of
service and operational readiness of the fleet.
6. No Navy installations are fully NG911 operational.
Mr. Rogers. According to the Department, DOD is the third largest
city in the United States with 3.2 million people--placing it behind
Los Angeles and New York City and ahead of Chicago. From an emergency
services perspective, DOD manages 150,000 first responders, 220 public
safety answering points (PSAPs), and 1500 operators across 4200
installations. As you may be aware, states and communities are rapidly
transitioning from outdated, analog 9-1-1 systems to Next Generation 9-
1-1 (NG911) which will ``enhance emergency number services to create a
faster, more resilient system that allows voice, photos, videos and
text messages to flow seamlessly from the public to the 911 network
while also improving public safety answering points' ability to help
manage call overload, natural disasters and transfer of 911 calls based
on caller location data.'' According to the 2020 National 911 Progress
Report, 12 states have fully implemented NG911 while 9 are rapidly
approaching that threshold. However, DOD, whose installations are
connected to the surrounding communities, is not transitioning to NG911
at the same rate. As a recent Institute for Defense Analyses report
highlighted, ``NG911 is both an operational requirement and a strategic
capability supporting multiple missions.'' Migrating to NG911 will
enhance ``capabilities to save lives and protect property'' and will
have a ``direct, positive impact on several mission areas including
Public Safety, Emergency Management, Force Protection, Anti-Terrorism,
Mission Assurance, and Critical Infrastructure Protection.'' Failure to
migrate to NG911 in a timely manner will turn installations into
islands unable to coordinate with local partners and leverage modern
technology. As IDA concluded, ``This situation is likely to result in
higher risk to life and property, and degraded capabilities to fulfill
safety obligations to their military personnel and under the numerous
mutual aid agreements in place today.''
Questions: 1. Does DOD have a detailed NG911 rollout plan? If so,
please provide. 2. Specifically, what is the timeline associated with
the plan? 3. Does it include individual installations? 4. What
budgetary resources are needed to fulfill the plan? 5. What budgetary
resources are needed to implement NG911 at all DOD installations? When
will this be completed? 6. Are any installations currently fully NG911
operational? If so, which ones?
General Smith. The DOD Chief Information Office C3, supported by
Defense Information Systems Agency's (DISA) Global Public Safety
Communications Office is the executive agent for DOD Public Safety
Communications. They have established four overarching levels of
efforts to modernize DOD's Public Safety Communications, which includes
Next Generation 9-1-1 (NG911), Next Generation Wireless, Public Safety
Internet of Things (IoT), and Enterprise Mass Warning and Notification
(EMWN). The Marine Corps is collaborating with DOD stakeholders to
conduct technical reviews between Emergency Communications, Public
Safety and its Title 10 Command and Control Communications to seek
alignment each of these independently regulated communications
capabilities into a single communications solution. The Marine Corps
timeline is aligned with the DOD governance and funding timeline and
will initiate planning actions in FY24 and across the FYDP. DOD's
guidance includes development of Public Safety Communications policies
and supporting technical requirements with State and local-level 9-1-1
authorities, identifying Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement
requirements and aligning NG911 transition efforts.
DOD's Guidance for FY24-28 proposes a number of installations be
modernized by fiscal year for each Component. The Marine Corps
tentatively plans to transition 13 installations as follows: four in
FY24 (MCLB Albany, MCAS Beaufort, MCAS Yuma, MCRD Parris Island), two
in FY26 (MCB Camp Butler, MCAS Iwakuni) and seven in FY28 (MCAGCC
Twentynine Palms, MCLB Barstow, MCB Camp Lejeune, MCB Camp Pendleton,
MCAS Cherry Point, MCAS Miramar, MCB Quantico). Complex challenges,
including the fast pace of State and local level transition plans,
resourcing levels and DOD information technology architectures, impact
the Marine Corps' timely to transition to NG911. The Marine Corps'
overseas installations requirement to connect to Host Nation emergency
and public safety communications infrastructure faces additional
technical and political challenges. The Marine Corps identified NG911
funding requirement investment costs of $212M across the FYDP for
procurement, operations and maintenance to support the material
solution, system sustainment, and labor. Additional requirements (and
costs) are being analyzed now to support Military Construction and
Installation Communication infrastructure, which are necessary at
several installations to eliminate legacy technologies and to implement
an Internet Protocol (IP) technical solution that is fully
interoperable and resilient with State/local and industry mission
partners. The Marine Corps' current estimate is $212 million, comprised
of $81.3M in labor and $130.7M for procurement of materiel. We
currently expect deployment to occur over a seven-year period.
The Marine Corps currently does not have any installations that are
fully NG911 operational.
Mr. Rogers. According to the Department, DOD is the third largest
city in the United States with 3.2 million people--placing it behind
Los Angeles and New York City and ahead of Chicago. From an emergency
services perspective, DOD manages 150,000 first responders, 220 public
safety answering points (PSAPs), and 1500 operators across 4200
installations. As you may be aware, states and communities are rapidly
transitioning from outdated, analog 9-1-1 systems to Next Generation 9-
1-1 (NG911) which will ``enhance emergency number services to create a
faster, more resilient system that allows voice, photos, videos and
text messages to flow seamlessly from the public to the 911 network
while also improving public safety answering points' ability to help
manage call overload, natural disasters and transfer of 911 calls based
on caller location data.'' According to the 2020 National 911 Progress
Report, 12 states have fully implemented NG911 while 9 are rapidly
approaching that threshold. However, DOD, whose installations are
connected to the surrounding communities, is not transitioning to NG911
at the same rate. As a recent Institute for Defense Analyses report
highlighted, ``NG911 is both an operational requirement and a strategic
capability supporting multiple missions.'' Migrating to NG911 will
enhance ``capabilities to save lives and protect property'' and will
have a ``direct, positive impact on several mission areas including
Public Safety, Emergency Management, Force Protection, Anti-Terrorism,
Mission Assurance, and Critical Infrastructure Protection.'' Failure to
migrate to NG911 in a timely manner will turn installations into
islands unable to coordinate with local partners and leverage modern
technology. As IDA concluded, ``This situation is likely to result in
higher risk to life and property, and degraded capabilities to fulfill
safety obligations to their military personnel and under the numerous
mutual aid agreements in place today.''
Questions: 1. Does DOD have a detailed NG911 rollout plan? If so,
please provide. 2. Specifically, what is the timeline associated with
the plan? 3. Does it include individual installations? 4. What
budgetary resources are needed to fulfill the plan? 5. What budgetary
resources are needed to implement NG911 at all DOD installations? When
will this be completed? 6. Are any installations currently fully NG911
operational? If so, which ones?
General Allvin DOD CIO is the lead for the DOD and DAF CIO is in
close coordination with them for the rollout of NG911. All questions
regarding the roll out of NG911 should be directed to the office of DOD
CIO.
Mr. Rogers. According to the Department, DOD is the third largest
city in the United States with 3.2 million people--placing it behind
Los Angeles and New York City and ahead of Chicago. From an emergency
services perspective, DOD manages 150,000 first responders, 220 public
safety answering points (PSAPs), and 1500 operators across 4200
installations. As you may be aware, states and communities are rapidly
transitioning from outdated, analog 9-1-1 systems to Next Generation 9-
1-1 (NG911) which will ``enhance emergency number services to create a
faster, more resilient system that allows voice, photos, videos and
text messages to flow seamlessly from the public to the 911 network
while also improving public safety answering points' ability to help
manage call overload, natural disasters and transfer of 911 calls based
on caller location data.'' According to the 2020 National 911 Progress
Report, 12 states have fully implemented NG911 while 9 are rapidly
approaching that threshold. However, DOD, whose installations are
connected to the surrounding communities, is not transitioning to NG911
at the same rate. As a recent Institute for Defense Analyses report
highlighted, ``NG911 is both an operational requirement and a strategic
capability supporting multiple missions.'' Migrating to NG911 will
enhance ``capabilities to save lives and protect property'' and will
have a ``direct, positive impact on several mission areas including
Public Safety, Emergency Management, Force Protection, Anti-Terrorism,
Mission Assurance, and Critical Infrastructure Protection.'' Failure to
migrate to NG911 in a timely manner will turn installations into
islands unable to coordinate with local partners and leverage modern
technology. As IDA concluded, ``This situation is likely to result in
higher risk to life and property, and degraded capabilities to fulfill
safety obligations to their military personnel and under the numerous
mutual aid agreements in place today.''
Questions: 1. Does DOD have a detailed NG911 rollout plan? If so,
please provide. 2. Specifically, what is the timeline associated with
the plan? 3. Does it include individual installations? 4. What
budgetary resources are needed to fulfill the plan? 5. What budgetary
resources are needed to implement NG911 at all DOD installations? When
will this be completed? 6. Are any installations currently fully NG911
operational? If so, which ones?
General Thompson. DOD CIO is the lead for the DOD. The Department
of the Air Force CIO is in close coordination with them for the rollout
of NG911. We have forwarded this question to the office of DOD CIO.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ
Mr. Waltz. Do you see benefits with the JROTC program and its
ability to help with recruiting?
General George. The mission of Junior Reserve Officers' Training
Corps (JROTC) is to assist high schools in motivating students to be
better citizens. The Army's JROTC program is an overwhelmingly positive
youth citizenship program supporting more than 272,000 cadets at more
than 1,700 high schools across the nation. JROTC's presence in high
schools in areas that lack a military presence helps connect those
communities with our Armed Forces. Across all programs, JROTC cadets
have higher attendance, graduation rates, and grade point averages than
their peers, who do not participate in the program. While JROTC is not
a recruiting program, approximately 44% of Army enlistees came from a
high school with a DOD JROTC program.
Mr. Waltz. An ongoing GAO study details the current disrepair of
barracks across the services. Some of the photos show rooms that are
similar to condemned buildings, rather than barracks for our service
members. What are you doing to ensure safe and sanitary places for
service members to live? How are these problems allowed to persist?
General George. The Army is investing over $1 billion per year in
barracks for construction, facilities sustainment, restoration, and
modernization across the 5-year Future Years Defense Program. This
investment will help to improve conditions for unaccompanied soldiers
across all types of barracks-permanent party, training, and transient.
Issues such as facility condition, functionality and deficit are the
main factors that are weighed when identifying barracks projects for
investment. Earlier this year, senior Army leadership directed all
components to inspect all barracks for life, health, and safety
conditions. We have also implemented an Army-wide inspection program
for all barracks to identify and prioritize deficiencies. As concerns
are observed or identified for remediation or correction, we are taking
immediate action.
Mr. Waltz. Do you see benefits with the JROTC program and its
ability to help with recruiting?
Admiral Franchetti. The Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps
(JROTC) program has historically had a positive impact on the Navy's
recruiting efforts. JROTC instills a sense of patriotism and a desire
for younger individuals to serve their country. This early exposure
significantly increases the likelihood of students to consider a career
in the Navy. JROTC emphasizes leadership skills by fostering personal
growth and self-discipline in its participants. These qualities are
highly valued in the Navy.
By nurturing leadership abilities, JROTC prepares students for
future naval service, making them more attractive candidates to
recruiters. Most importantly however, the program's strong presence in
high schools facilitates recruiter access to the student population by
developing relationships with school administrators and their faculty.
These relationships provide Navy recruiters with an easier path to
engage with school officials, thereby gaining access to the student
population. This access allows recruiters to provide firsthand
information about Navy opportunities, career paths, and benefits to
students who may be curious about the service and those who may already
be interested in serving.
Mr. Waltz. The Commandant of the Marine Corps cites amphib
availability at about 32 percent. Our ability to project power, on a
persistent basis, is critical to our ability to successfully operate
from competition to conflict. What is the Navy doing to improve Navy
surface vessel maintenance and increase readiness for ARG-MEUs? Why is
the Navy requesting to decommission amphibious ships to a level below
the requirement set by the FY23 NDAA?
Admiral Franchetti. The Navy continues to emphasize its focus on
achieving measurable performance improvement to improve surface vessel
maintenance. The Navy is accomplishing this by improving schedule
adherence, reducing new and growth work during availabilities and
identifying and improving Maintenance Figures of Merit. The Navy is
investing in maintenance and readiness in PB-24, fully funding all
executable ship maintenance. The Navy is committed to working closely
with private shipyard partners to improve surface ship maintenance and
modernization outcomes. In particular, Performance-to- Plan-driven
improvements--such as the goal of awarding contracts 120 days before
the start of a maintenance availability, level loading ports through
better prediction of workload, better availability planning, and
improved long-lead-time material acquisition have provided effective
solutions for readiness and reduced maintenance delays. As part of the
joint force, the Navy has met every global force demand for naval
amphibious forces. Navy Amphibious Forces provided over 100% of the
SECDEF Global Force Management Allocation Plan base order in FY22, and
is on course to do so again for FY23. Further, the Navy supports the 31
amphibious ship requirement, but it needs to be the right 31 ships with
a capable, sustainable mix of ship classes to ensure we meet the
nation's need for ARG/MEUs for decades to come. The Navy recently
delivered the Battle Force Ship Assessment and Requirements report
which continues to validate the need for 31 amphibious ships.
We prioritize readiness and modernization over maintaining force
structure. In doing so, we maintain a combat-credible Navy now and in
the future.
Mr. Waltz. An ongoing GAO study details the current disrepair of
barracks across the services. Some of the photos show rooms that are
similar to condemned buildings, rather than barracks for our service
members. What are you doing to ensure safe and sanitary places for
service members to live? How are these problems allowed to persist?
Admiral Franchetti. As directed in Section 2814 of the Fiscal Year
2022 NDAA, Navy is developing a sustainable path to eliminate poor and
failing Unaccompanied Housing (UH). The Secretary of the Navy and the
Chief of Naval Operations' joint memo, ``Setting a New Course for Navy
Quality of Service,'' states that every Sailor deserves the opportunity
to live off the ship. This intent is a line of effort under the Quality
of Service (QoS) Cross Functional Team, which is developing a
comprehensive and integrated approach to improve UH; the Navy is
targeting investments to improve the condition of inadequate UH and
identifying sustainable, optimized UH policies to ensure safe, reliable
housing for all Sailors.
The Navy is focusing on several efforts to increase ownership,
advocacy and visibility of UH issues to improve living conditions. To
that end, on 2 May, Navy released NAVADMIN 102/23, Navy Unaccompanied
Housing Resident Bill of Rights and Responsibilities. This bill of
rights and responsibilities outlines what residents should expect while
residing in Navy-controlled UH. It also highlights their individual
responsibilities while residing in UH.
Last fall, Commander Navy Installations Command (CNIC), the Navy
Housing program manager, standardized the inspections program that
includes semi-annual preventive medicine unit to ensure the health and
safety of residents, and the installation UH management staff conducts
monthly inspections for adequacy and habitability of facilities. The
standardized inspections conducted by UH staff identify issues
requiring correction to ensure safe, reliable housing for Sailors. In
addition, as part of our UH improvement efforts, we have reinvigorated
the Command inspection program to better monitor daily living
standards. This intrusive leadership provides UH management and unit
command leadership the ability to proactively identify any relevant
maintenance, health or safety issues in UH.
To help Sailors self-advocate, in 2022, CNIC rolled out a
maintenance request QR code program across the enterprise to improve
the maintenance request process. The QR code initiative allows
residents to report routine maintenance issues at any time of the day
or night using their cellular phones. Since the rollout, there has been
an increase in the volume of service calls, while completion times have
remained steady. As there has not been an increase in staff within UH
or Public Works, CNIC is monitoring operational metrics closely to
determine optimal staffing requirements.
The Navy has requested $165M in PB24 ($400M FYDP) to renovate and
replace poor and failing UH. We appreciate Congress' support for these
investments in Navy UH.
Mr. Waltz. Do you see benefits with the JROTC program and its
ability to help with recruiting?
General Smith. JROTC is among the largest youth development
programs in the United States. These programs instill the value of
citizenship and civic responsibility, service to our country (including
opportunities within the military, national, and public service
sectors), personal responsibility, and a sense of accomplishment in
participating students. Over the last decade, Marine Corps JROTC
(MCJROTC), serving over 27,000 students in 254 high schools, has
provided opportunities through our co-curricular and extra-curricular
activities \1\ to introduce students to means for improving career
readiness skills and knowledge of emerging workforce careers in
science, technology, engineering, math, computer science, and
cybersecurity. Although recruiting is not the purpose of JROTC, the
MCJROTC historical data continues to demonstrate a benefit of MCJROTC
to service. The data from the last three graduation reports \2\ show
the following:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Co-curricular activities--drill, marksmanship, enrichment
trips, and physical training. These are taught in conjunction with
academic curriculum. Extracurricular activities--competition teams in
drill and exhibition drill, marksmanship, and precision marksmanship,
Cyber, Academic Bowl, and PT/Raider. These are conducted outside of the
academic curriculum.
\2\ The graduation report is information submitted by graduating
cadet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Graduation Year                 2020       2021       2022
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Graduating Seniors                       4,849      4,683      4,442
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Service Academy Appointments             35         29         40
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ROTC Scholarships                        88         75         143
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Service Enlistments                      1,011      853        1,119
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total Military Service                   1,134      957        1,302
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percentage Military Service              23.4%      20.4%      29.3%
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mr. Waltz. The Commandant of the Marine Corps cites amphib
availability at about 32 percent. Our ability to project power, on a
persistent basis, is critical to our ability to successfully operate
from competition to conflict. Has the requirement for 31 amphibious
vessels changed? How does lagging amphibious availability hurt your
readiness?
General Smith. Our requirement remains no less than 31 amphibious
warfare ships. The increased time that our Amphibs spend in the
maintenance phase consumes approximately half our Marines training and
certification time. Per the Navy OFRP, our ships should average about
eight months of their notional 36 month cycles in maintenance. Over the
past ten years that number is slightly over twelve months since 71% of
maintenance periods were extended. On top of that, when factoring in
all other emergent maintenance requirements, our AWS average closer to
15 of 36 months in maintenance. We prioritize shipboard operations and
training for our deploying ARG/MEUs, so the maintenance does not impact
them quite as heavily, however across the Service we've seen over 82
incidents in the past two years where training or deployments were
negatively impacted by lack of available ships. In summary, Marines
cannot become proficient at operating in an amphibious environment, as
required by Title 10 Sec 8063, unless they are provided time aboard
amphibious warfare ships.
Mr. Waltz. An ongoing GAO study details the current disrepair of
barracks across the services. Some of the photos show rooms that are
similar to condemned buildings, rather than barracks for our service
members. What are you doing to ensure safe and sanitary places for
service members to live? How are these problems allowed to persist?
General Smith. The Marine Corps inventory of unaccompanied housing
(UH) is comprised of 672 facilities, of which 16% (108) are below an
acceptable condition level (rated as Q3 or Q4 facility condition
index). We want every Marine living in facilities that meet high
standards. Accordingly, we have embarked upon a path to improve overall
quality of UH to Q2 or higher by 2030, prioritizing barracks facility
renovations. For example:

In FY22, the Marine Corps renovated 14 barracks, totaling
$117.8M, to improve the quality of life of an estimated 3,353 Marines.

In FY23, the Marine Corps is on track to execute the
renovation of an additional 16 barracks, totaling $262.2M, to improve
the quality of life of an estimated 4,763 Marines.

In FY24, the Marine Corps plans to renovate 13 barracks,
totaling $116M, to improve the quality of life of an estimated 4,339
Marines.
We are also focusing on oversight procedures to improve the
condition of inadequate UH and more broadly provide for high quality
facilities in a predicable, sustainable manner. For example, we are
testing QR codes on the doors of our barracks rooms at Marine Corps Air
Station Miramar and Camp Pendleton for Marines to scan and report
maintenance concerns. Additionally, on the laundry rooms doors of these
test barracks, we have placed QR codes there to enable Marines to
report which washers and dryers require maintenance. The goal of QR
codes access to maintenance reporting is to ensure a more responsive,
accurate, and connected reporting and remedy system. We are also making
targeted investments using MILCON projects like P158, which in the FY24
base budget for a $131M Bachelor Enlisted Quarter and Support Facility
aboard Marine Barracks Washington, Of course, the Marine Corps can
accelerate the pace at which we get all barracks assets to Q2 or
higher, should the President or Congress decide to make additional
funding be available. The Marine Corps has 12 additional ``shovel-
ready'' barracks renovations projects totaling $155M to improve the
quality of life for an additional 4,178 Marines. In the end, care for
our Marines is a leadership issue. Management tools are needed but
cannot replace on scene leadership.
Mr. Waltz. Do you see benefits with the JROTC program and its
ability to help with recruiting?
General Allvin. Yes, we see the value of JROTC. One of the
challenges we face in recruiting is an unfamiliarity with what the Air
Force is and does. Having the presence of AFJROTC in schools offers the
opportunity for youth and their influencers (teachers) to be educated
on the value proposition of service, and for our potential future
Airmen to ``see themselves'' as part of this institution, to include
all the opportunities for growth/experience/education/leadership that
will serve them throughout their lives.
Mr. Waltz. An ongoing GAO study details the current disrepair of
barracks across the services. Some of the photos show rooms that are
similar to condemned buildings, rather than barracks for our service
members. What are you doing to ensure safe and sanitary places for
service members to live? How are these problems allowed to persist?
General Allvin. The Department of the Air Force (to include Space
Force) recognizes that the environment in which our Airmen and
Guardians live impacts their quality of life, their ability to do their
job, and our ability to recruit and retain the force. Taking care of
unaccompanied Airmen and Guardians living in dormitories is a
fundamental responsibility of leadership, installation commanders, and
senior enlisted leaders. In keeping with this commitment, the DAF has
numerous projects underway or planned between FY2023 and FY2026 to
modernize and ensure safe, quality unaccompanied housing that supports
mission requirements and provides improved privacy and greater
amenities for junior personnel. DAF housing offices work to keep our
families and single Airmen and Guardians safe every day. These housing
offices conduct dormitory inspections on a routine basis and they brief
our members upon move-in about maintenance and safety precautions.
Additionally, during resident change over, dormitory rooms undergo
maintenance and are again inspected. If problems are discovered, teams
make corrections before assigning the unit. Overall, our dorms are in
satisfactory condition--with 99% of dorms above the OSD standard--but
we continue working hard to increase investment to improve facility
conditions. The long-range investment plan is captured in the Dormitory
Master Plan that integrates data and commander assessments. In response
to Section 2814 of the FY22 NDAA, the DAF made a concerted effort to
increase investment in dormitory facility conditions. Section 2814
requires the DAF to invest approximately $1.1B in permanent party dorms
across FYs22-26--the DAF is exceeding this requirement, targeting
$1.7B. In FY23, the DAF authorized $342M in O&M funding for dorm
maintenance & repair projects. DAF's ongoing unaccompanied housing
projects include construction of a dormitory at Clear Space Force
Station, Alaska, and a follow-on increment for a Basic Military
Training dormitory at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas. For FY24, the DAF
budget request includes $50 million in MILCON for a Surety Dormitory at
Royal Air Force Lakenheath, UK. Additionally, we are planning to spend
$251M in O&M funding on 38 projects to maintain, repair, and improve
dormitory facilities.
Mr. Waltz. Do you see benefits with the JROTC program and its
ability to help with recruiting?
General Thompson. JROTC programs are citizenship programs, not
military recruiting programs. Our ROTC units teach character,
leadership skills, the importance of fitness, and a commitment to
national service. As a result, they familiarize youth with Air Force
and Space Force core values and increase the propensity to serve. JROTC
programs can help create positive relationships with educators and
provide an avenue for recruiters to engage with student cadets. There
are ten Space Force JROTC detachments managed by the Air Force.

Arlington Career Center, Arlington, Va.

Del Norte High School, Albuquerque, N.M.

Durango High School, Las Vegas, Nev.

Falcon High School, Peyton, Colo.

Huntsville High School, Huntsville, Ala.

Klein High School, Spring, Texas

Shadow Mountain High School, Phoenix, AZ

Space Coast Junior/Senior High School, Cocoa, Fla.

The Academy for Academic Excellence, Apple Valley, Calif.

Warren County High School, Warrenton, N.C.
Mr. Waltz. An ongoing GAO study details the current disrepair of
barracks across the services. Some of the photos show rooms that are
similar to condemned buildings, rather than barracks for our service
members. What are you doing to ensure safe and sanitary places for
service members to live? How are these problems allowed to persist?
General Thompson. The Department of the Air Force (to include Space
Force) recognizes that the environment in which our Airmen and
Guardians live impacts their quality of life, their ability to do their
job, and our ability to recruit and retain the force. Taking care of
unaccompanied Airmen and Guardians living in dormitories is a
fundamental responsibility of leadership, installation commanders, and
senior enlisted leaders. In keeping with this commitment, the DAF has
numerous projects underway or planned between FY2023 and FY2026 to
modernize and ensure safe, quality unaccompanied housing that supports
mission requirements and provides improved privacy and greater
amenities for junior personnel. DAF housing offices work to keep our
families and single Airmen and Guardians safe every day. These housing
offices conduct dormitory inspections on a routine basis and they brief
our members upon move-in about maintenance and safety precautions.
Additionally, during resident change over, dormitory rooms undergo
maintenance and are again inspected. If problems are discovered, teams
make corrections before assigning the unit. Overall, our dorms are in
satisfactory condition--with 99% of dorms above the OSD standard--but
we continue working hard to increase investment to improve facility
conditions. The long-range investment plan is captured in the Dormitory
Master Plan that integrates data and commander assessments. In response
to Section 2814 of the FY22 NDAA, the DAF made a concerted effort to
increase investment in dormitory facility conditions. Section 2814
requires the DAF to invest approximately $1.1B in permanent party dorms
across FYs22-26--the DAF is exceeding this requirement, targeting
$1.7B. In FY23, the DAF authorized $342M in O&M funding for dorm
maintenance & repair projects. DAF's ongoing unaccompanied housing
projects include construction of a dormitory at Clear Space Force
Station, Alaska, and a follow-on increment for a Basic Military
Training dormitory at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas. For FY24, the DAF
budget request includes $50 million in MILCON for a Surety Dormitory at
Royal Air Force Lakenheath, UK. Additionally, we are planning to spend
$251M in O&M funding on 38 projects to maintain, repair, and improve
dormitory facilities.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GARAMENDI
Mr. Garamendi. The AIR and SEA Card programs are critical to
national security and military readiness across the world. The Air Card
fuel program contract process administered by DLA has previously had
issues. What effect would the degradation of this program have on your
service's readiness should aircraft and marine fuel suppliers in the
network be limited or lost? Are you concerned about the loss of
competitive prices or disruption of this long-standing network?
General George. The cost of fuel, efficient contracting, and
general fuel management are all essential to Army readiness. The Army,
like the other armed services, relies on the Defense Logistics Agency
(DLA) to effectively manage fuel contracts. DLA currently uses the
Aviation Into-plane Reimbursement (AIR) and Ships' bunkers Easy
Acquisition (SEA) Card programs to manage fuel contracts between
vendors and purchasing customers; the Army relies on DLA to mitigate
any readiness concerns or disruptions in the supply network. The Army
is always concerned with the Standard Fuel Price, though the Stand Fuel
Price is set by the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense
(Comptroller) for each FY.
Mr. Garamendi. The AIR and SEA Card programs are critical to
national security and military readiness across the world. The Air Card
fuel program contract process administered by DLA has previously had
issues. What effect would the degradation of this program have on your
service's readiness should aircraft and marine fuel suppliers in the
network be limited or lost? Are you concerned about the loss of
competitive prices or disruption of this long-standing network?
Admiral Franchetti. 1. The SEA and AIR Card programs are critical
enablers for procuring commercially available Marine Gas Oil and
Aviation Fuel from nearly any commercial port and air station/airport
around the world. In the absence of Combat Logistics Force assets,
Defense Fuel Service Points, and Fuel Exchange Agreement locations,
there is no other quick and organic contracting mechanism for U.S. Navy
ships and aircraft to acquire fuel. Loss, or degradation to the program
would create significant gaps in logistics support for units deployed
across the world. Additionally, it would exacerbate the complexity of
logistics support for distributed maritime operations, which would
eliminate or weaken our ability to project power.
2. Inability to meet operational requirements is a greater concern
than the loss of competitive prices, even in a fiscally constrained
environment. The greater concern would be if this program were
disrupted with no functional alternative. From the end-user side, AIR
and SEA Card provides an effective contracting mechanism to rapidly
acquire commercially available fuel with minimal lead time. If the AIR
and SEA Card programs were not available, the Navy would require an
immediate solution from Defense Logistics Agency in order to meet its
commercial, bulk fuel requirements for ship port visits to commercial
ports and aircraft refueling stops at commercial airports. It should be
noted that fuel and fuel-related services are outside the scope of the
Husbanding Service Provider Program.
Mr. Garamendi. The AIR and SEA Card programs are critical to
national security and military readiness across the world. The Air Card
fuel program contract process administered by DLA has previously had
issues. What effect would the degradation of this program have on your
service's readiness should aircraft and marine fuel suppliers in the
network be limited or lost? Are you concerned about the loss of
competitive prices or disruption of this long-standing network?
General Smith. The proper and effective use of the Defense
Logistics Agency (DLA) managed, Aviation Into-plane Reimbursement (AIR)
Card program provides Marine Aviation with the flexibility needed to
sortie and operate across our Air Stations and commercial aviation
infrastructure. The Marine Aviation Logistics Squadrons across our
force continue to execute DLA directed control measures to increase
program management proficiency at the tactical level and ensure
accountability. Any degradation, disruption, or serious loss of the
associated network of aircraft fuel suppliers would immediately compel
a reassessment of a key planning consideration shaping the execution of
Sortie Based Training Plans (SBTP) and operational missions.
Disruptions or loss of competitive pricing will ultimately impact the
fiscal balance the Service looks to maintain as multiple appropriations
are brought to bear in resourcing the operation and maintenance of our
aircraft and units. This would almost surely lead to a degradation in
readiness of our aviation community.
Mr. Garamendi. The AIR and SEA Card programs are critical to
national security and military readiness across the world. The Air Card
fuel program contract process administered by DLA has previously had
issues. What effect would the degradation of this program have on your
service's readiness should aircraft and marine fuel suppliers in the
network be limited or lost? Are you concerned about the loss of
competitive prices or disruption of this long-standing network?
General Allvin. AIR cards are administered by DLA-Energy and the
AF/A3 community in accordance with DLA Energy Publication P-8: ``Fuel
Card Program'' and Air Force Instruction (AFI) 11-253, ``Managing
Purchases of Aviation Fuel and Ground Services.'' The loss or
degradation of the AIR Card, as a purchase media--without a suitable
replacement for Mission Planners and Aircrews to utilize at commercial
airports to purchase fuel and ground services--would have a detrimental
impact on the Air Force's ability to execute its mission. It is the Air
Force's understanding that DLA-Energy is in the process of awarding the
next AIR Card contract and has extended the current contract to ensure
there is no lapse or disruption to the network. In FY22, the Air Force
purchased fuel at over 1,200 commercial airports, using the cards
provided by the AIR Card program. The Air Force purchased over 80
million gallons at DLA contract/Canadian Bulletin locations and 23
million gallons at non-contract locations, accounting for 67 thousand
refuel operations, or 7% of the total gallons of aviation fuel
purchased.
______

QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MR. FINSTAD
Mr. Finstad. Can you speak to the critical need to modernize the
Air National Guard C-130 fleet to C-130J aircraft and the importance of
continuing to modernize the fleet by simultaneously upgrading some C-
130H aircraft with modern technology?
General Allvin. C-130Js are gradually replacing the C-130H fleet
through yearly Congressionally added funding which will establish a
common interoperable MDS fleet. At the current rate of 16 C-130J models
per year, full recapitalization of the remaining 120 C-130Hs will occur
in 2033. However, selective C-130H model modernization efforts are
still required to ensure the remaining aircraft remain effective and
operationally compatible. Further, continued C-130H model propulsion
system modernization are needed to improve reliability, fuel
efficiency, and performance.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. STRONG
Mr. Strong. 1. It is my understanding that the Army has taken up
its own approach to develop a variant of robotic targets. What is the
current status of the Trackless Moving Target-Infantry? Is it true that
it is five years late in development?
General George. The Army has successfully matured its Trackless
Moving Targets (TMT) program to meet the Army's requirements for
trackless targets, including both vehicle (TMT-V) and infantry (TMT-I)
variants, to operate on live-fire ranges. The program is executing on
schedule and in accordance with the Army's plan.
In 2020, the Army awarded a Small Business Innovative Research
(SBIR) Phase III production contract to a Michigan-based small
business, Pratt Miller Engineering, which is a wholly owned subsidiary
of Wisconsin-based Oshkosh Defense. The Army produced and deployed 25
TMT-Is and 3 TMT-Vs at two Army Installations. These systems have
commonality for ease of maintenance and sustainability and operation.
The Army plans to award its Full Rate Production SBIR Phase III
contract in 2nd Quarter FY 2024 (2QFY24) for the continued production
of both TMT variants to meet the Army's training requirements.
Mr. Strong. 2. The Maneuver Center of Excellence at Fort Benning
has shared that the Army's solution dangerously lacks collision
avoidance, doesn't accurately register hits, doesn't provide a thermal
signature for nighttime operation, can't replicate human behaviors and
has barely been used by soldiers. It is my understanding that the Army
is still planning on going to Full Rate Production for TMT, is this
true? If so, why--how does this enhance soldier lethality?
General George. Yes, the Army plans to award its Full Rate
Production SBIR Phase III contract for TMT in 2QFY24 to meet the Army's
training requirements for trackless targets. The Army is confident
these systems will improve soldier lethality with the additional
realism that trackless targets provide. The Army is currently unaware
of any documented concerns with the TMT program from the Maneuver
Center of Excellence.
TMT platforms implement collision avoidance and human behavior
replication via pre-planned path following and positive control of the
platforms through the Army's live-fire range control software and PME's
robotic software. Although the initial systems deployed to Fort Moore
(formerly Fort Benning) had issues with registering hits, those issues
were addressed and corrected during development. With respect to
nighttime capabilities, TMTs have power ports for the connection of
devices including thermal blankets, which are required for day and
nighttime operations. Although the initial TMT systems deployed to Fort
Moore had limited soldier use due to the installation's operational
requirements and an early-on technical issue, the TMTs are now being
relocated to Fort Liberty (formerly Fort Bragg) to gain more
utilization. The TMTs sent to the Joint Readiness Training Center have
been utilized in every training rotation since their deployment in
October 2022 and more systems are being requested for additional
realistic training scenarios.
Mr. Strong. 1. As you know, the Army has led the way with mass
timber adoption through five privatized hotels. Since the first hotel
that was built at Redstone Arsenal in 2015, DOD saw mass timber
buildings consistently go up almost 40 percent faster, with 44 percent
less personnel hours, and a 90 percent reduction in on-site
construction traffic. Not only that, but mass timber far exceeds
installation resilience standards related to anti-terrorism force
protection, lateral winds, seismic activity, and fire performance.
Despite these benefits, the DOD has yet to design and build its own
facility using the innovative wood products from mass timber despite
that speed, strength, and efficiency. What is the Department doing to
ensure equal competition in the early MILCON process, particularly to
ensure mass timber is considered?
General George. The Army relies on the design and construction
agent to ensure equitable competition for all building materials within
our current planning and design process. Life-cycle cost effectiveness
is required per the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-58). As a
result, project delivery teams are required to consider multiple
alternatives for the various components of each design including, but
not limited to, project location, building type, and material
availability. Policies currently being written by the Army that
prioritize sustainability attributes may have the effect of expanding
the use of cross-laminated timber (CLT) for military construction. The
Army plans to construct a CLT barracks in FY 2025 at Joint Base Lewis-
McChord, Washington, and will use data from that process to inform
future decisions regarding building materials.
Mr. Strong. 2. Considering the lessons learned from the Redstone
Arsenal hotel, how did USACE ensure education across the MILCON
workforce, particularly those responsible for designing the buildings
and soliciting for construction bids?
General George. Multiple presentations/webinars have been
facilitated documenting the successes and lessons learned from the
Candlewood Suites hotel at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, with an audience
consisting of a cross-section of groups and disciplines within the US
Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
USACE also published and circulated technical notes for both CLT in
January 2016 and nail-laminated timber in April 2019 to promulgate
knowledge about these materials and the most advantageous building
types and geographic regions for their utilization.
Mr. Strong. 3. Specifically, what has the Army done to ensure the
USACE workforce is aware of mass timber construction benefits to get
after the MILCON problems we face today?
General George. While the Army typically does not direct the design
and construction agent on what materials and methods to use for
military construction, USACE developed a tri-service Uniform Facilities
Guide Specification on CLT, which has been approved for use by all U.S.
military services. The ready availability of this template helps to
facilitate the use of CLT in military construction. In 2016, the
International Code Council Tall Wood Building Ad Hoc Committee began
formulating building code recommendations for tall wood buildings. In
2018, the Committee's proposals were approved for inclusion in the 2021
International Building Code (IBC). USACE, with its tri-service
counterparts, modified and published the Unified Facilities Criteria 1-
200-01 DOD Building Code in September 2022, incorporating the 2021 IBC
to enable more effective use of CLT and nail-laminated timber in
military construction.
Multiple presentations and webinars have been facilitated to
discuss the above documents and other recent developments. These events
equip USACE project delivery teams with the understanding and
confidence to integrate mass timber and other newer technologies.
The USACE Construction Engineering Research Laboratory (CERL) is
currently exploring how buildings constructed with mass timber respond
to blast conditions. CERL is also partnering with the American Wood
Council to provide expertise for the upcoming Army military
construction barracks project at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington,
which will promote decarbonization and electrification. To date, there
are five Army hotels constructed by Lendlease, the Privatized Army
Lodging program partner and construction firm. These CLT structures
include: the Candlewood Suites hotel at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama (92
rooms); Fort Drum, New York (99 rooms); Joint Base Lewis-McChord,
Washington (127 rooms); and Fort Jackson, South Carolina (West
Building--171 rooms; East Building--146 rooms).
Mr. Strong. 1. I understand that the Marine Corps is planning a
$250 million, 5-year IDIQ to support Marine lethality and autonomous
robotic targets. I'd like to commend the Corps for doing this, and for
using an innovative ``Technology as a Service'' model that saves the
government time, money, and logistics. Do you believe realistic
training tools like this are critical to preparing warfighters for
combat operations?
General Smith. The Marine Corps' training resources play a critical
role in the Service's ability to prepare to meet the demands of current
and future operating environments. The provision of modern capable
training and range resources remains a Service priority to realize the
Naval Expeditionary Force required in Force Design 2030 and Training
and Education 2030 to deter current and future real-world pacing
threats. The Marine Corps is committed to continued research,
integration, and use of the latest technological advances in evolving
our training to prepare Marines to counter a peer adversary. These
efforts are indicated through the Service's establishment of the
Trackless Mobile Infantry Target (TMIT) (e.g., autonomous robotic
target) capability. Based upon a Business Case Analysis, the capability
is being provided using a Knowledge Based Training Service (KBTS) type
contract (e.g., ``Training as a Service''). In addition to the TMIT
system, the contract includes field service support at each location
for the operations and maintenance, and logistical equipment, spare
parts, and software/hardware upgrades. The KBTS solution was identified
as the most advantageous in terms of performance, benefits, and risks.
TMITs significantly enhance standards-based training events, promote
enhanced weapons proficiency, and provide the ability to create a more
challenging training environment. TMITs contribute to the overarching
missions and activities of the Marine Corps by providing human-like
behavior in a live-fire training environment to better simulate the
actions of adversaries resulting in increased lethality and more
effective warfighters. The capabilities that these targets provide
allow Marines to conduct a live-fire assault on a realistic enemy,
chase that enemy from the objective, pursue them by fire, and prepare
for and repel a counterattack in ways not previously achievable.
Realistic training tools like this are critical to preparing
warfighters for combat operations. In summary, the Marine Corps will be
required to support training of Marines and Marine Corps units in an
expanding array of mission essential tasks that require ever-increasing
amounts of training space and increasingly sophisticated training and
range resources. With the help of Congress we will meet that challenge,
enabling Marines to serve as the Nation's Force-in-Readiness.

[all]
