- [H.A.S.C. No. 118-34] A REVIEW OF THE DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE ENTERPRISE'S POSTURE AND CAPABILITIES IN STRATEGIC COMPETITION AND IN SYNCHRONIZING INTELLIGENCE EFFORTS TO COUNTER THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-34]

A REVIEW OF THE DEFENSE
INTELLIGENCE ENTERPRISE'S POSTURE
AND CAPABILITIES IN STRATEGIC
COMPETITION AND IN SYNCHRONIZING
INTELLIGENCE EFFORTS TO COUNTER
THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

__________

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

APRIL 27, 2023

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-525                    WASHINGTON : 2024

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL OPERATIONS

JACK BERGMAN, Michigan, Chairman

AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 SARA JACOBS, California
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
CORY MILLS, Florida                  JIMMY PANETTA, California

Craig Greene, Professional Staff Member
Will Johnson, Professional Staff Member
Zachary Calderon, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Bergman, Hon. Jack, a Representative from Michigan, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations............     1
Gallego. Hon. Ruben, a Representative from Arizona, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations....     2

WITNESSES

Berrier, LTG Scott, USA, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency...     4
Moultrie, Hon. Ronald S., Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence and Security......................................     3
Nakasone, GEN Paul M., USA, Director, National Security Agency/
Chief, Central Security Service, and Commander, U.S. Cyber
Command........................................................     3

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Berrier, LTG Scott...........................................    32
Moultrie, Hon. Ronald S......................................    23
Nakasone, GEN Paul M.........................................    27

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted post hearing.]

A REVIEW OF THE DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE

ENTERPRISE'S POSTURE AND CAPABILITIES IN

STRATEGIC COMPETITION AND IN SYNCHRONIZING

INTELLIGENCE EFFORTS TO COUNTER

THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Subcommittee on Intelligence and Special Operations,
Washington, DC, Thursday, April 27, 2023.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4:15 p.m., in
room 2212, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jack Bergman
(chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JACK BERGMAN, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
MICHIGAN, CHAIRMAN, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL
OPERATIONS

Mr. Bergman. Good afternoon. The subcommittee will come to
order. I ask unanimous consent that the Chair be authorized to
declare a recess at any time. Without objection, so ordered.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for the subcommittee to
understand the Defense Intelligence Enterprise's posture and
capabilities in strategic competition and in synchronizing
intelligence efforts to counter the People's Republic of China.
The National Defense Strategy focuses the Department's efforts
on China, and rightfully so. But as we hold this hearing, the
Russian-Ukraine conflict has been raging for 428 days, North
Korea continues to test nuclear missiles, Iran is actively
supporting non-state actors in the Middle East, and threats
from terrorist organizations are still persistent across the
globe.
The Defense Intelligence Enterprise has a challenging task
to support the Department's efforts in strategic competition,
counter China, and support the remaining geographic combatant
commanders to counter threats in their areas of operations, as
well as the persistent counterterrorism efforts. I am
interested in understanding each of your roles in synchronizing
these efforts and ensuring your organizations have the
capabilities needed, are resourced appropriately, and, probably
most important, what capabilities gaps exist.
I would welcome to today's hearing the following witnesses:
Mr. Ronald Moultrie, Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence and Security; General Paul Nakasone, Director of
the National Security Agency, Chief of the Central Security
Service, and Commander of U.S. Cyber Command; and Lieutenant
General Scott Berrier, Director of the Defense Intelligence
Agency. Welcome, all.
In the interest of time, I will ask the witnesses to keep
their opening remarks brief so that we can have more time for
the closed session. With that, let me again thank our witnesses
for appearing before us today. I now recognize Ranking Member
Gallego for any opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. RUBEN GALLEGO, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM ARIZONA,
RANKING MEMBER, SUBCOMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE AND SPECIAL
OPERATIONS

Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
chairman for convening this hearing and the witnesses for their
time and willingness to appear before the subcommittee. Since
you testified in front of this subcommittee last year, the
global security situation remains dynamic. Russia continues its
violent assaults on Ukraine's sovereignty. China, our pacing
challenge, as defined by national security and defense
strategies, continues its posture toward Taiwan, military
assertiveness in the Indo-Pacific region, and global influence
campaign. North Korea continues its persistent testing of
ballistic missiles. Iran's proxies continue their malign
activities, and violent extremist organizations continue
seeking to attack the United States and our allies.
For the Defense Intelligence Enterprise specifically, we
continue to see concerning trends in the strategic competition.
Last fall, the NSA [National Security Agency], in coordination
with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] and CISA
[Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency], released a
report highlighting Chinese cyber threats to our critical
infrastructure and the security of the defense industrial base.
Likewise, just 2 months ago, the DIA [Defense Intelligence
Agency] issued a report further exposing ties between Russia
and Iran over the use of lethal Iranian drones in Ukraine. And
we're continuing to monitor the growing relationship between
Russia and the PRC [People's Republic of China], especially as
the latter reportedly spends billions of dollars in support of
Russian disinformation. These are just a select few instances
that reflect the need for increased focus and agility from the
Defense Intelligence Enterprise when it comes to strategic
competition.
I remain committed to working with you to ensure your
organizations have the resources and authorities required to
address these challenges in an era of great power competition.
We cannot do it alone, so I continue to say our partners and
allies play a key role as we work together to counter the
aggressive and malign behavior that seeks to erode rules-based
international order.
I would especially like to thank Secretary Moultrie for
reaffirming the value of strategic intelligence partners
publicly during his visit last year with the Lithuanian
Minister of National Defence.
To effectively deal with the challenge of strategic
competition, the Defense Intelligence Enterprise must remain
agile, be collaborative across all domains and enterprises,
quickly provide releasable and actionable intelligence
throughout the Department, and collaborate with allies and
partners.
I look forward to hearing from witnesses on these and other
issues today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Ranking Member Gallego. We will now
hear from our witnesses and then move into the question-and-
answer session. Immediately following one round of questions,
we will reconvene for the classified session, which will take
place in Rayburn room 2337.
I will now recognize Mr. Moultrie.

STATEMENT OF HON. RONALD S. MOULTRIE, UNDER SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE FOR INTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY

Mr. Moultrie. Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Gallego, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, it's a privilege to
testify on the posture of the Defense Intelligence and Security
Enterprise. With my colleagues, we will address global threats
and challenges with a specific focus on the pacing challenge,
the People's Republic of China, or the PRC.
On behalf of defense intelligence security professionals
and intelligence professionals, I thank each of you for your
steadfast support and partnership in keeping our Nation safe.
I am joined by Generals Nakasone and Berrier, and they will
be offering their intelligence-informed perspectives on the PRC
challenge. We look forward to your questions on these
challenges and how our enterprises are postured to meet them.
I have provided the subcommittee with a classified
statement for the record that outlines our FY24 [fiscal year
2024] Military Intelligence Program [MIP] budget request in
greater detail. Our number one priority continues to be the
pacing challenge of the PRC. As Secretary Austin has testified
previously, we do not believe that conflict with the PRC is
either imminent or inevitable. The Department's intelligence
and security efforts are focused on deterring the PRC's
regional aggression against Taiwan and its neighbors while
supporting global adherence to the international rule of law.
While we seek peaceful resolutions to issues, in the event that
conflict becomes inevitable, we will deliver a decisive
information and decision advantage to our leaders and combatant
commanders. The Military Intelligence Program is postured to
support that goal.
While I can provide more specifics of the MIP's efforts in
closed session, our major lines of effort are focused on
establishing: one, robust intelligence sharing policies and
processes; two, secure, resilient, and reliable systems and
architectures; three, strong regional and global partnerships;
and, lastly, number four, a deep analytic and linguistic bench.
I again thank the subcommittee for its leadership and its
support, and I will now turn to General Nakasone, followed by
General Berrier, for their testimonies.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moultrie can be found in the
Appendix on page 23.]

STATEMENT OF GEN PAUL M. NAKASONE, USA, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY/CHIEF, CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE, AND COMMANDER,
U.S. CYBER COMMAND

General Nakasone. Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Gallego,
distinguished members of the committee, I'm honored to
represent the men and women of the National Security Agency,
and I'm grateful for your support. Thank you for this
opportunity to testify today before and with my Department of
Defense Intelligence Enterprise colleagues. The men and women
of the National Security Agency are committed to providing
vital support to policymakers and to military operators in our
vital role as a combat support agency. We deliver cryptologic
capabilities to enable the Defense Intelligence Enterprise to
deliver accurate and timely intelligence on threats facing the
Nation to our warfighters and national leadership.
The U.S. faces many threats today. China challenges across
all elements of national power while coercively seeking to
expand its malign influence and control over its neighbors and
around the world. Russia remains engaged in global malign
influence and its illegal aggression in Ukraine. Iran is a
regional menace routinely conducting cyber and malign influence
activities, while North Korea continues to advance its missile
and WMD [weapons of mass destruction] capabilities. Terror
groups, criminal cyber actors, and fentanyl-dealing cartels are
ongoing threats. Rapid changes in the global technological
environment require better approaches to data, machine
learning, and artificial intelligence.
NSA is working with interagency, private sector, and
foreign partners to build cybersecurity in defense of the
Nation and is playing a critical role in developing insights to
counter China. I'd like to emphasize the importance [of]
intelligence derived from section 702 of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act to the missions I just mentioned.
This authority, which allows NSA to collect intelligence on
non-U.S. persons located overseas that use U.S. communications
infrastructure, is critical to keeping the Nation safe. I look
forward to continuing to speak with Congress about 702's
importance and the rigorous compliance program that guides our
use of it.
In my role as the Director of NSA and Commander of U.S.
Cyber Command, and pursuant to recent guidance issued by the
Department of Defense, I am closely examining access,
accountability, and security in our workspaces, in
collaboration with the whole-of-government efforts related to
the protection of classified information.
Maintaining the trust and confidence of our Nation's
leaders and the public remains a top focus. Your support is
what allows us to achieve positive national security outcomes
for the Nation.
Thank you again for inviting me today, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Nakasone can be found in
the Appendix on page 27.]

STATEMENT OF LTG SCOTT BERRIER, USA, DIRECTOR, DEFENSE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

General Berrier. Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Gallego,
and distinguished subcommittee members, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the Defense Intelligence Agency's
assessment of the global security environment. I am pleased to
join Honorable Moultrie and General Nakasone today to discuss
the complex threat landscape and our work to provide timely,
insightful, and rigorous intelligence.
DIA and the Defense Intelligence Enterprise [DIE] are
transforming our approach to meet threats to our Nation posed
by strategic competition with China, Russia, and other foreign
nations. With your continued support, DIA and the DIE will
continue excel in providing all-source analysis, HUMINT [human
intelligence] and technical collection, open-source collection,
material exploitation, modeling and simulation, and other
unique mission sets.
Like you, I am very concerned about the ongoing threats
from China, Russia, North Korea, Iran, and violent extremist
organizations, but China is our pacing challenge and DIA's top
priority. Beijing is expanding its global influence and
stepping up its multi-domain pressure campaign against Taiwan,
as observed by its sharply increased rhetoric and military
activity over this past year. Xi Jinping's attainment of a
third term as the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist
Party positions Beijing for further progress on military
modernization and operational goals that will challenge the
U.S. during the next year and beyond.
The war in Ukraine is also a priority for DIA. For the
Russian military, 2022 was not a good year. The ``New Look''
army is gone, and in my view we are at a particularly dangerous
place with Russia. Putin is not seeking an off-ramp, and Moscow
has asserted publicly that it remains committed to achieving
its objectives in Ukraine through military force.
DIA has unique responsibilities, expertise, and missions
that you trust us to lead, such as foundational military
intelligence; Defense HUMINT and cover; measurement and
signature intelligence, known as MASINT; and JWICS [Joint
Worldwide Intelligence Communications System]. Your DIA
officers provide strategic operational and tactical defense
intelligence to our warfighters, defense planners,
policymakers, and the acquisition community.
One final area I would like to highlight during my
testimony is the workforce. As you know, our workforce spans
the globe with innovative and forward-leaning officers. These
talented and dedicated experts are making strides to defend the
United States and our allies. From our defense attaches, to
combatant command J2 [Joint Staff Intelligence Directorate]
teams, to analysts and case officers, these professionals are
mission focused and working tireless behind the scenes to
defend the nation. I'm proud to represent a dedicated workforce
that provides intelligence on foreign actors to prevent and win
wars, and to illuminate opportunities to enable the United
States to outpace our strategic competitors.
I also echo General Nakasone's comment on section 702
reauthorization. Our all-source analysis depends on it.
I look forward to your questions on the global threat
environment, and thank you for your continued support and
opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of General Berrier can be found in
the Appendix on page 32.]
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. I would remind everyone, especially
those giving testimony, we are not in a classified setting
here. I know I don't have to tell you that, but I think it's
important that we all understand we will go to closed session
after this.
So I will recognize myself here for 5 minutes to start. And
all of my questions here are for all of you, so feel free to
whoever feels like you want to, you know, chime in.
First, what lessons have your organizations taken from the
Russian-Ukraine conflict that are helping you shape your
efforts to counter China?
Mr. Moultrie. Yes, Chairman, I'll start and turn to my
colleagues. I think one of the top lessons that we took away in
the Defense Department from an intelligence perspective is that
we have to have the right sharing policies in place to be able
to provide our allies and, in this case Ukraine, with the
intelligence that it needed to actually defend itself against a
formidable, at least seemingly formidable, adversary, if you
will. So that was probably lesson number one.
Lesson number two was ensuring that we had the right
partnerships and establishing those partnerships early on and
not waiting until after a conflict actually broke out to do
that. So ensuring that we had the right individuals and
partnerships.
And then the last one that I'll highlight is just ensuring
that we have the right skill sets, ensuring that we have the
right analytic expertise, ensuring that we have the right
linguistical expertise is something that we took away as
something that we have to be prepared for if we are to face the
pacing challenge of the PRC.
General Nakasone. Chairman, I would add two ideas here.
First of all, intelligence and information and what a strength
it is to our Nation. If you would have asked me 3 years ago
would you anticipate releasing some of our most sensitive
intelligence broadly to the public, I would have said I could
never imagine such a day. But yet in the fall of 2021, with the
President's decision and the direction of the Director of
National Intelligence, we did that, and we did it in a manner
that was allowing us to do three things: build a coalition,
impact an adversary, and enable a partner. That is a lesson
that we have taken to heart, and at the same time, when we've
been able to do that, be able to protect our sources and
methods.
The second piece that I would highlight is the tempo. We go
from competition to crisis to conflict in weeks, and the pace
in terms of the provision of intelligence is much quicker today
than anything I've ever seen before. And I think it will only
speed up with our ability to process information, the
collection that we're taking in, and obviously the information
that we're providing.
General Berrier. Chairman, thank you for that question. I
would offer three things from the DIA perspective here:
partnership, secure communications, and continuously refining
our tradecraft.
So on the partnership piece, we all have deep professional
and personal partnerships with our counterparts in other
nations, and those personal relationships go very, very far
when you can pick up a secure line and have a conversation with
your partner about something bad that's about to happen. That
is key, it's clutch, and it's clutch today.
The other piece is secure comms. We had the ability to
install a secure communications network that was able to
support Ukraine and our partners on this to be able to
disseminate the information that Honorable Moultrie and General
Nakasone are talking about. It's so key to have that.
And then the last piece is to continuously look at
ourselves to refine our tradecraft. We rest everything on sound
tradecraft principles. Whether that's analyzing foreign
military forces or analyzing their will to fight, we have to go
through a continuous process to reevaluate that and make sure
that we're doing the best that we can.
Thank you.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. And I just want to, before my time
expires here, each of you touch on your ability to get the
right people in the right positions, have them, you know, a
full up round, if you will. How are you doing as far as being
able to recruit and maintain the workforce you need?
Mr. Moultrie. I'll start, Mr. Chairman. I think we're doing
better. There's a lot more work to be done, especially if we
are to get the skill sets and the linguistic skills that we
need to prepare for any inevitability that we might face with
China. And so being able to bring in those linguistic skills,
hiring the right expertise, I think is going to be something
that we have to continue to focus on.
General Nakasone. Chairman, we're in the midst of our
largest hiring ever, year ever in our agency's 70-year history.
And I would characterize it as being one that, while we will
meet, it will be incredibly challenging for us just because
there is so much competition for the best and the brightest
today.
It's interesting that, as we go out and make our pitch, one
of the things that certainly that we're able to do quite well
is to talk about the benefits of the mission that you work. But
I would also say just in closing on this that we have to have a
new paradigm as we look at the workforce of the future. Not
everyone comes into government service for 30-plus years, and
so we have to be ready to recruit, train, retain, and then also
return people that go away for a period of time, bringing them
back to our agency with open arms and readily.
General Berrier. Chairman, thank you for that question. We
are attracting a lot of talent, and we're getting a lot of
really, really good folks into the agency, and we have to be
able to sustain that. DIA is undergoing its only HR [human
resources] modernization effort that we've ever gone through,
and the ability to attract that talent, to retain that talent,
to make sure that we can professionally develop them, that we
have a talent management system that they thrive in, is really,
really key.
So we've got some work to do. We think we're on the right
track, and we do appreciate your support for that.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, everybody. And Ranking Member
Gallego, you're recognized.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've all heard the
public statements from the Chinese president telling his
military to prepare to invade Taiwan by 2027. There's a fair
amount of speculation when it comes to that date or any date.
In your assessment, could the PRC launch a successful
military invasion of Taiwan? And if they could, what would be
the cost to China? When I say could they make that--can they
make that jump by 2027 or near that time, to be more specific.
And we'll just start with General Nakasone.
General Nakasone. Ranking Member, as the Secretary has
talked about, I certainly believe that any type of conflict
with China is not imminent, nor is necessarily inevitable.
To your very specific question, while we have heard the
statements in terms of what President Xi would like to do by a
specific date, I think where we are focused right now is to
ensure that there is no miscalculation. And that's where we
have focused a tremendous amount of time to ensure that we
clearly understand the capabilities and intents of the People's
Republic and, at the same time, we're able to provide early
warning and that type of indication to our forces in the
Pacific and to our senior policymakers, as well.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you. The follow-up question on that, I
think, Lieutenant General Berrier and General Nakasone, you
guys both have created organizations within your respective
departments that focus on China. One is the USCYBERCOM [U.S.
Cyber Command]-NSA China Outcomes Group and the other is the
DIA mission group. Can both of you discuss what these groups
provide to you in your departments--obviously concerning the
[inaudible]--and do they collaborate? If you can answer as much
as possible now, we can also, obviously, follow up in greater
detail in the classified session.
General Berrier. Ranking Member, they absolutely
collaborate. In fact, we had the leader of General Nakasone's
team into our headquarters just a couple of weeks ago, so
there's crosstalk and discussion.
The China mission group is really focused on China and
Taiwan. We felt, in this pivot to the Pacific that President
Obama directed in 2012, that we needed to focus internally and
externally, and the China mission group gives us the capability
to really stare in deeply and provide the deep insights,
analysis, and warning support to INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command] and the Department.
General Nakasone. Ranking Member, they do collaborate, and
they collaborate quite closely. As we stood up the China
Outcomes Group, it was based on our experiences in 2018 when we
brought together the experts of U.S. Cyber Command and the
National Security Agency to deal with Russia and election
influence. That was the same idea. And with us, as we go
forward, we're looking at our China Outcomes Group primarily to
support USINDOPACOM with the options and the insights that are
necessary to understand what China is going to do in the near
term.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you. Secretary Moultrie, recognizing the
importance of [inaudible] and timely intelligence sharing with
our partners and allies, something which we saw with our
Ukraine engagement with our allies, what updates to policies
have you made related to that, and how effective have they been
so far?
Mr. Moultrie. Yes, Ranking Member. We've looked at a number
of things since we implemented the sharing changes in early
2022. One of the things that I signed out in October of last
year was a new policy on NOFORN [Not Releasable to Foreign
Nationals], so no foreign intelligence dissemination. So what
we wanted to do is have a comprehensive review of our NOFORN
policy to ensure that we were not overly using NOFORN within
the Department. There are only two conditions where we really
could only use NOFORN, and so what we wanted to do was to
ensure that our policies actually match what our practices
were. And I think that's been a great, of great assistance to
our partners and allies. We've heard resoundingly from them to
say that they are looking at their NOFORN, which each of our
partners have their own eyes-only type intelligence, if you
will. So we're leading by example in this space by actually
saying we will ensure that we maximize the sharing that we do
with you, even on the most sensitive things that we have, if
you will do the same. That will be a force multiplier for the
partnerships and relationships.
So we are doing that, while at the same time looking at how
we can maximize the sharing of other types of intelligence with
our partners. But we have signed out policies that will
actually help us institutionalize this across the Department of
Defense.
Mr. Gallego. Thank you. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. And I again just remind our members
who came in a couple of minutes ago, we are in the unclassified
part of this, so just as a reminder. Mr. Scott, you're
recognized.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Nakasone, you
mentioned 702. I understand that we--did we declassify the
number on the percentage of the information that is given in
the President's daily briefing on national security with regard
to how often 702 is used in those briefings?
General Nakasone. Congressman, we did. In fact, that was
released just recently. In calendar year 2022, 59 percent of
the President's daily briefing articles contained section 702
information reported by our agency.
Mr. Scott. And we have, obviously, have the reauthorization
of 702 coming forward. It's extremely important to our national
security, and I want to say this: the bureaucrats at the FBI in
some cases have abused their authority, and there are going to
have to be some systems put in place that stop that if it's
going to be reauthorized, and there are going to have to be
consequences for the people who abuse that authority.
And, again, I appreciate your agency and the way you have
used it. But people have to understand that, the President of
the United States needs to understand, there are going to have
to be some guardrails for 702 to be reauthorized because of the
abuses that have occurred, predominantly with bureaucrats at
the FBI.
With that said, we depend on the private sector for our
economy, our defense industrial base. The corporate sector
seems ill-prepared to deal with corporate espionage or cyber
attacks, and they happen on a daily basis. And my question is,
who's responsible for the security of the national
infrastructure, as well as the cybersecurity inside our defense
industrial base?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, in terms of our critical
infrastructure, as you well know, 16 different sectors are
critical infrastructure. The one sector that the Department of
Defense is responsible for is the defense industrial base. And
what we have done as a department is, working through the
National Security Agency, Under Secretary of Defense for
Intelligence and Security, and the DOD [Department of Defense]
Chief Information Officer, look at ways that we can partner
more effectively with the defense industrial base. If the
majority of the intelligence that we have to share with the
defense industrial base needs to be at an unclassified level,
why don't we produce that? And we are today.
And so we have stood up a cyberspace collaboration center
outside of the National Security Agency that regularly is
talking with the defense industrial base, over 300 different
defense industrial base companies today that are talking
regularly. And I think, to the important piece of not only just
getting the information from the private sector but giving,
what are we seeing, as well, and then having this discussion,
what's anomalous that's happening.
Mr. Scott. You alluded to this. The Armed Services
Committee had serious discussions back in December, over a year
ago, about the declassification of the intel. I want to give
our intelligence community tremendous credit for just how
precise the intel was with regard to Russia and what they
intended to do in Ukraine. And I agree with you 100 percent
that the decision to declassify that information was important
to the world. If the world had been surprised by the attack of
Russia on the Ukraine, I think that you would probably be in
the midst of a global recession right now that somewhat was
avoided because people expected what Russia did.
The thing we missed was how important the will to fight
was. I mean, we thought Ukrainians could hold out for weeks or
months, and they have given the Russians a pretty good punch in
the nose, and I hope they keep doing it.
With regard to declassification going forward, that's an
example of how it worked. It obviously doesn't work every time.
But what suggestions do you have for us on declassification?
General Nakasone. So I begin with, Congressman, the fact of
it's a two-way dialogue, right. The importance of the agency
that is looking at the sanitization or the declassification
material, working with a series of different senior
policymakers and senior military commanders, say this is the
art of the possible. This is what we have to do, and this is
what we have to protect. That dialogue was very rich in the
fall of 2021.
The second piece is the work that this committee has done
to empower our agencies with the collection that we need gives
us tremendous opportunity. At the end of the day, this is
really powerful collection combined with really good analysis.
Mr. Scott. Gentlemen, thank you.
Mr. Bergman. Mr. Jackson of North Carolina, you are
recognized.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Thank you. General Nakasone,
I want to follow up on something you just said with respect to
really powerful collection. Understanding that we're in an
unclassified setting, and I think we should probably follow
this up when we're in a different setting, but I'd like to hear
you speak to the effect that artificial intelligence is going
to have on magnifying your capabilities with respect to
collection. I assume a ton of bandwidth goes into taking data
and turning it into intelligence, and I assume that artificial
intelligence is going to become critical with respect to both
collection of data and processing data into intelligence.
That's my assumption. Am I right about that, or am I wrong
about that?
General Nakasone. I believe you're correct about that,
Congressman. And I might just state, you know, the power of
bringing together so much information and rapidly being able to
go through it, we're very interested in this. We've been very
interested in large language models and this type of data for
many, many years at the National Security Agency.
I think, however, we also need to understand that it is by
no means a panacea to everything that is done. And, in fact, if
we take a look at some of the examples of artificial
intelligence today, not all of it is correct. And so we need to
be very, very judicious about understanding the models and
understanding both the capabilities and the shortcomings of it.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Is this technology the
biggest game changer in your field since you've been in it?
General Nakasone. It's the biggest game changer that I can
think of that I've seen in terms of as we go forward. I think
it's going to have tremendous impacts not only on the
intelligence community but our economy, the way that we conduct
our lives. It will be transformational.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Would either of you like to
speak to this?
Mr. Moultrie. I'll speak to it, Congressman. Thanks for the
opportunity. I agree completely with General Nakasone that AI
[artificial intelligence] and generative AI is going to be a
major game changer for us. I think, when you couple it with
potential, the potentials of quantum computing, you'll really
have a powerful tool that we can use.
I think it's also important, as General Nakasone pointed
out, to really understand that the outcomes that you will reap
out of this will only be as good as the data that's been fed
into the AI model, so data provenance becomes really important
to us, as we have seen for a number of years and decades, if
you will. You have to ensure that you feed the right data into
the model, the large language model. If you don't, you will get
an outcome that is not the correct outcome. And we know our
adversaries are considering or already thinking about large
data models, if you will, and how they may use that against us.
Our being able to understand and being able to identify when
something is actually an AI-generated outcome is something
that's going to be very important to us, too.
General Berrier. Congressman, I would add that this
committee expects DIA to be the master sense-makers of the
operational and strategic environment. To do that, we have to
be the best at foundational military intelligence. That is to
know everything there is to know about every military in the
world: where they're at, how they're organized, what their
order of battle is, what their equipment is, how they're
trained, how they fight, when will they fight, why would they
fight, how they're led.
If you think about the plethora of data that's out there in
big data analytics, AI is a game changer for DIA. We're
incorporating some of these tools now, and I'd be happy to
discuss that in the closed session.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Isn't it, to your point,
also a game changer for our adversaries and maybe more of a
leveling-up for them than a leveling-up for us? Because it just
is such a force magnifier that it makes up for a lot of other
infrastructural deficits they have with their forces. It's an
acceleration for them.
Mr. Moultrie. Yes. Congressman, that's an excellent point,
I think. We get back to why we call China the pacing challenge.
We need to continue to pace ourselves ahead of them. So they
are going to do these things. There's no preventing them from
going there. What we have to do is ensure that the respective
agencies have the resources that they need, that they have the
materials that they need, and that they have the intellectual
firepower that they need to actually look at this.
General Nakasone. Congressman, I think the other piece, and
this is really to Secretary Moultrie's point early on, is that
it truly is about partnerships. This is being driven, for the
most part, very rapidly in the private sector, and so the
partnerships that we form with the private sector,
understanding what's going on, are critical.
Here's the other point. We think much about the ability of
what AI is going to do for us in the future. One of the things
that we have communicated very clearly to a number of the U.S.
companies is the importance of securing the intellectual
property that you have invested within this type of capability
because this will be a target of our adversaries.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. It just seems like, now that
the genie is out of the bottle, it's less of an advantage to us
than it will be to our adversaries who are so far behind us,
that it lets them catch up to us more quickly than it lets us--
it is an incremental gain for us, but it may be an exponential
gain for our adversaries, is a potential concern.
Mr. Moultrie. I think we can talk more about that in closed
session.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Fair enough. I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. Mr. Jackson of Texas, you are
recognized.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate
it. I just want to say, you know, as a democratic nation, the
U.S. values of transparency and openness are obviously pretty
important to all of us. The amount of information that can be
gathered through a Google search about government policy,
military activities and facilities, monetary expenditures,
civilian corporate structures, and anything like that is
absolutely staggering, I guess, when you look at it relative to
the United States.
The PRC, by contrast, has created a system where
information is suppressed, obscured, and distorted, and there's
also a profound cultural and language barrier that amplifies
the intelligence collection challenge that we face.
My question, Lieutenant Berrier, is, to the extent that you
can share in an open session, how is the Defense Intelligence
Enterprise overcoming the challenges of such an inherently
closed system, and are we developing new practices and
capabilities that will offset some of these difficulties? And,
furthermore, does this put us at a significant disadvantage
that China can so rapidly access so much open-source
information about us? And to ping off of what Mr. Jackson was
just saying, as well, I was just thinking as he was speaking
that, you know, do these facts that I've stated here, does it
give them a distinct advantage when it comes to AI because
there's so much open-source information that would be available
to AI, and we may not have the same amount of data to rely on
with our AI?
General Berrier. Congressman, I would say to the latter
part of your question, I think, because we are a free and open
society, we put so much out there, that that does give a
certain advantage to the Chinese and their ability to go in and
do research on us. But they've been doing this for 30 years. I
often describe China as really conducting at a nation-state
level the largest theft of intellectual property in the history
of mankind.
So it's not new. They have done it before, they're going to
continue to do that. And I think it's really up to us to
determine how we defend against that and how active we get in
this space to apply counterintelligence methods to do that. And
we can talk more about that in the closed session.
From a DIA perspective, though, we talked a little bit
about the standup of the China mission group focused solely on
multi-spectrum dimension of all facets of intelligence to be
able to bring to bear against this problem. It's my number one
priority.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Yes, sir. Thank you. I appreciate
that. Second question I have is the intelligence community [IC]
is comprised of 18 total organizations, 9 of which are part of
the Defense Intelligence Enterprise. I know that, as the
intelligence collection, the means in which we can collect
intelligence increases, so does the amount of intelligence that
we collect. However, what I'm wondering about is--this is for
you Dr. Moultrie--what are we doing right now regarding
potential stovepiping within the intelligence agencies? I think
that's haunted organizations, not just the IC but, you know,
law enforcement and everybody else, and it's led to things that
easily could have been prevented but, you know, one agency
didn't know what the other agency was doing.
What are we doing within the defense intelligence
community, you know, to prevent stovepiping and work with the
sister agencies?
Mr. Moultrie. Thank you. Both my colleagues have talked
about the relationships that we have, but there's also formal
mechanisms that we have that allow us to collaborate. There's
integrees that we have in all of our agencies where we have
individuals who work from my organization within NSA, from my
organization within DIA, from DIA within my organization, NGA
[National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency], and the same with
the National Reconnaissance Office. We all have an integrated
system, if you will.
What we started recently was the first stand-up of the
Defense Intelligence Enterprise Management Council. So one of
the things that we decided to do, at the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence and Security, is actually bring a
council together of agency heads where we could get together
and actually talk about how we can further share, how we can
further collaborate on a number of different things. That
session, I think we had it in March, I want to say it was early
March, if you will, it was actually visited by the Deputy
Secretary of Defense. The Secretary was out that day and could
not do it. And she talked about the importance of us
collaborating and sharing to ensure just what you're talking
about, sir, that there is no stovepipes.
So I think what we've done is we've taken some of the
informal mechanisms that we've had and we formalized them. Of
course, the DNI, Director of National Intelligence, has the
executive committee that brings all 18 heads together, if you
will. We do that once every other month or so, and we have this
way of communicating between those integrees that we have that
are scattered throughout the various agencies, the
relationships that we have, and the formal mechanisms,
Congressman, that we have put in place.
Dr. Jackson of Texas. Okay. Thank you, sir. I appreciate
that. Thank you all for your time. I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Representative Slotkin, you're recognized.
Ms. Slotkin. Thank you, Mr. Bergman. So thanks for being
here. A couple of questions and then a comment. I would say
also, for those of us who are engaging now so frequently with
folks who are in the AI commercial space who are developing new
commercial technology, I mean, all of them would say that
ChatGPT is one of the most ground shaking changes or
innovations out there. It's the fastest growing system right
now, at least if you talk to the folks in Silicon Valley. And
they will rattle off a list of military implications of the
commercial availability of that AI, right, putting it at
someone's fingertips. They will say automated target
recognition, military robotics, intel analysis, and I say this
as a former CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] officer, right,
logistics, modeling and simulation, missile guidance, wearable
systems, terrain analysis, like on and on and on and on.
So I certainly know that you all have been focused on
looking at other militaries and what they are incorporating in
terms of AI, but who is in charge of looking at what the
commercial availability of AI will mean for the U.S. military?
Mr. Moultrie. So, for the Department of Defense, we have a
chief data officer that looks at this and has been looking at
AI. We also have our research organization led by Under
Secretary Shyu that is looking at AI. Of course, ChatGPT is
just one of the programs that are out there, and, of course, if
you look at discussions that are being held even today out in
San Francisco with the RSA security conference, I think they
have identified generative AI as the number one thing that we
should be looking at, and that's rightfully so. And I believe
you have a representative out there who has been on the news
over the last 2 days or so.
So we have the mechanism in place to understand exactly
what this might mean in terms of being the game changer we've
already discussed in front of this committee. Now we're trying
to look at the applications of it. We're trying to ensure that
we understand the models, and when we go into closed session, I
think we can tell you what we're doing a little bit more to
actually understand how our adversaries may be using it, what
we're doing to potentially counter that, and how we need to
approach this with your support moving forward in the future.
Ms. Slotkin. Yes. I think it's adversaries, but it's also,
just as we've seen, the average American has been the victim of
some kind of identity theft, ransomware attack, and it's not
necessarily, maybe it's permitted by a nation state, but it's
not necessarily directed by a nation state. And so I would just
offer that, to the average citizen, defending them also means
against the commercial use by bad actors, not necessarily by
the Department of Defense.
And then who is in charge at the Department of Defense at
looking at the rules of the road for the incorporation of AI
into, you know, into the Defense Department? We're struggling
with that here for folks who are interested in this topic. You
know, do we legislate, do we regulate, do we think about it, is
there a commission, do we want the flip phone generation
regulating AI. I don't know. [Inaudible humorous exchange with
Mr. Bergman.] But who is doing the sort of ethical and moral
implications of the AI incorporation into the Department of
Defense? Who owns that?
Mr. Moultrie. For us, we turn to Policy within our
organization. They're the ones who really set those frameworks
and those guidelines that we live by. They work very closely
with our OGC, Office of General Counsel, and then they'll work
very closely with the DOJ [Department of Justice] and others to
determine what's the right thing for us to do as the
interagency to get after this and how it's used and how it's
not used.
Of course, we will provide our input as to the benefits of
it, and we'll provide our input as to what the adversaries may
do against us. But, yes, it really is, it's an interagency
effort, ma'am.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay. I would offer it might need to be
someone's responsibility. It's an issue that's coming to a
theater near us.
Lastly, can anyone tell me if you've participated in any
war game vis-a-vis a China-Taiwan scenario in which the private
sector have been cleared in to participate, captains of
industry, folks who are not normally part of the executive
branch but who have major stakes in either transportation in
and around China, supply chain issues, those of us who come
from manufacturing, homes, you know. There is a possibility of
mutually assured economic destruction if we have war with
China, so please tell me if you've actually had the instance
with the private sector in the room in a classified setting.
Mr. Moultrie. I would just say if we can talk about what
we've done in classified settings in a classified session----
Ms. Slotkin. I just want to know if you've ever had the
private sector folks, I'm talking about like a Jamie Dimon or
the head of GM, in any war game you've personally ever attended
on any China scenario.
Mr. Moultrie. Once again, I would say that we work closely
with the private sector and----
Ms. Slotkin. So, no. I mean, it's just a yes or no. I'm not
asking if it's classified or unclassified. But have you brought
in the private sector to game this out?
Mr. Bergman. Just so you know, sometimes the best answer is
a non-answer if you don't want to infer things.
Ms. Slotkin. Okay. All right. Well, I'll take that for what
it was. Thanks.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. And, Mr. Mills, you're recognized.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much, and
Secretary, I apologize for him referring to you as a
Congressman. You don't want that sentence.
So I want to touch on the AI autonomous systems. You know,
one of the things, and I just returned from Fort Bragg and I
won't go into anything that is not going to be covered in our
classified section, but I do see a significant importance in
the quantum race and where we're at on things. And I noted that
China's big concern right now is that they feel confident in
their ability to outpace us militarily and economically, but
they really struggle with knowing where we are from an
innovative perspective, which is really a direction that
they're trying to head in. And in seeing that their primary
goal, and I've written about this numerous times in the past
years, about this great superpower resurgence with China,
Russia, Iran, North Korea's geopolitical alignment, they're
really tailored towards the idea that it's not so much the
kinetic but the non-kinetic element of things with influence
campaigns but also looking at that Belt and Road Initiative
which would pave the way to get that Eurasian expansion; that
Africa dominance with controls to resources from the port in
Djibouti, which is, roughly a $560 million investment; the
railway supplies that goes into the potash farms and harvests
that you see; and also the control of Oceania in an effort to
try and cut off Western Hemisphere supply chain.
And while that, in itself, is concerning, we also know that
they're attempting to complete that encirclement with the
economic coercions in Honduras and Panama to control the Panama
Canal for increased tariff and access while utilizing that
Russian, I guess, marriage of convenience, if you will, for the
Chavez of Venezuela, Petro in Colombia, and others within our
own hemisphere.
Now, we know that it's economic and resource-based. We know
innovation is an area that they're most concerned with, and we
also know that they don't allow their currency and their
economics to be audited, if you will, because they're really
far stretched more than what they actually allude to. I look at
the quantum space or the quantum race very much like we
utilized against Russia in the space wars in an area that we
can outpace them if we continue to invest in it and drain down
further resources.
Are you in any way along the same lines that the quantum
entanglement that we're seeking to try and achieve and the AI
autonomous drone capabilities and capacities which could be
utilized to leave our enemies deaf, dumb, and blind is the
right path forward, and do you hear of whether or not China is
concerned with our advancement in this?
General Nakasone. So, Congressman, I think this speaks
directly to the National Defense Strategy when we talk about
building enduring advantage. You know, our agency does really,
at its core, two very, very important things for our Nation: we
make code and we break code. The making of code is what we're
doing right now as we think about quantum-resistant encryption.
If this type of computer can be deployed in the future, we will
ensure that we have an encryption that can defeat it. And we've
already developed a number of the algorithms that underpin that
for our national security systems working very, very closely
with NIST [National Institute of Standards and Technology]
being able to ensure that they understand this, as well.
But I think your point is very important as you talk about
the broader campaign that China has across the world. And this
is why I come back to the importance of section 702 that
provides this type of insight in terms of what China is doing
in South America, in Central America, in Africa, in terms of
being able to have the insights that are so necessary for us to
be able to shine a light because, at the end of the day,
malfeasance that the Chinese have undertaken, whether or not
that's with outrageous repayment terms or, you know, the
stripping of natural resources from a country, this is the type
of information that really sets them back.
Mr. Mills. Yeah. And, again, I think that, when I'm looking
at things, the evolution of warfare has gone far beyond the
ideas of kinetic elements of just bomb-to-bomb, bullet-to-
bullet, gun-to-gun. We have to recognize the economic
resources, cyber capabilities as being the, you know, future of
warfare, which can be done in a room this size, as opposed to
on a battlefield. And so what concerns me the most is knowing
that their ultimate goal is to eliminate the U.S. dollar from
the global currency by utilizing economic coercion, other
methods with WHO [World Health Organization], WEF [World
Economic Forum], with the OPEC [Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries], to try and undermine the petrodollar with
what they're doing to decouple us from the EU [European Union].
I really see this as a whole-of-nation approach, not just
from our [inaudible] JSOC [Joint Special Operations Command]
and the operators on the ground or even DIA and the IC but also
from Treasury and the rest of good policy. And just in a quick
last 10 seconds, would you agree with that synopsis?
Mr. Moultrie. I would agree with that and also say the
international community, the Western-aligned community, too.
Mr. Mills. And sir?
General Berrier. Wholeheartedly.
Mr. Mills. Thank you, sir
General Nakasone. And I would say this is why working with
other elements of our broader interagency is so important. The
CHIPS Act and being able to work with Commerce and being able
to provide the insight is so very, very important.
Mr. Mills. Thank you so much. I appreciate it. With that, I
yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you. Unless anybody has any other
unclassified questions, this will conclude the open portion of
the hearing. We are adjourned. We will reconvene as soon as
everyone gets into their seats at Rayburn 2337 for the closed
session.
[Whereupon, at 5:05 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session.]

=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

April 27, 2023

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

April 27, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
