[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

,
[H.A.S.C. No. 118-58]

U.S. MILITARY POSTURE AND

NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES IN

NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

MARCH 12, 2024

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-371                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
One Hundred Eighteenth Congress

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ADAM SMITH, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Vice    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
Chair                            RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
DON BACON, Nebraska                  MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               SARA JACOBS, California
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 PATRICK RYAN, New York
PAT FALLON, Texas                    JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
NANCY MACE, South Carolina           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota                  Pennsylvania
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        JENNIFER L. McCLELLAN, Virginia
NICK LaLOTA, New York                TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                JIMMY PANETTA, California
CORY MILLS, Florida                  MARC VEASEY, Texas
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia
LANCE GOODEN, Texas

Chris Vieson, Staff Director
Taryn Woody, Professional Staff Member
Katy Quinn, Professional Staff Member
Owen McGeary, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Panetta, Hon. Jimmy, a Representative from California, Committee
on Armed Services..............................................     3
Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1

WITNESSES

Guillot, Gen Gregory M., USAF, Commander, United States Northern
Command and North American Aerospace Defense Command...........     8
Richardson, GEN Laura J., USA, Commander, U.S. Southern Command..     6
Zimmerman, Rebecca, Performing the Duties of the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for the Homeland Defense and Hemispheric
Affairs........................................................     4

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Guillot, Gen Gregory M.......................................   117
Richardson, GEN Laura J......................................    75
Zimmerman, Rebecca...........................................    57

Documents Submitted for the Record:

[There were no Documents submitted.]

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

[There were no Questions submitted during the hearing.]

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Lamborn..................................................   141
Mr. Norcross.................................................   142
Mr. Scott....................................................   142
Mr. Carbajal.................................................   148
Mr. Gallagher................................................   149
Mr. Banks....................................................   150
Mr. Bergman..................................................   150
Mr. Waltz....................................................   151
Mr. Ryan.....................................................   153
Mr. LaLota...................................................   154
Ms. Slotkin..................................................   154
Mr. Gimenez..................................................   157
Ms. Sewell...................................................   159

U.S. MILITARY POSTURE AND NATIONAL SECURITY CHALLENGES IN NORTH AND
SOUTH AMERICA

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, March 12, 2024.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
Before we begin I have one housekeeping matter. As soon as
we adjourn the public hearing we will immediately move upstairs
for a classified briefing and we'll also be asking questions in
reverse order of seniority today.
Today we begin our fiscal 2025 posture hearings for
Northern Command (NORTHCOM) and Southern Command (SOUTHCOM). I
want to thank our witnesses for being here today and for their
service to our nation.
In eight months President Xi is expected to visit Peru
inaugurate a brand--to inaugurate a brand new $3.6 billion mega
port. It was financed by China, built by Chinese workers, and
it will be owned and operated by the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP)--backed company.
It will be used to ship South American copper, lithium, and
other critical materials to China to further their military
modernization.
This is just the latest effort--latest of China's efforts
to displace American influence and build a strategic footprint
in our backyard. Twenty-five of the 31 countries in the
SOUTHCOM area of responsibility (AOR) are welcomed--have
welcomed infrastructure investment from China. Twenty-two have
formally joined China's Belt and Road Initiative.
China is investing in critical sectors across Latin America
including sea, space, telecommunication, critical minerals, and
energy. CCP-backed companies currently own or operate mines in
Mexico, Argentina, Peru, and Venezuela, electrical grids in
Peru and Chile, 5G wireless systems in Costa Rica and Bolivia,
Brazil and Mexico, space launch and satellite tracking
facilities in Peru, Venezuela, Bolivia, Argentina, as well as
40 ports across 16 Latin American and Caribbean countries.
That includes ports on both ends of the Panama Canal, one
at the tip of South America and one just a hundred miles away
in the Bahamas.
None of the agreements governing these port, space, and
telecommunication projects ban the collection of intelligence
about China and none of them ban the People's Liberation Army
(PLA) from using them for military operations.
In fact, many of these countries already share
intelligence, host port calls, buy military equipment, and
receive training from the PLA.
Unfortunately, China is not the only malign influence in
the Western Hemisphere. Since Putin's illegal invasion of
Ukraine, Russian propaganda efforts have increased across Latin
America.
Russia continues to invest heavily in Cuba's communist
regime, and military--and its military continues to provide
training and arms to Venezuela, Cuba, Nicaragua where Russia
has over 200 troops operating a satellite tracking station.
Recent unrest in SOUTHCOM AOR is also very troubling. Over
the weekend U.S. forces were sent to Haiti to help evacuate
nonessential embassy personnel.
Meanwhile, Venezuela continues to threaten its neighbors by
moving thousands of troops to its borders. We need to do more
to encourage stability in this region. This means we must build
and enhance partnerships to further our security interest in
the region.
We also need to focus on real threat transnational criminal
organizations based in the region and what they pose to our
nation. These brutal criminals prey on thousands of vulnerable
men, women, and children.
They steal their money and endanger their lives with
perilous attempts to gain illegal entry at our borders. Last
year Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) encountered nearly two and
a half million migrants trying to illegally cross into our
Southwest border. That set a new record.
And to make matters worse that number includes at least 169
individuals on the terrorist watch list, 598 known gang
members, and 178 of which were MS-13 gang members.
Keep in mind these are just the ones that the CBP caught.
CBP estimates that another 1.7 million illegal immigrants got
away. South and Central American criminal organizations are
also the main source of fentanyl and other dangerous drugs
smuggled across our southern border.
In fiscal year '23 a record 27,000 pounds of fentanyl were
seized at the Southwest border, enough to kill 6 billion
people, and that's what was seized, not what got in. Nearly
3,000 military personnel are deployed to the U.S. border, the
largest U.S. deployment of forces in the Western Hemisphere.
NORTHCOM and SOUTHCOM are doing their best to try to
provide support to civilian authorities to address the border
crisis but the real solution rests with our president. He needs
to drop the excuses and secure our border.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses and getting
their best military advice on how to overcome these security
challenges that we face.
And with that, I yield to my friend the Ranking Member, Mr.
Panetta, for any questions he may--or comments he may have.

STATEMENT OF HON. JIMMY PANETTA, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
CALIFORNIA, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
opportunity to sit in for Ranking Member Adam Smith. But I'd
also like to welcome our witnesses for our hearing today.
Ms. Rebecca Zimmerman, performing the duties of Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Hemispheric
Affairs.
General Laura Richardson, welcome back as the--again, the
commander of U.S. Southern Command, and General Gregory
Guillot, commander of U.S. Northern Command and North American
Aerospace Defense Command in his first appearance before the
committee after taking command in February.
It's appropriate for our first posture hearing to be
focused on the defense of the United States. What happens here
at home and in our neighborhood is of the utmost importance to
securing our national interest.
I appreciate Ms. Zimmerman's focus on the new homeland
defense policy guidance in her testimony and look forward to
additional detail about what the department intends to improve
in its resilience across Department of Defense (DOD), the
interagency, and our civil society to ensure that we can deter
and, if necessary, survive and prevail against any adversary
who chooses to test our defenses.
I also look forward to hearing about the progress of
General Guillot's initial review upon taking command as well as
his and Ms. Zimmerman's views on the department's support to
civilian authorities at the southern border, unidentified
anomalous phenomena, and DOD and national interests in the High
North and NORTHCOM.
Further, I hope to understand North American Aerospace
Deefense Command (NORAD)'s posture and future requirements with
respect to integrated air and missile defense particularly in
regard to increasing our domain awareness regardless of the
type of threat or origin.
I expect to encourage General Guillot and Ms. Zimmerman to
speak to the threats to our national security and strategic,
cyber, and traditional domains and across the full geographic
breadth of our country.
Strategic competitors are active in the SOUTHCOM region and
often engage in activities that undermine the rules-based
order. Despite other global events that require our attention
we should not ignore our own hemisphere. The department needs
to engage in agile and adaptive ways in the region where
resources can be limited.
In SOUTHCOM the department continues to pursue security
cooperation activities that enhance our partners' ability to
address challenges in the region like drug trafficking, migrant
flows, and the fallout of the humanitarian crisis in Venezuela.
Such activities can effectively build the capacity of our
partners while also deterring malign activity and aggression in
the region.
I'm interested in hearing how such activities build
capacity and to the extent to which they reinforce human
rights.
And, yes, we are keeping an eye on the situation in Haiti.
The department is currently supporting the multinational
stability support mission and augmenting security at the U.S.
embassy, and I encourage General Richardson to speak about
these missions.
Finally, I will repeat my concluding question at our--to
our witnesses from last year. How do we continue to protect the
United States, continue to build our partnerships with the
countries of the Western Hemisphere, and continue to keep an
eye on efforts that may undermine the United States interests?
I thank the witnesses for being here and I look forward to
hearing their testimony.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Now I'd like to introduce the
witnesses.
We have the Honorable Rebecca Zimmerman as Acting Principal
Deputy Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and
Hemispheric Affairs. That's a pretty long title.
General Laura Richardson, commander at U.S.--United States
Southern Command, and General Gregory Guillot. How do you
pronounce that?
General Guillot. Chairman, it's Guillot.
The Chairman. Guillot. All right.
General Gregory Guillot is the commander of the United
States Northern Command and Northern Aerospace Defense Command.
I welcome the witnesses.
Ms. Zimmerman, we'll start with you. You're recognized for
five minutes.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE REBECCA ZIMMERMAN, PERFORMING THE
DUTIES OF ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR THE HOMELAND
DEFENSE AND HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS

Ms. Zimmerman. Thank you.
Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith and Congressman
Panetta standing in, and distinguished members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today.
I'll highlight how we're putting homeland defense and other
interests across the hemisphere front and center to implement
the 2022 National Defense Strategy (NDS).
But I want to first acknowledge the tragic helicopter crash
on the Southwest border on Friday afternoon that killed two New
York National Guardsmen, Casey Frankoski and John Grassia, and
also U.S. Border Patrol agent Chris Luna.
On behalf of the Department of Defense I extend our sincere
condolences to the families of those lost.
The 2022 NDS states that the department's top priority is
defense of the homeland paced to the growing multi-domain
threat posed by the People's Republic of China (PRC).
Per the NDS, the PRC is the pacing challenge for DOD while
Russia remains an acute threat. The PRC and Russia currently
pose more dangerous challenges to safety and security to the
U.S. homeland. But the NDS also ensures vigilance of other
persistent threats.
North Korea is expanding its nuclear and missile capability
to threaten the homeland. Iran is testing space launch
technologies and global terrorist groups require continued
monitoring.
Emerging technologies pose new challenges to strategic
stability and demand that we adapt and adjust our posture,
deterring adversaries from employing advanced threats by
denying them the benefits of their aggression.
As small uncrewed aircraft systems proliferate in the open
market and their costs decrease as their capabilities rapidly
increase the threat of these small Unmanned Aerial System
(UAS)es is becoming more prominent.
Our nation also continues to face the challenge of natural
and manmade hazards. Last year the U.S. homeland endured 114
incidents, 24 more than in 2022, caused by natural hazards
including severe storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, and
wildfires.
In December of 2023 Secretary Austin approved a classified
homeland defense policy guidance updating the department's
approach to homeland defense to account for major changes in
the global security environment.
We have shared this classified document with the Congress
and plan to publish an unclassified version later this year.
The guidance looks to meet the challenges we face today by
driving action across the department to deter threats of
aggression or strategic attack to the homeland across multiple
domains and the spectrum of conflict.
It identifies initiatives that contribute to DOD's ability
to project power, defend the homeland, and in the event of a
conflict maintain continuity of wartime operations.
Those initiatives link to the 2022 NDS and ensure that DOD
will deter aggression against the homeland, improve resilience
to an attack across the spectrum of conflict, focus on
defending defense critical infrastructure against attacks,
ensure continuity of operations and continuity of government,
build resiliency against the impacts of climate change, and
ensure resilience in chemical, biological, radiological, and
nuclear response capabilities associated with homeland defense
missions.
Defense Support of Civil Authorities, or DSCA, is an
important activity supporting the American public and our
partners, responding to disasters, public health emergencies,
and securing our borders.
Per the NDS DOD is prepared to support DSCA activities that
do not impair warfighting readiness. Today, between 2,500 and
3,000 military personnel are deployed to the Southwest border
supporting U.S. Customs and Border Protection activities.
DOD has supported Department of Homeland Security (DHS)'s
border security mission for 18 of the last 21 years. The United
States derives immense benefit from a stable, peaceful, and
democratic Western Hemisphere that reduces security threats to
our nation.
We're deepening partnerships with Canada, Mexico, Brazil,
Colombia, and Chile, while reinforcing democratic institutions,
civilian control of the military, and respect for human rights
and the rule of law.
In February, Secretary Austin participated in the North
American Defense Ministerial with his counterparts from Mexico
and Canada.
DOD is working to fulfill and sustain the department's
supporting role in Central America and the Caribbean,
institutional capacity building, and humanitarian assistance
and disaster response.
In addition, the department is participating in U.S.
government efforts to support a U.N.-backed multinational
security support mission in Haiti to assist the Haitian
National Police.
Our relationships in the hemisphere help ensure we can
conduct humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, bolster
cyber defenses, promote climate resilience, and conduct
pandemic response.
To conclude, the department is committed to defending the
homeland and pursuing U.S. interests in the Western Hemisphere
and the Arctic.
Thank you for your support of the Department of Defense and
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Zimmerman can be found in
the Appendix on page 57.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Zimmerman.
General Richardson, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL LAURA J. RICHARDSON, USA, COMMANDER,
UNITED STATES SOUTHERN COMMAND

General Richardson. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member
Panetta, and distinguished members of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you with Assistant
Secretary Zimmerman and General Guillot.
I am honored to represent the dedicated men and women of
U.S. Southern Command to discuss the challenges we share with
our neighbors in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Our National Security Strategy recognizes the direct link
between this region's security and our own security. We are
harnessing the power of partnership from Team USA in supportive
of Team Democracy by leveraging all instruments of national
power--diplomacy, information, military, and economics--to
expeditiously assist partner nations in addressing the
challenges that impact our collective security.
This region, which is our shared neighborhood, remains
under assault from a host of cross-cutting transboundary
challenges that directly threaten our homeland. I have seen
these challenges intensify since I met with you last year and
this remains a call to action.
In almost two and a half years in command I've made it my
priority to meet our partners where they are and to listen and
understand the challenges that affect us all. The world is at
an inflection point.
Our partners in the Western Hemisphere with whom we are
bonded by trade, shared values, democratic traditions, family
ties, and increasingly impacted by interference and coercion,
I've learned that our presence absolutely matters.
The People's Republic of China has exploited the trust of
democracies in this hemisphere, using that trust to steal
national secrets, intellectual property, and research related
to academia, agriculture, and health care.
The scope and scale of this espionage is unprecedented.
Through the Belt and Road Initiative the PRC aims to amass
power and influence at the expense of the world's democracies.
Here in the Western Hemisphere Latin America and the
Caribbean have the potential to feed and fuel the world.
Understanding this, the PRC is already busy extracting and
exploiting.
Predatory investment practices, construction of mega ports
and dual-use space facilities, and criminal cyber activities
are just a few of the PRC's malign activities that jeopardize
the sovereignty and safety of the region.
Russia remains an acute threat and seeks to increase its
foothold by bolstering authoritarian regimes in Cuba,
Nicaragua, and Venezuela.
In the last year China, Russia and Iran have increased
their presence diplomatically, economically, and even
militarily in the region. These activities undermine
democracies and challenge their credibility.
Both China and Russia exploit the presence of transnational
criminal organizations and amplify their destabilizing impacts
on democratic governments.
Transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) traffic
weapons, drugs, people, gold, lithium, rare earth minerals,
commodities, and counterfeit goods while contributing to the
surge of fentanyl--related deaths here at home.
The good news is working with our very willing partners
leads to the best defense. We must use all available levers to
strengthen our partnerships with the 28 like-minded democracies
in this hemisphere, who understand the power of working
together to counter these shared threats.
The United States remains the preferred and most trusted
security partner in the region. We build trust through
investment and security cooperation programs that train and
equip our partner militaries and security forces, a robust
joint exercise program to build interoperability, and the
development and employment of emerging technologies.
Moreover, we maximize the resources allocated by the
Department of State's International Military Education and
Training program, or IMET, foreign military financing, foreign
military sales to build interoperability and counterbalance the
PRC's military engagements and investments.
As the National Defense Strategy states, the U.S. derives
immense benefit from a stable, peaceful, and democratic Western
Hemisphere that reduces security threats to the homeland. U.S.
SOUTHCOM continues to innovate and adapt, putting integrated
deterrence into action every day.
We remain committed to working across all domains with
allies and partners, combatant commands, the joint force, the
U.S. interagency, nonfederal entities, and the United States
Congress to guarantee safety, security, and prosperity
throughout the Western Hemisphere.
This work and promise of U.S. SOUTHCOM as a part of Team
USA in support of Team Democracy is our pledge. Thank you for
your assistance in resourcing this team. I look forward to your
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Richardson can be found
in the Appendix on page 75.]
The Chairman. Thank you, General Richardson.
General Guillot, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL GREGORY M. GUILLOT, COMMANDER, UNITED
STATES NORTHERN COMMAND AND NORTH AMERICAN AEROSPACE DEFENSE
COMMAND

General Guillot. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Panetta,
and distinguished members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
It's a profound honor to command and represent the men and
women of North American Aerospace Defense Command and United
States Northern Command and I thank Ms. Zimmerman for
acknowledging the sacrifice of two soldiers and a Border Patrol
agent as well as remembering the injured soldier from last
week's helicopter crash along the southwest border in Texas.
As we speak this morning, American and Canadian military
and civilian personnel from both commands are actively
defending our homelands against significant persistent threats
from multiple vectors in all domains.
Although I've only been in command a few weeks, it is
readily clear to me that the United States, Canada, and our
expansive network of partners are facing an extraordinarily
complex strategic environment.
Competitors seeking to diminish our military and economic
advantage have fielded advanced kinetic systems designed to
strike military and civilian infrastructure in North America
both above and below the nuclear threshold.
Meanwhile, competitors have rapidly advanced and routinely
use nonkinetic capabilities targeting our critical
infrastructure and essential networks.
Threats to the homeland are present in all domains along
all avenues approach to include the Arctic region. As stated in
the National Defense Strategy, the People's Republic of China
remains our pacing challenge as the People's Liberation Army
modernizes and grows at a rapid pace.
The PRC's expanding nuclear capability and capacity along
with its development of modern submarines, missiles, and
hypersonic weapons, all present significant challenges for
homeland defense.
While The PRC's capabilities are growing quickly Russia
remains a threat to the homeland today and as an immediate
nation state concern. Russia retains the world's largest
stockpile of strategic and nonstrategic nuclear weapons along
with significant capacity to strike inside North America with
its air- and sea-launched precision conventional weapons.
Despite heavy losses to its ground forces in Ukraine Russia
has invested heavily in systems that can threaten the United
States such as advanced guided missile submarines, hypersonic
glide vehicles, intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM)s, as
well as significant cyber and undersea capabilities and
developmental systems such as a nuclear torpedo and a nuclear-
powered cruise missile.
Meanwhile, North Korea continues its bellicose rhetoric
while test launching increasingly advanced long-range missiles
and expanding its ties with China and Russia.
While Iran currently lacks the capability to strike North
America with long-range missiles it is investing heavily in
that capability.
Iran also supports violent militant groups in the Middle
East and maintains a worldwide network of operational
surrogates, and the most prevalent and growing threats include
cyber and small unmanned aerial systems that are being employed
inside the U.S. and Canada against civilian and military
infrastructure in ways that were not possible a few years ago.
With those risks firmly in mind, NORAD and NORTHCOM strive
to begin homeland defense well beyond North America. To do so
both commands are working with the services and Congress to
improve domain awareness in order to detect, track, and defeat
threats ranging from long-range ballistic missiles to small
unmanned aerial systems.
The defense of North America is an active endeavor that
requires NORAD and NORTHCOM to campaign against all threats in
all domains along all approaches.
That effort requires seamless exchange of information with
combatant commands, conventional and special operations forces,
and the intelligence community in the spectrum of interagency
and international partners.
The importance of collecting and disseminating information
quickly cannot be overstated. I strongly support the
department's work to advance the Combined Joint All-Domain
Command and Control Concept as we seek to detect and track
potential threats and share information as quickly as possible
with analysts, operators, and decision makers around the world.
Finally, upon taking command I began a 90-day assessment to
inform the department, the joint force, and Congress on NORAD
and NORTHCOM's ability to execute assigned tasks and make
recommendations on where the command could or should do more.
Once complete, I look forward to sharing my findings and
updated vision for how NORAD and NORTHCOM will best execute the
noble mission of homeland defense.
The challenges facing our homeland are real but there
should be no doubt about NORAD and NORTHCOM's resolve to deter
aggression and, if necessary, defeat threats to our nations and
our citizens.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to appear this
morning. I look forward to working with the committee and I'm
happy to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of General Guillot can be found in
the Appendix on page 117.]
The Chairman. Great. Thank you all, and I now recognize
myself for questions.
General Richardson and Guillot, you heard me outline and
you all talked about China's infrastructure investments in the
south throughout Latin America and the Caribbean.
Are you all concerned about them taking those
infrastructure investments and using them for military
purposes?
General Richardson. Chairman, yes, we are worried about
that, and being able to flip the state-owned enterprise
critical infrastructure, what looks to be investment in the
region, deep water ports, 5G, clean energy, the Safe City/Smart
City technology and space-enabling infrastructure.
The Chairman. General?
General Guillot. Chairman, I completely agree with General
Richardson from the NORTHCOM homeland defense perspective,
something that I'm watching very closely in the 90-day
assessment and I look forward to sharing what I learned as far
as the specifics of what we can do to address that threat more
completely.
The Chairman. Well, obviously, I am concerned about it and
I'm particularly interested in both of you all what would you
like to see Congress do to help you counter those malign
influences in the Caribbean and Latin America?
General Richardson. So, Chairman, I would say that we've
got to be on the field competing for the tenders and the
contracts that come out from the countries. And so the
countries put out the tenders and our Team USA, U.S. companies,
have got to be competing on that critical infrastructure.
And so I've been--over this past year I've been partnering
U.S. Southern Command with--more closely with the interagency
to try and break down those barriers that are there.
Also, through the Inter-American Development Bank,
Development Finance Corporation, and all of the projects that
come out of there those are big money projects that can compete
with Western solutions, Team USA solutions, in support of the
countries.
That would be a counter, an alternative, to the Chinese
companies, state-owned enterprises, that are competing on these
contracts in the countries.
The Chairman. General Guillot, is there anything that you
need from Congress to help you counter those influences?
General Guillot. Chairman, thank you.
First, we'll continue to cooperate with General Richardson
and her command as the seams between SOUTHCOM and NORTHCOM, our
seams that cannot be--we need to make sure cannot be exploited.
Our approach to partnering with Mexico is primarily through
the mil-to-mil arrangement and with that our Special Operations
Command, which we call SOC North, works side by side with
Mexican military to build capacity, capability, and eventually
interoperability.
What I would appreciate is continued support for those
efforts as we strengthen that relationship on the south side of
our border.
The Chairman. Are those mil-to-mil authorizations that you
have, the funding levels, adequate at present?
General Guillot. Chairman, at the present time they are
sufficient.
The Chairman. General Richardson, are yours?
General Richardson. So on the security cooperation not just
yet and the--with the bill--the defense bill that'll be coming
out for '24 we hope to receive what we did last year and that
would go a long way to meeting our requirement if we were to
receive the same thing as we did in the previous year.
The Chairman. Well, I appreciate your loyalty to the
administration but both of you are undercutting how much I
think you need. I think the amount you received last year
should be doubled at least this next year.
With that, I will yield to Mr. Panetta for any questions he
may have.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think, obviously, Russia has been occupied recently.
However, they're still pretty active in the Arctic and, General
Guillot, I want to focus on that area.
Obviously, with the expansion of North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) creating more opportunities to secure the
Arctic it's becoming more critical that we leverage our Special
Operations Forces capabilities and ensure that our personnel
are trained, readied, and equipped to project power.
However, I've had some discussions recently with some
Special Operations Forces officers who talked about the
difficulties that they've had, be it in resources that they
have to operate in that area and the extremes that they have to
deal with but also that they're training in Montana and
Colorado, no way compared to the actual environment of being in
the Arctic.
So and we can't address the tactical level difficulties
without appropriately defining our mission in the Arctic. It
remains unclear to many of our personnel what we mean when we
say Arctic, which differs significantly by season, and what
Arctic readiness is versus Arctic capable and how we should
operate in an austere environment defined by both economic and
military interests.
So, General, can you describe what our Arctic mission is
and the department's efforts to better align that mission
across services?
General Guillot. Congressman Panetta, our approach to the
Arctic is--
The Chairman. Could you pull the microphone a little bit
closer, please? Thank you.
General Guillot. Yeah. Sorry, Chairman.
Congressman, our approach to the Arctic is vital to our
overall homeland defense because the Arctic comprises about 52
percent of the entire area of operation for NORAD and
NORTHCOM's areas, and although we frequently talk about the
Arctic in terms of Alaska it's important to note that the High
North and then also the Northeast approach, which we call the
2:00 o'clock position, is extremely important.
What you mentioned about the training of the forces is
exactly right. We have well-trained forces but, unfortunately,
they train often in the United States and not up in the Arctic
in Alaska and, therefore, they need to have specific equipment,
gear and kit to make sure that it can operate in that harsh
environment.
As we speak, our Special Operations Command is conducting
two operations in Alaska, ArcticEdge and IceX, both of which
are identifying the unique capabilities that we need to equip
our forces to be able to fight there.
And on the same--and you pointed out the Special Operations
on the other side. Even with our Air Forces and Army forces
that operate very well in Alaska right now and are equipped for
that, if a conflict in the Pacific would cause them to push
forward I'm concerned that the forces back--that would backfill
there may be well trained but not specifically in Arctic
techniques and then also with the gear necessary.
So that is something that I will address with the services
to ensure that we have depth in our Arctic capability.
Mr. Panetta. Great. And, you know, as you know well, with
the expansion of NATO including Sweden and Finland how will--
using them as reliable partners how do you think that's going
to help us in our mission in the Arctic?
General Guillot. Congressman, I think the immediate benefit
will be strengthening that 2:00 o'clock approach that I just
mentioned. If I could use a quick example for last week.
We had two times where Russian Bear Bombers flew along that
avenue for the first time in over two years, I should add,
approaching the Canadian and United States air defense
identification zones off the northeast United States.
As they approached our ability to share intelligence and
radar picture with NATO partners to include Norway were vital
for us to have the situational awareness as those bombers
approached our area.
Mr. Panetta. Great. General Guillot, thank you for
highlighting an area that I think we have to focus on a little
bit more. I appreciate that.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
We will now yield to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
McCormick.
Dr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the
witnesses and also thank you for the two sergeant majors in the
Marine Corps because we know that four-star generals and
admirals are nowhere without their sergeant majors.
I want to address the fact that our forward deployed
military performs a critical task in defending on us in this
Western Hemisphere, which is often neglected in this
conversation.
I think we cannot take this for granted especially as the
People's Republic of China and the pacing threat that we have
increases its influence over Latin America. Honduras recently
joined the Belt and Road Initiative and Peru announced the
construction of a massive Chinese-financed deepwater port.
Now, by my estimates I think China has over 50 deep water
ports like this. We have about two. Puts a tremendous
disadvantage and it's growing.
Over the past 10 years China has replaced the U.S. as
Latin's top trading partner. This means that they basically
have greater influence in the Western Hemisphere in some of the
most populous areas in this region to include Brazil, Peru,
Colombia, Panama, Venezuela, Cuba, Honduras. The list keeps on
growing.
My concern is that as their influence continues to grow in
Latin America how has it impacted SOUTHCOM's mission? How do we
reestablish ourselves as good friends and the choice between
two nations, one that I believe is very nefarious versus one
that should be friendly as a global leader especially in the
Western Hemisphere?
And, General Richardson, if you would address this, please.
General Richardson. Thank you, Congressman.
So in my opening I said, you know, the 28 like-minded
democracies that we have in the region we have got a partner
better with them and close to 15 to 20 years receiving less
than 50 percent of my security cooperation requirement, as I
mentioned, last year's funding that we got in the 8068 section
was very, very helpful.
But we can't just get one year of additional funding to
meet the requirement, and I would say that our presence
absolutely matters and our security cooperation program is my
number-one lever in the SOUTHCOM AOR to partner with our
militaries and the public security forces in the region and to
provide the counterbalance to what the PRC is doing.
And so as I said our presence absolutely matters. But when
we're not there--with this additional funding last year in the
8068 appropriation we were able to get further into the
Southern Cone, so the countries of Chile, Argentina, Paraguay,
Uruguay, with exercises and more engagement other than just a
visit every once a year has really made a huge difference in
terms of the partnering.
But we have to be there. We have to have good security
cooperation programs. We have to have flexible authorities that
as opportunities open because there are only open for a short
period of time to allow Team USA to be able to be responsive to
our partners.
Dr. McCormick. And I'd say we probably also have neglected
AFRICOM too for the same reasons. We just seem to look in
different regions. We forget the places that we've in the past
been very dominant and now we're losing ground.
Secretary Zimmerman, according to Customs and Border Patrol
so far this year we have encountered almost 19,000 Chinese
nationals at the U.S.-Mexican border, a more than 50-fold
increase since 2021. I might add we have a record number of
crossings in the northern border from the Chinese nationals as
well.
We acknowledge the threat from the People's Republic of
China and it seems our porous southern border is in crisis
already, which we have acknowledged. The American people are
absolutely concerned. It's one of the number-one issues in
America.
We know this is potential devastation to what could be
terrorist activities, stealing information, smuggling things,
and we have almost 2 million people that got away. We don't
even know who they are. We don't know how many of them are
Chinese nationals as well.
On top of that, 258 individuals on the terrorist list have
crossed the southern border since the start of 2021 and oh, by
the way, we have a record number of Chinese coming in from all
over the world whether it be by air or by sea or by across the
borders.
Would you agree that the suspected terrorists and their
potential PRC spies crossing the southern border are a national
security threat?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressman, you speak of a very important
challenge. I think the crisis at the border includes a number
of dimensions to include what we call extrahemispheric
immigration.
I think that anytime we talk about those actors, be they
terrorists, be they ----
Dr. McCormick. I hate to cut you off. I'm almost out of
time. I just got to make my point. I know you agree it's a
threat. I just want to point out that when we talk about the
difference between undocumented versus document just to
clarify.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Veasey.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
the panel for being here today.
And one of the things that is surprising to me around the
issue that we're having at the border right now is people talk
about it as if it's something that is, you know, brand new or
something that just happened.
But, General Richardson, I wanted to ask you--I'm sure that
you have studied the history and remember when the Cali cartels
and the Medellin cartels and Colombia was having issues,
dealing with far left paramilitary organizations in that
country created a great deal of instability.
From estimates that I've seen, depending on who you talk
to, whether it's the Colombian government or from outside
sources, between 1985 and 2002, perhaps, anywhere from 1
million to almost 3 million Colombians were displaced, some
internally but some sought refuge outside of Colombia, and one
of the things that I wanted to talk with you about was Plan
Colombia.
That proved to be very effective in helping deal with a lot
of that regional destabilization that happened, a lot of the
mass migration that happened, by improving security measures,
economic development, and other areas that really helped
finally rein in some of the issues from the Wild West days
under those two cartels.
And I was hoping that you could perhaps tell us what
additional steps you think the U.S. can take including its
military forces to assist other unstable countries in the
hemisphere in managing migration flows and--I'll let you answer
that one first and then I have a follow up to that.
General Richardson. So there's a lot to unpack there,
Congressman, because of the effects of Venezuela and the seven
and a half million migrants that have poured out of Venezuela
as a result of the conditions there, and then coming into the
region that is already economically impacted from COVID and
still trying to dig out of the hole and so as you--as some will
go through the Southern Cone--all the way down to the Southern
Cone and back up to only go through the very dangerous Darien
jungle and make that trek.
And so as we see the insecurity and the instability
families are on the move at unprecedented numbers. There used
to be a lot of single movers but now there are families with
young children trying to find a better life.
And so in my opening I talked about the potential of this
region, a lot of talk about it 10 years ago to feed and fuel
the world. That's the potential of this region, and if we can
help this region realize that potential to slow down the
migration, to have families feel secure and stable there's a
lot of work to be done in order to do that.
Ever since last April prior to the Title 42 expiration the
United States signed a trilateral agreement with Colombia and
Panama.
That investment that you referenced, Plan Colombia, was
huge and our security relationship continues to be extremely
strong with Colombia, and the operations that both Colombia
with their military and Panama with their public security
forces going after the criminal networks that are trafficking
the humans.
But they're not just trafficking the humans. It's drugs and
all of the other portfolio--illegal mining, illegal logging,
counterfeit goods.
And so as we continue with the migration a lot of the
countries in the SOUTHCOM AOR have laws that migration is a
human right and so they don't try to--their laws don't allow
them to stop migration or slow the flow.
So that's why our investment in the region with the safe
mobility offices, the legal pathways--Administrator Power said
it best, I think, that everybody knows how to get in touch with
a smuggler to get an illegal pathway to the United States but
we have to have that campaign that folks know how to legally
get to the United States.
Our policies matter in this respect and, again, families
are trying to realize the American dream. But how do we realize
the American dream in the Americas with the potential to feed
and fuel the world?
So I think economic investment as well as security
investment is absolutely necessary.
Mr. Veasey. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Missouri, Mr.
Alford.
Mr. Alford. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm honored to represent two distinguished military
installations, Whiteman Air Force Base and Fort Leonard Wood,
in our district.
As you know, the Chinese spy balloon that penetrated our
airspace last year flew above Whiteman Air Force Base, the sole
home to the B-2 stealth bomber and soon to be home to the B-21.
General Guillot, I want to start with you. The Chinese spy
balloon last year highlighted disconcerting gaps in our all-
domain surveillance and system of sensors that protect our
homeland.
What steps has North Command and NORAD taken to eliminate
these gaps and mitigate risks?
General Guillot. Congressman, I'd outline three immediate
steps that have shown promise and have been successful in
identifying balloons that in the past we probably would not
have seen.
First and foremost, my predecessor General VanHerck
directed the radar sensitivities to be adjusted which would
allow better detection of low radar cross section, slow moving,
and high altitude objects, although it introduces some clutter
in the system because the system is receiving more. It does
allow us to detect threats like the one that you just
mentioned.
Second, when our operators see intermittent hits that in
the past would be passed off to usually weather or other
phenomena that would cause an inconsistent hit they're now
continuing to track those more carefully and more consistently
to ensure that it is not a balloon or some other phenomena.
And third is better domain awareness between the other
combatant commands. As we get JADC2, the all-domain command and
control system, the ability to share data from one combatant
command to another instead of stopping at a black line on a map
that divides the regions now we can seamlessly share that
information electronically to increase our awareness further
away from our shores.
Mr. Alford. General Richardson, you've highlighted the
attempts by the People's Republic of China in our hemisphere
the investments they've made. What is their end game in these
investments?
General Richardson. It's to gain a foothold in all of the
critical infrastructure. We have seen it. It's not new in just
South America and Central America and the Caribbean. It's
happened in Africa and in Europe as well.
Mr. Alford. This is an intermediate step for what end?
General Richardson. So I look at it as their way--in this
region we worry about basing for the PLA and the--as we have
seen in other areas.
But I look at the state-owned enterprises and the ability
to be able to flip the use of that to possibly military
application being sort of the basing strategy through critical
infrastructure in the region.
Mr. Alford. And if we were to become in a conflict with
China this would be very useful for them?
General Richardson. And that's my concern is exactly that.
Mr. Alford. Ms. Zimmerman, have members of Hamas or
Hezbollah crossed our southern border and, if so, how many?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressmen, I think I would have to take
that back to get you rough numbers from DHS since they have the
lead on securing our nation's borders. But I'd be happy to talk
to you in general about our ----
Mr. Alford. But have they crossed? Just without a number,
can you give me any information on that?
Ms. Zimmerman. I can't speak to that. As has been said
earlier, I know that there are members of the terrorist watch
list who have been detained while crossing the border.
Mr. Alford. Back to General Guillot, what is the current
nuclear threat in space from Russia?
General Guillot. Congressman, the threat of nuclear weapons
in space primarily from Russia is a constant and real concern.
If I could, I'd like to address the specifics in a closed
session.
Mr. Alford. If there is an actual threat should Americans
know about it?
General Guillot. Congressman, I think that it's important
for all Americans to know of the wide variety of threats that
face the homeland in all domains.
Mr. Alford. Thank you for that. I appreciate your service
to our nation. With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I apologize
for being late this morning. Believe it or not, I cut myself
shaving and it simply would not stop bleeding and that's the
reason I wasn't here. I wish I had a better story but that's
basically it.
I don't want to cover a lot of ground that's already been
covered but I did have an opening statement talking about--I
mean, obviously, the number-one issue that we're facing out of,
you know, the--both of your regions is the migration challenge
coming up out of Latin America--how that's certainly pressuring
our border but it is also putting a lot of pressure on nations
throughout your AOR.
I know Colombia, Panama, Chile, amongst others are facing
that challenge and just the overall instability and, of course,
now instability coming out of Haiti as well I think it's
crucially important that we try to figure out some way to work
with these countries to increase stability.
You know, we can talk about the border and what should we
do to secure it, what law should we pass, but at the end of the
day as long as there are millions of people desperate to get
out of where they're at and come here there's no 100 percent
fix to the problem in that situation. There just isn't.
So getting greater stability in that region, understanding
also that many of the migrants come from outside of your
region, get into Latin America, and work their way up is the
number-one thing.
And also I think Mr. Alford's point about China the answer
to the question of what is their end game China wants more
influence in the world and very specifically they want more
influence than us.
They want to build partnerships and relationships wherever
they can to undermine our ability to have influence in the
world and put themselves in a better and stronger position.
We can see what that means, that it would put them in a
better position to bully their way into, gosh, a half dozen
countries where they claim territory--the Philippines,
Indonesia, India, ironically, even Russia.
So that's really what we're fighting for is influence in
the world and what they want to do. I think it's really
important that we build our relationships in Latin America to
try and prevent that.
And then on the North American side, again, I agree with
Mr. Alford, try to protect our airspace. Certainly, we've
learned of some vulnerabilities in the last couple years. I
know, General Guillot, you have addressed those and I
appreciate that. But those are the broad concerns.
One question I would have is, you know, you mentioned the
potential that exists in Latin America. I'd like both General
Richardson and Ms. Zimmerman to address what can we be doing,
what partners can we be working with, to better realize that
potential and reduce the chaos, reduce the drive that is
pushing so many people out of so many countries and forcing
this migration.
Ms. Zimmerman, why'd you go ahead and go first?
Ms. Zimmerman. Thank you so much, Congressman, for that
question.
I think you speak to an important set of things which is
not simply what can we do to respond, you know, on America's
worst day if we find ourselves in conflict with China but how
can we actually build the relationships now because that speaks
to the values that we share as democracies, and the department,
in conjunction with other departments and agencies across the
U.S. government, is really working to reinforce those
democratic values, is working to build strong defense
partnerships.
So, for example, the Secretary just attended the North
American Defense Ministerial, which is a trilateral
conversation involving Canada and Mexico.
We have the Conference of Defense Ministers of the Americas
which will be coming up later this year so to ensure that the
department represents those values in those forums.
But I think there's also work that we do in building
partner capacity and I'll let General Richardson speak to that.
But I would also second what General Richardson said
earlier, which is that some of the Development Finance
Corporation efforts, our other economic efforts, where we can
nest those, where we can nest our activities in those common
efforts I think we can realize a lot of gains that would
otherwise, working in silos in the government, not be possible.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
General?
General Richardson. So, Congressman, the--thank you for
that and thank you for the question. Certainly, the funding
that I received last year and the 8068 funding--additional
funding on top of what I receive--really helped and it had
flexible authorities to help us be responsive to our partner
nations.
And as you know and as I've testified before, and working
with the DOD team but also Department of State and the
interagency to speed up our processes in foreign military
sales, access to defense articles, and not take years to
deliver a capability because these--our partner nations are--
these heads of state are in the seat generally one term of four
years and they're working on a stopwatch, not a calendar. They
need results within months, not years.
And so that's what has led me to also partner with
Department of Commerce, Department of Treasury, the American
Chamber of Commerce, because our economic security is really,
really important here.
So when you're talking about the realization of feeding and
fueling the world, when half the soybean for the globe comes
from this region, 30 percent of the corn and the sugar comes
from this region for the globe, you've got the Amazon, you got
31 percent of the world's fresh water, you got light sweet
crude, heavy crude, you've got gold, copper, rare earth
elements so lithium triangle--60 percent of the world's lithium
is in this region--the potential is there.
So how do we help with the economic investment? We have a
lot of foreign direct investment from the United States already
but our U.S. companies in the region we need to brand and start
bragging about what Team USA does for the countries already and
then we have to help streamline the--how our companies and if
there are barriers to competing on the tenders for critical
infrastructure in South America, Central America, and the
Caribbean and that is part of that partnership that we have
been doing. National security rests on economic security.
Mr. Smith. Yeah. And just one comment, one final question.
I think the security piece of this is crucial and I know it's
something that Congress writ large is wrestling with right now.
You know, we have concerns when we sell arms or security
equipment to other nations what do they do with them, and those
concerns are legitimate.
But I hope everyone understands that every nation tries to
figure out some way to provide for their own security. Okay.
There is no nation out there that just simply lays down their
arms and hopes for the best.
Okay. They try to maintain security and that's never easy
and it's always a very difficult balance. A partnership with
these other countries part of it is helping them provide that
security and our slow walking of arms sales is undermining our
relationships throughout the world and opening the door wide
for China and Russia.
It is not like these nations are not going to get weapons
if we stop selling them to them. They're just going to build
different relationships--we have certainly seen that in the
Middle East--and I hope we're mindful of the tradeoff.
Final question is our relationships in Latin America. You
know, one of the big things Russia and China have an incredibly
aggressive messaging machine. They are out there 24/7
denigrating us, basically.
It's a massive, worldwide negative campaign that people
here domestically pick up for a variety of different reasons,
and one of the things they play off of is historical concerns
about what the U.S. has done in a bunch of places but
particularly in Latin America.
So when you're working with Brazil and Argentina and Chile
how do you push back against that negative campaign? Because it
does seem to be having an effect. I mean, you can correct me if
I'm wrong on that point, but I think it has hurt our
relationship with a number of countries in Latin America--the
battle with Cuba, the battle with Nicaragua, what's going on
with Venezuela.
How can we better burnish our own image so that we can have
a better chance of building the partnerships we need to build?
General Richardson. Well, I would say, Congressman, thank
you for that question because we have got to have trusted
partners and we have the American Partnership for Economic
Prosperity--APEP--which is a program from the Summit of the
Americas.
And APEP hosted at the White House in early November 11
Latin American heads of state that came and for a week they
discussed the challenges in the region but then also rolled out
the programs of economic help in terms of in modern ports,
clean energy, and digital technology, and billions of dollars
of programs and efforts, infusement of economic investment into
the region through the Inter-American Development Bank and also
through Developmental Finance Corporation.
And so with that there are some shares--75 million in
shares that are coming up for vote this month that I would
recommend that as we had this APEP in November and hosted these
leaders at the White House that we have got to--we have got to
recommend that we purchase those shares from the United States
so we don't give our adversaries an opportunity to purchase
them as part of the investment that we rolled out in the
November time frame.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The Chair recognizes gentlelady from
Virginia, Mrs. Kiggans.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for our
guests for being with us today.
Just a comment about the security potential that we have in
Central and South America and I think just prioritizing our
funding so that we can put our money where our mouth is. The
defense budget is always inadequate, and just making sure that
we are, again, prioritizing that funding because it is so
important.
I wanted to speak and ask a little bit about Cuba. In my
district I represent Virginia's 2nd Congressional District so
we have Naval Air Station Oceana there, and they've recently
moved their Strike Fighter Advanced Readiness Program, or
SFARP, exercises back home to Virginia Beach because they are
worried about activity in Cuba from the Chinese.
And so could you speak a little bit just about what
concerns you have about Chinese activity in Cuba and what
approaches we're taking to fortify the security encounter of
our adversaries in this region?
General Richardson. So thank you, Congresswoman, and the--
certainly that concern being so close to the homeland is very
concerning. The U.S. interagency is working very hard to
counter that effort and I can talk tomorrow about that in the
classified session afterwards.
Mrs. Kiggans. Great. Thank you. And then I also want to
talk about Haiti a little bit just because of the unrest and
maybe, Ms. Zimmerman, you can answer the question.
Just with the recent news about the prime minister stepping
down and understanding that we've increased our aid $300
million and just $33 million in humanitarian assistance going
to that region, and then talks of sending, perhaps, military as
well.
So can you just speak to what is going on there? Is there a
possibility of us sending our troops to that region?
Ms. Zimmerman. Absolutely. I'm happy to speak to that,
Congresswoman.
So the situation in Haiti remains, obviously, very tense
and the U.S. is participating in both its own efforts and also
efforts in support of Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and other
allies with respect to Haiti.
So in terms of a troop commitment of U.S. troops we are
talking there only about security augmentation for our embassy
in Port-au-Prince. There isn't discussion of sending in our
military.
But we are in support of the MSS--the Multinational
Security Support--mission for Haiti. This is the Kenyan-led
mission to train and support the Haitian National Police.
So there the department has increased its funding from $100
million to $200 million in order to better support the
logistics and sustainment aspects of that mission in order to
get the mission fielded as soon as we can.
Mrs. Kiggans. Thank you. And then also, briefly, we see
China adopting some of our tactics that we use to develop
alliances with exercise--military exercises specifically with
some of those 28 democracy countries that you mentioned and
that's kind of been--the United States has developed our
friendships and we have done military exercises together so
that we understand each other's capabilities, that we're there
for each other if needed.
So we see China kind of adopting that and now doing their
own types of exercises. Can you speak to where that is
happening? Are those 28 democracies--are they steadfast in
their relationship with us or are they turning around and then
participating in exercises with potential adversaries of ours?
General Richardson. I would say, Congresswoman, the--in
terms of--you're absolutely right. The PRC is utilizing our
playbook as well and not just in exercises but key leader
engagements and things like that.
So they're upping the ranks of the PLA that are now showing
up to the exercises in the Marines and I would say that the way
to--when I say our presence absolutely matters it really does.
And us being able to have an exercise--several years ago my
exercise funding to get me down into the Southern Cone--
SOUTHCOM and all of our components--was reinstalled with the
additional funding last year and so happy to say that we're
able to be there.
But I would ask for that continued funding. I don't need to
outspend the PRC to outcompete them. We just need to be there.
We got to be there.
And I would say on the economic side of the house if we're
not there from Team USA then--and responsive when opportunities
open up and they need help, if we can't help them then they're
going to look to whoever has the cash or the loans or things
like that in order to fund what they need, again, for the
presidents that are in the seat for a very short term of four
years.
Mrs. Kiggans. So those--the 28 democracies that you talked
about that are the friendly countries are they pretty
steadfast, though, in those relationships?
Are they questioning our alliances just based off kind of
what they're seeing with Russia and Ukraine and our ability to
provide aid to allies throughout the world? Is it having an
impact in your ----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from the great
state of Alabama, Ms. Sewell.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank our
witnesses for being here today.
And as the emerging threats environment facing the United
States become increasingly complex I really do appreciate your
dedication to protecting our homeland, our citizens, and our
troops.
General Guillot--is that right? General Guillot, I first
want to discuss hypersonic weapons which have become a key
component for both Russia and China. Hypersonics, high-speed,
low-trajectory, and maneuvering capabilities pose a major
challenge to our ability to identify and warn of inbound
threats.
With your priority of detecting, classifying, and tracking
potential threats to the homeland are we providing enough
resources for reactive threat representation from hypersonics?
General Guillot. Congresswoman, I share your assessment on
hypersonics. I think that they are probably the most
technologically challenging threat that we're facing as well as
the most destabilizing because of where they operate between
established norms and weapons.
Specifically for NORAD and NORTHCOM, because both commands
have a role with hypersonics, I'm comfortable with the
trajectory that we're on to build systems that can detect and
track. We have some capability today. But as the threat
advances we need to advance.
And so staying on track with our over-the-horizon radar and
some space-based systems, which will give us hypersonic detect
and track capability, is essential here in the coming years.
Ms. Sewell. So what about next-generation technology with
respect to hypersonics? Do you feel like we have enough
resources around that? Because I really don't think we do. I
understand that we don't have to outspend them but we do have
to be protective and show foresight.
And so talk to me a little bit about that.
General Guillot. Congresswoman, I agree. We need to double
the efforts in--like I said, we can detect what we have today
but that's not where our adversaries will be in just a couple
of short years, and that's on the defensive part.
Obviously, not directly my realm but then to deter, keeping
pace on the offensive side, is important and I know that my
fellow combatant commanders are looking at as well.
And I've also had some very good discussions with the
Missile Defense Agency--MDA--about some of the systems that
they're developing both in the future as well as adapting
current systems today to be able to defeat hypersonics. I'm
highly interested in those.
Ms. Sewell. Just want to make sure that you know that there
are those of us who are really quite concerned about that and
would welcome the opportunity to talk further about it.
Ms. Zimmerman, in your testimony you discuss the impact
climate change has on our military readiness. You highlight the
Global Water Security Center at the University of Alabama which
utilizes DOD funding to provide education, training, and
research related to water, food, energy, and natural disasters.
Can you discuss how the Global Water Center assessments
help combatant commands' strategic planning and contribute to
our national security?
Ms. Zimmerman. Thank you very much.
I think in terms of some of those specifics I'd like to get
back to you in a little bit more detail. But I will say that
our ability to get on the same page as a department and as a
government in our analysis, our understanding of the problem,
is what is right now allowing us to begin to take action with
the goal for the department of really ensuring seamless
operations when we need them, where we need them, regardless of
the impact of climate change and extreme weather.
Ms. Sewell. Great.
General Richardson, we continue to see our adversaries
target our partners in South America, from China's Belt and
Road Initiative to Russia's disinformation.
With China emerging as South America's top trading partner
how can we use our trade initiatives like the America's
Partnership for Economic Prosperity to deter China?
General Richardson. I would say that the--we have to be--
what we said that we're going to do we have got to follow
through with that and do what we said we're going to do and I
think that that is a huge investment in the region.
Eleven presidents from this region out of the 31 that came
here to Washington, D.C., that shows you--I mean, that's--I
look at that as just a foot in the door to expand that.
I mean, what a great first effort, and I'm so excited about
this program--the attention, the investment. It's huge for Team
USA and Team Democracy. And so if we can just make that even
bigger and better that's what we need to do.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you. I yield back the balance.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Luttrell.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank
everybody for coming today and thank you everybody for your
service. Everyone in uniform and our veterans, thank you.
Absolutely thank you for what you do to keep our families safe.
Mr. Guillot, this is your first time in front of Congress.
I think you missed an absolute great opportunity. Ms.
Richardson, you failed on that one, too.
If the Chairman of House Armed Services Committee (HASC)
says I think your budget should be doubled your immediate
response is you will have it by the end of the day.
Tracking? Okay, good. Let's move on.
My colleague from Alabama hit it on the head with
hypersonics. This is very forward leaning and I think that's a
very high-risk profile that we need to be addressing.
But my other--my concern besides that is cyber. So I was
hoping General Richardson and General Guillot, can you give me
a kind of high level briefing of where we stand with cyber
risk, cyber threat in both of your AORs and the advances in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) that we're emplacing and how we
function and the functionality with our partners?
Because their footprint is far inferior to ours.
General Richardson. It is, and the 14 major attacks on
government networks in 10 countries over this past year we
can't respond fast enough and help our partners with training.
The additional funding I received last year helps with the
Security Cooperation Initiative--SSCI for cyber--but our
authorities in institutional capacity building--Triple Three--
are not responsive enough.
So I would say what help do the combatant commands (COCOM)s
need help with is that flexible funding with Triple Three to
help our partners. So, when these opportunities--they're crises
but they're also opportunities to help our partners and so
that's what they rely on us for, being fast and being quick to
help them.
And so I would say that that would be what we would need
help with.
Mr. Luttrell. Are we in the process of line iteming those
exact things? I mean, we're going to need ----
General Richardson. Absolutely.
Mr. Luttrell. You have to present that to us so we know
details.
General Richardson. Yes, and in our security cooperation
initiatives for cyber we're laying that out, and I have what's
called the JCAT--a Joint Cyber Assessment Team--from SOUTHCOM.
It's like a quick reaction force to help our partners and then
do the institutional capacity building of training with them on
cyber.
But we need to do more in cyber because their--the level of
technology is--and how quick technology is happening they
cannot keep up with it.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, ma'am.
General Richardson. And so that's why they need our
assistance with that.
Mr. Luttrell. We'll, we're more than willing to assist you
with that, especially given the advancements in cyber risk and
cyber threat.
General Richardson. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, ma'am.
General?
General Guillot. Congressman, first, thanks. Message
received on the funding side.
Mr. Luttrell. Solid ----
General Guillot. As far as cyberspace, just with all the
threats that we face in the homeland and all domains the most
persistent and present threat that we face is the cyber threat.
We see attacks every day on--or attempts to attack our
networks every day on both the--we have four networks in
Northern Command that we use to, you know, conduct our mission
that we protect and then also across the DOD network that we
work in primarily with Cyber Command to make sure we're
defending as well as with Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) on the defense critical infrastructure.
So I share your concern on that. That is certainly the most
persistent and challenging threat that we face. I have
confidence in our detect but you don't know what you don't
know, and then so continued emphasis on this is something that
you'll see from NORAD and NORTHCOM.
Mr. Luttrell. Perfect. This is a language not very many
people speak and it seems as if as these attacks happen daily,
every half second--they are so repetitive--I don't want it to
be siloed in a way that the Armageddon happens and, like, well,
we have been--this has been happening for years. We just--we
didn't know how to, number one, address that up and out of the
organization or combat it.
So I'm asking you to share with us as best you can where we
stand, where we need to move, how we need to flex left, right
of center, in order to not become victims in this space.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Thank you so much, Mr. Chair, and to our
witnesses today.
I've actually taken my second trip while serving in the
118th Congress to the southern border. I visited most recently
the Del Rio sector to witness the evolving crisis firsthand.
While there we had the opportunity to meet with those who
are working on the front line. So, we definitely appreciate the
service and all the work that has taken place--that's gone into
it so far.
Ms. Zimmerman, while at Eagle Pass we learned there have
been more than 120,000 known gotaways so far fiscal year 2024.
How do you compare the threat posed by these individuals, some
of whom are on the terror watch list, with those who are
actually unknown?
Ms. Zimmerman. I couldn't understand your last question.
Mr. Davis. Yeah. I said how do we compare those to those
who are unknown?
Ms. Zimmerman. To those who are unknown?
Mr. Davis. Yes.
Ms. Zimmerman. Well, Congressman, I think, you know, the
work that we're doing not just in Eagle Pass but in other
places in support of the Department of Homeland Security and
our CBP colleagues is intended to minimize that number of known
gotaways.
We do a lot of detection and monitoring in support of CBP
which helps to ensure that CBP can respond where they need to
when they need to.
In terms of those who might be affiliated with terrorists,
criminal organizations, et cetera, I think it's a small number
relative to the other getaways. But, of course, as General
Guillot said with respect to cyber we can't know what we don't
know.
Mr. Davis. Okay. Is it safe to say if we know that what we
don't know that there are some unknowns? I mean, is it only an
assumption that there are likely some who may have been on a
terror watch that could have been unknown or identified as
unknown?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressman, I think this is really a
question for the Department of Homeland Security which leads
those efforts.
Mr. Davis. Okay. Thank you.
Moving on then, Ms. Zimmerman and General Guillot, when we
talk then in terms of transnational criminal organizations like
the drug cartels my question is how can we better predict the
next epicenter of the crisis based on resources that may be at
our hands?
General Guillot. Congressman, with regard to countering the
TCOs, NORAD has some very specific guidance from the department
on how we can assist and the way we present that is through
partnering with various lead federal agencies in the area of
intel support, more particularly by targeting the network using
some of the techniques that Special Operations Command and
Central Command have used effectively overseas with terrorist
networks using some of those same techniques to help illuminate
on the cartels.
And so through our Joint Task Force (JTF) North that's
where we present that capability to the interagency.
Ms. Zimmerman. It's hard to add to that. I think that was a
very comprehensive answer.
But, broadly speaking, we work in conjunction with other
departments and agencies making sure that we're breaking down
those silos.
I was also on the border just I think the week before last
speaking with our colleagues from JTF North and hearing from
them that our cooperation with CBP and by extension the Border
Patrol, I think, is more thorough and deeper than it has been
in many years.
Mr. Davis. Okay. And General Guillot, your men and women
who've augmented in terms of the Department of Homeland
Security for, I believe, 18 years now it's my understanding
that this was never intended to be an endure mission as it's
become.
Can you describe the impact that it has on those who
continue to serve?
General Guillot. Congressman, while it hasn't intended to
be an enduring mission we recognize that our partners need help
and the department has tasked NORTHCOM to do that.
The readiness that you alluded to is a very big concern of
mine. We operate in three primary areas. You know, in the
aviation I think that we can maintain our readiness for other
worldwide missions in the course of the support missions but
some of the other ones--the logistical support and the
detection and monitoring--require us to take them off the line
and conduct other trainings so they can keep their worldwide
readiness while they're conducting the Southwest border mission
and that's something that I and JTF North track very closely.
Mr. Davis. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank each of you
for being here today.
General Guillot, the Next-Generation Interceptor will play
a critical role in U.S. Northern Command mission and homeland
defense. Your predecessor General VanHerck told the Senate
Armed Services Committee on March of 2022 that the United
States needs to deploy the Next-Generation Interceptor--NGI--by
2028 or sooner to keep pace with our adversaries.
What is your assessment of the current NGI schedule, given
the evolving threat picture?
General Guillot. Congressman, I agree with General
VanHerck's assessment. It's one of the first things I looked at
upon taking command.
I still feel that 2028 is the point where if we have not
fielded this system by then that we run the risk of falling
behind the advances of competitors, most notably North Korea.
But at this time I feel that we have the capability to defeat
that threat but we must stay on time with NGI in order to
preserve that capability.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Just to confirm, you agree that fielding the NGI as soon as
possible is critical for defense of the homeland?
General Guillot. Congressman, I absolutely agree with that.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. If NGI--the NGI program failed like
its predecessor what would that mean for the homeland defense
system--missile defense system?
General Guillot. Congressman, I'll go into details in the
closed session but it would mean that we are not keeping pace
with the rogue nations, in particular North Korea.
Mr. Strong. That would be a very bad thing, correct?
General Guillot. It would be a very bad thing.
Mr. Strong. Okay. As we have seen others' now canceled
portions of the ground-based midcourse defense system,
maintaining competition as long as possible is critical.
The acquisition strategy for NGI is the gold standard and
the plan has always been to carry two teams through at least
critical design review.
This is why I'm extremely concerned by reports that the
department is now officially planning to conduct an early
downselect for NGI.
NGI is the future of homeland missile defense and we don't
have another capability in the pipeline if these programs fail.
Are you concerned with the amount of risk that hasty cost-
cutting measures would add?
General Guillot. Congressman, I'm concerned with anything
that would give us a less than capable NGI system. I'll defer
to the department and MDA on the specifics of the contracting
measure.
But I do have frequent and thorough discussions with MDA to
ensure that the operational requirements that were established
by NORTHCOM are being met.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I understand that you're not going
to go against your boss but would you say that the Next-
Generation Interceptor is a no-fail mission?
General Guillot. Congressman, I believe NGI is a no-fail
mission.
Mr. Strong. Then why would we put all our eggs in one
basket earlier than planned?
General Guillot. Congressman, to the specifics of the
contract and the procurement I have to defer to the MDA
experts.
Mr. Strong. Again, I'm very concerned by the proposed major
change to policy for NGI and I look forward to continuing
discussions with the DOD on how it intends to mitigate the
extreme risk of an early downselect.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Deluzio.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
everybody. Thank you for being here.
You've highlighted examples today in your testimony and in
your written testimony of how the Chinese Communist Party is
increasing infrastructure investments in the Western
Hemisphere. Certainly concerning.
What also concerns me, though, is their access to our own
infrastructure here in this country, our maritime ports, for
example.
The Wall Street Journal highlighted just last week nearly
80 percent of our ship-to-shore cranes are Chinese built, many
containing unexplained covert communications, capabilities, and
equipment. I think the vulnerabilities there are obvious.
I was happy to see last year's National Defense
Authorization Act (NDAA) Section 7405 required an assessment of
the threat posed by these cranes. I support House Resolution
(H.R.) 3169, Mr. Gimenez and Garamendi and others as well on
the Port Crane Security Inspection Act.
So, General Guillot, I'll start with you. Given that much
of our port infrastructure is privately owned, and we see these
vulnerabilities in public reporting, what is NORTHCOM's
responsibility here and where is private or corporate
responsibility lie as well?
General Guillot. Congressman, primarily the defense of the
ports is a private matter. However, in particular in the cyber
realm NORTHCOM has a very vested interest in it because of our
defensive critical infrastructure role.
In particular, this is where we on behalf of requested
support from the private companies, if they request help in the
cyber in cooperation with CISA and Cyber Command any support
given to them with cyber defense from DOD would be synchronized
and presented through NORTHCOM.
Mr. Deluzio. Do our adversaries care if our infrastructure
is owned by a private or a public entity?
General Guillot. I don't believe so. I think they--
Congressman, I think they worry about their own interest and
not ours.
Mr. Deluzio. Related to that, my district and many others
saw nation state actors attack critical infrastructure. The
Aliquippa Water Authority in western Pennsylvania in my
district experienced an attack.
I'm not alone in that. How do you see those vulnerabilities
to our critical infrastructure not just threatening our way of
life, our prosperity, but undermining defense?
General Guillot. Congressman, the way I see it undermining
defense is it could potentially--you mentioned water, the
ports, electricity, any number of--rail--any number of those
systems that aren't considered to be military or the Defense
Department actually are very important to us as we look to
project forces overseas.
We would use all those capabilities to support combatant
commands around the world. So that's why in my homeland defense
responsibilities I take a special interest in that.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you.
Ms. Zimmerman, I'm going to come to you. I'll just say
this. I mean, you outlined the homeland defense policy guidance
in your testimony. A quote here--must be a quote--``focus on
defending defense critical infrastructure against attacks in
all domains and build resiliency and redundancy,'' end quote.
The general went to it. There are pieces of nondefense
critical infrastructure that Defense Department military
facilities rely on. Can you tell me more about that and how you
worry about those vulnerabilities?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressman, I'd be glad to.
This is a major effort that the department is undertaking
now in support of the resilience of defense critical
infrastructure and we recognize that a large part of the
infrastructure on which the Department of Defense relies is not
Defense owned.
Some of it is federal infrastructure owned by federal
partners and some of it is in the private sector. The
Department of Defense is the sector risk management agency for
defense critical infrastructure.
There are sector risk management agency (SRMA)s for all of
the varieties of critical infrastructure. We come together in
the federal senior leader council, which is managed by CISA, to
talk about cyber threats and we talk about those in a cross
forum where we're able to talk with those agencies about the
infrastructure on which the Department of Defense depends.
And so we're able to make decisions. We're able to make
sure that the risk management constructs that those agencies
are pursuing accommodate the needs of the Defense Department.
But in addition to that, we're making efforts to reach out to
our federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial and private
sector Defense Industrial Base partners.
So, we have recently reformed some of our guidance about
how we're able to talk about these issues in order to allow us
to have classified conversations and unclassified conversations
in a much more fulsome way with those partners so that they can
understand where our dependencies are.
We're also working in conjunction with CISA, some of our
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) colleagues, to
support the better mapping of critical infrastructure in order
to draw out what those dependencies look like.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you. And I'll just close with the
question I asked to General Guillot is do you think our
adversaries care if the thing they are targeting is defense,
civilian, private? Does it matter to them?
Ms. Zimmerman. I think they absolutely do not. I think they
will target the areas that are weakest and we have to be
prepared.
Mr. Deluzio. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
New York, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman. I represent a district in
New York and I want to start by offering my condolences to the
families of two New York National Guardsmen Chief Warrant
Officers Casey Frankoski and John Grassia, who were killed in
the recent helicopter crash in our southern border. Their
services and sacrifices to our great nation cannot be
forgotten.
Generals, Ms. Zimmerman, we have a problem in America's
southern border and crises at many of America's cities and
states, and I want to use my time to address the impact of your
areas of operations, SOUTHCOM especially, General Richardson,
have on our security at America's southern border and in states
like New York.
Just a few years ago MS-13, with many roots in El Salvador,
had a massive and destructive presence on Long Island where I
represent.
The motto of MS-13, for folks at home who may not know, is
kill, rape and control, and while MS-13 was, largely,
eradicated on Long Island several years ago--credit to a good
partnership between the federal government and local law
enforcement--I am concerned about the resurgence of MS-13 or a
group like it and I'm concerned because there's two policy
choices going on that are exacerbating the flow of migrants
across the southern border and to states like mine.
Those policies are the administration paroling millions of
noncitizens into the United States and New York City's migrant
crisis, which is exacerbated by their sanctuary policies.
In light of these concerns I'm eager to explore how we can
bolster our defenses and ensure that Long Island continues to
contribute effectively to our national defense architecture.
General Richardson, the administration states they are
properly vetting all the migrants who come to the United States
before paroling them in the United States. Yet, critics contend
that the proper vetting would entail much more.
It would entail full cooperation from the migrants' home
country and awareness of that home country and what that
individual's background is--cooperation between that host
nation's law enforcement and intelligence services.
General, in your capacity as SOUTHCOM commander is it safe
to say that you've become familiar with the El Salvador
military?
General Richardson. Yes, I am familiar with the El Salvador
military.
Mr. LaLota. Are you familiar with the El Salvador
government?
General Richardson. No, Congressman.
Mr. LaLota. How about some of the local police departments?
General Richardson. No, Congressman.
Mr. LaLota. Okay. Given your expertise with the military
component can you tell us how the intelligence apparatus in
countries like El Salvador compares to the United States?
General Richardson. It's definitely not as robust,
Congressman.
Mr. LaLota. Scale of 1 to 10, if the United States is the
10 standard where would you put nations in your AOR?
General Richardson. In terms of the intelligence capacity?
Mr. LaLota. Yes.
General Richardson. I would say they have the advantage of
having home turf advantage but I would say inside their country
it would be a 10, and then as we encourage our partners to work
together, cross their borders to share information, because all
of them are experiencing some form of all of the threats that
I've talked about.
And so them working together better not just within their
own borders, binational operations that we see taking place
between Colombia and Ecuador, the work that Colombia and Panama
is doing cross border on migration as well ----
Mr. LaLota. I'm going to cut you off. I apologize.
So, inside the home country you're saying they have a
decent awareness. I appreciate that. You also said that you
don't, and it's no fault of your own, your command doesn't
necessarily have a relationship with the government there or
law enforcement I understand as well.
What would you say with respect to the intelligence sharing
from countries like El Salvador to the United States? Is that a
mutual thing? Is it one way? Is it minimal? How would you
characterize the intelligence sharing between us and El
Salvador?
General Richardson. I would say that the work that the
ambassador has done on the ground--our U.S. ambassador to El
Salvador--and the work that we have and the relationships that
we have with El Salvador we have a robust relationship military
to military.
And so the sharing of information, I think, from El
Salvador with the United States is good in that respect.
Mr. LaLota. But you don't--are you aware of any
relationships either State Department or other U.S. officials
have with some of those more national or local law enforcement
entities?
General Richardson. You'd have to speak to them,
Congressman.
Mr. LaLota. Okay. Focusing on drug trafficking, narcotics,
transnational organizations like MS-13, what sort of
intelligence have you shared in this setting, I understand,
with countries like El Salvador with respect to entities like
MS-13 and drug trafficking?
General Richardson. I have relied on the State Department
and the U.S. ambassador in terms of the intelligence sharing
that they would do with the country of El Salvador.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. Appreciate your service. My time has
expired. I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'd like to share my sense of the situation with respect to
fentanyl production in Mexico and if I'm wrong I'd like you to
correct me.
My understanding is that there are two cartels that are
producing the vast majority of the fentanyl that comes into the
United States, that we know where these cartels are, that the
Mexican government and more specifically the president of
Mexico has been very reluctant to acknowledge this problem, let
alone respond to this problem, and specifically has been very
reluctant to enter into any kind of military partnership with
us--that we could be much more effective and helpful than we
are being allowed to be by the Mexican government.
Is any of that wrong? That's my understanding. Feel free to
correct me.
General Guillot. Congressman, I can't refute anything that
you said. I would point out that as part of the 90-day
assessment that I'm undergoing I am looking very closely at the
operational environment specifically with Mexico and how we
address the transnational criminal organizations, and at the
conclusion of this I will brief the Secretary on my findings
and then I'll be happy to share after that with this body.
Mr. Jackson. My sense is that part of--one of the success
stories that we have to tell with the interdiction of drugs and
combating cartels is with Venezuela because many years ago the
Venezuelan government accepted our help--accepted our military
assistance with respect to running offense on the cartels.
General Richardson, am I right in my understanding of that,
that we were able to be very helpful there?
General Richardson. So the--General Guillot has Mexico in
his AOR in terms of with the cartels and I would say with the
transnational criminal organizations in my region and the
insecurity and the instability that they continue to create and
their portfolio has diversified and they become more powerful,
as I was saying before this, the--our countries working
together to try and eliminate those threats and share the
information on those threats that are in the South America/
Central American region is extremely important.
Mr. Jackson. I think what I'm driving at is I think there's
a--there are good examples of times in which other countries
have entered into military partnership with us in order to run
offense on cartels and it feels like that would be an
appropriate partnership right now with Mexico.
And the president of Mexico is resisting this for reasons
that I'm sure none of us fully understand, and at the
conclusion of your 90-day assessment this is going to be a
point of extreme interest for a lot of people because I have
people who are dying every day in my state--every single day.
And the sense is when we hear statements from the Mexican
president like, this is not a problem--this does not exist as a
problem--we know that's not true and it colors all of our
thinking about, well, what does the solution to the problem
really look like.
Can we solve the problem when the president of Mexico
refuses to acknowledge its existence, let alone refuses to
accept our assistance in dealing with this as other nations
have to their benefit in the past?
Can you describe--and I know you're still within an
assessment--the current scope of our assistance to Mexico with
respect to running offense on cartels? What's it look like
right now such as you can?
General Guillot. Congressman, NORTHCOM is authorized to
participate in the counter TCOs by providing intelligence
support.
We run the info analysis center in Mexico City where we
coordinate with the lead federal agencies for the U.S. as well
as cooperate with General Richardson's Joint Interagency Task
Force-South (JIATF-South) for a full approach of south of our
border to include into Southern Command's AOR.
So by target--in that center we target the network. We
assist with targeting to network with our intel specialists and
then distribute the information to the interagency ----
Mr. Jackson. What I hear you saying is purely intel at this
point, nothing tactical. Is that, roughly, the assessment?
General Guillot. That is correct.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Fallon.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, when I saw the topic of the hearing a few days
back--you know, the security challenges of North America, South
America--I immediately--I'll admit I immediately thought about
Venezuela.
I want to take my five minutes to ask about Venezuela and
Cuba and the MS-13 like my colleague from New York did, or the
Mexican drug cartels.
And then it dawned on me that I did pay attention in
elementary school and America is part of North America. So why
aren't we talking more about focusing my five minutes on
securing our own border?
And what I wanted to do is ask General Guillot do you think
that if you had--I assume we all agree that border security is
a national security issue. Just do we do we agree on that,
General Guillot?
General Guillot. Congressman, I do agree.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah. Okay. I don't think that's a real reach.
And what concerns me is when I look back at prior
administrations and the two prior administrations before the
current one, at this juncture in their administrations they had
about 1.7 million illegal border crossings.
Unfortunately, that's now, depending on exactly what stat
you use, it's hovering around 8 million. Would you agree that
that is a troubling trend?
General Guillot. Congressman, the role of NORTHCOM on the
border is to support the Department of Homeland Security and
the Customs and Border Protection in support roles that don't
relate to law enforcement or the ----
Mr. Fallon. Sure, but, General, I count eight stars on your
shoulders. Do you think that that is a troubling trend? Would
you rather--the fewer illegal crossings we have is that--would
that--would you agree that that's better? The fewer the better?
General Guillot. Yes, I would agree with that.
Mr. Fallon. Because we don't know who a lot of these folks
are and in the prior administration we had a couple of years
where we had three individuals on the terrorist watch list that
were apprehended and then this past fiscal year I believe it
was 169. That is an alarming difference, would you not agree?
General Guillot. Congressman, I agree that any threats that
come into the U.S. would be a concern to me as the NORTHCOM
commander.
Mr. Fallon. So with--let's talk about the Mexican drug
cartels. Clear and present danger to the United States? Would
you agree with that statement?
General Guillot. Congressman, I would--I would say that
it's certainly a national challenge and a national concern.
Mr. Fallon. So I'd say you would agree with that, that the
cartels are a danger to the United States. The Mexican drug
cartels are a danger to the United ----
General Guillot. Cartel activity does pose a danger to the
United States.
Mr. Fallon. Okay. So we don't want to embolden them. We'd
like to have them weakened because the more--the stronger they
get the more they endanger American citizens. Would that be
accurate. It's not a trick question, General.
General Guillot. Well ----
Mr. Fallon. Really? I mean--all right. Well, General
Richardson, do you think that that is a clear and present
danger if the Mexican drug cartels are emboldened and make more
money? Does that endanger the United States of America?
General Richardson. Yes, because they're getting stronger,
more powerful, and they're diversifying their portfolio.
Mr. Fallon. Precisely.
General Richardson. So they're not just doing drugs and
trafficking people, that it's illegal mining, illegal logging,
counterfeit goods.
Mr. Fallon. Some of the worst people on the planet.
General Richardson. It is, and they're getting stronger. So
we have to--we really have to band together with all of our
countries, all the countries in all of the--across the globe to
counter this because they're taking advantage of countries that
haven't experienced this kind of activity before and this kind
of crime and they're behind the eight ball trying to counter
this before--trying to get ahead of it once it occurs ----
Mr. Fallon. And I apologize for interrupting but I just
have limited time and as a O-3 I don't usually interrupt O-10s.
But so Mexican drug cartels present a clear and present
danger and they are charging, depending on who you talk to,
between $4,000 and $7,000 per illegal migrant coming into the
country.
So it stands to reason that the more illegal migrants
crossing the southern border the more emboldened the cartels
get, the more power they get, the more they endanger the
American people, and that's exactly why we want to limit the
illegal crossings on the southern border and that's why, for
instance, I'm also very concerned--and we'll give it another
go, General Guillot--with Chinese nationals crossing the
southern border.
There was a couple of years back where we had 450
apprehended, mostly military-aged men. Now, depending on who,
again, you talk to it's 43,000, 50,000. Is that an alarming
trend for you, General Guillot?
General Guillot. Yes, Congressman it is.
Mr. Fallon. Yeah, tremendously so, and that's why, again,
we have to do everything we can.
Director Wray even said that there's Islamic State of Iraq
and Syria (ISIS) elements that are also crossing the border as
well. So I just can't emphasize enough how important it is to
take this seriously. I don't think it's a political matter. I
think is an absolute matter of national security.
And I thank you for coming today. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back. Thanks.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Ms. Jacobs.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, as one of the few members on this committee who
actually represent a border community I feel like I just need
to make sure we are setting the record straight on these
issues.
First of all, San Diego, the community I represent, is one
of the safest cities in America, not despite being on the
border but I'd argue because of it, and I think my colleague
from El Paso would likely say the same thing.
And despite the fearmongering on display here today on my
regular trips to the border I think it's clear that the best
way to actually weaken the drug cartels is to make sure that we
have more legal pathways for people to come here and to make
sure we can let our Border Patrol agents actually focus on
national security by, for instance, funding the child wellbeing
program so that we're not having Border Patrol acting like
social workers.
And I would just--you know, all the people they're saying
on the terrorist watch list that we've seen come through we
know that because we have caught them, which means the system
is actually working. So in any case, just wanted to put that at
the top.
General Richardson, I'd like to ask you actually about the
SOUTHCOM Human Rights Office. You know it was established in
the late '90s and I think it's been a clear success in how we
integrate human rights directly into daily operations.
Could you speak to how the Human Rights Office has
benefitted SOUTHCOM, how it's improved the command's
relationship with human rights advocates and civil society and
if there's anything more you need from us to best be able to
utilize the Human Rights Office?
General Richardson. So thank you for that, Congresswoman.
The Human Rights Office in SOUTHCOM that we have had for
over 20 years has been a huge enabler and the ability to--you
know, everything that we do it's baked in.
It's a core foundational principle, and human rights, the
rule of law, and the professionalization of the militaries as
we work with our military partners in the region that is at the
top of the list, and then just infusing that in terms of all of
the programs.
And then it dovetails nicely into women, peace, and
security--the integration of women into the forces, the
militaries, and the public security forces.
Our enlisted leader development program which is a rock
star program,, that's what makes our U.S. military so strong is
our enlisted force and what we do is we bring that program to
the region and help our partners make that stronger.
And so with my sergeant major sitting behind me today,
very, very proud of that program and what our Human Rights
Office--I just did a human rights engagement last Friday and I
try to do that just about every six months.
I meet with human rights organizations when I travel in the
region as well to hear their perspective because it's a
perspective that you have to understand--not just our military-
to-military perspective but what is happening on the ground,
what they're seeing, what they're concerned about and--because
that factors into everything that we do to help countries.
And I think with the Human Rights Office that we've been
able to over the years with the relationships we have built but
actually as our partner nations have had to be mobilized to
help their police, and we talk about, you know, honoring their
constitution and the importance of honoring their constitution,
not just a person that might be in the leadership seat.
When those gray zone areas come into effect that's where we
really see the benefits of the hard work of our Human Rights
Office in SOUTHCOM.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
And could you share a little bit about the 25th anniversary
celebration that happened in Miami in 2022?
General Richardson. So thank you for that. We had numerous
countries, close to 20 partner nations that came, and there
were so many people that wanted to come and it was--we had just
really extended an invitation to the militaries but ministers
of defense wanted to come. A couple of congressional folks from
the countries wanted to come too because they were so excited
about it.
And then we have had a couple nations join the Human Rights
Initiative. It's a nonbinding agreement. It's just a commitment
to double down on supporting human rights and being aware of it
and the training that goes into the partner nations' militaries
and public security forces.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you. And in my last 30 seconds could you
just share how the Human Rights Office interacts with the
civilian harm mitigation and response policy?
General Richardson. And so the CHMR-AP as we call it for
the--as an acronym but the--those meetings occur regularly with
our Office of the Secretary of Defense so with Office of the
Secretary of Defense (OSD) and the Joint Staff.
And so the engagement and the importance of that only
brings that up to a higher level with a broader engagement
strategy, and so I appreciate the work by the Joint Staff and
OSD to do that forum.
Ms. Jacobs. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mrs. McClain from Michigan is
recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here.
General Richardson, with the recent breakout in violence in
Haiti the administration has done--has seemingly abandoned
Americans abroad again. The administration was able to pull out
State Department staff in our embassy this weekend but made
little attempt to rescue other Americans on the island.
While I appreciate the department's announced additional
funding for the Multinational Security Support (MMS) mission
the additional funding will not solve the problem.
So, General Richardson, my question is were you contacted
or consulted by anyone at the White House or the State
Department about Americans trapped in Haiti?
General Richardson. Regarding Americans trapped in Haiti,
no. We had--we were pulling out nonessential personnel from the
embassy.
Mrs. McClain. So you didn't have any discussion regarding
the Americans that were trapped in Haiti, just government
officials or nonessential government ----
General Richardson. Nonessential personnel to reduce that
number.
Mrs. McClain. Was there any conversation among your staff
on the rescue of the Americans in Haiti? What was the plan for
those?
General Richardson. There possibly were discussions above
my level regarding that and I know that as the political
negotiations continue in Jamaica with our Secretary of State
and CARICOM leaders to try and get to a political solution on
Haiti.
Mrs. McClain. So as of right now what is the plan for the
Americans trapped in Haiti?
General Richardson. And so the--as we work forward the--as
the administration creates a requirement for DOD to bring out
trapped Americans in Haiti we will absolutely do that from
SOUTHCOM.
Mrs. McClain. And I can appreciate, but as of right now we
don't have any plans to get Americans home. That's what I heard
you say.
General Richardson. I don't have a request for support to
bring any Americans--not just yet.
Mrs. McClain. I just want--I appreciate that. Thank you.
Yet. And what is the situation, in your opinion, in Haiti right
now?
General Richardson. Well, the--in terms of the violence
that the gangs--over 300 gangs, about 7,200 gang members that
we're tracking and the activities that they've taken over this
past week to create violence.
They've made four demands for the prime minister to resign,
for elections to be held within 90 days, that they be given
amnesty for the crimes that they've been--they've committed.
Mrs. McClain. Is it--and again, ma'am, I don't mean to cut
you off. Is the situation pretty dire over there or is it
business as usual in Haiti?
General Richardson. No, I would say that they--because of
what the gangs have done and taken advantage ----
Mrs. McClain. I agree.
General Richardson. --of the prime minister being out of
the country they've consolidated and conducted simultaneous
attacks across ----
Mrs. McClain. So pretty dire. Is that a fair assessment or
am I over exaggerating?
General Richardson. It is. So the situation--the security
situation is dire in Haiti, yeah.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you.
Was there any intelligence indicating the potential threat
of a violent takeover prior to last week?
General Richardson. That was not expected that the gangs--
we had not seen the gangs really work together or coordinate
together before once the prime minister left. There was no
indication that they had done that before or that they were
going to do that once he departed.
Mrs. McClain. So prior to there was really no indication or
no intel that we would end up in this situation, correct?
General Richardson. That they would be working together and
conducting simultaneous attacks, no.
Mrs. McClain. Okay.
Ms. Zimmerman, did the Secretary of Defense consult with
the Secretary of State regarding any options on protecting
Americans in Haiti?
Ms. Zimmerman. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of State, along with
other members of the U.S. government, have had numerous
discussions about Haiti as the situation has continued to
evolve.
With respect to Americans in particular, of course the
department maintains prudent planning for evacuations wherever
we have diplomatic ----
Mrs. McClain. Let me be clear.
Ms. Zimmerman. But the embassy remains open as of now.
Mrs. McClain. Okay. I'm asking these questions because this
is the third time this administration has abandoned Americans
abroad in dangerous situations. We don't have a plan to get
them out. We just said that.
Last night I coordinated with Congressman Cory Mills to
rescue several Americans trapped in Port-au-Prince. Congressman
Mills actually participated in the rescue of those Americans
abandoned by the Biden administration and the State Department.
So I ask you all what exactly is the plan to get Americans
trapped in Haiti out? We don't have one.
Mr. Chairman, this administration doesn't seem to have a
problem with abandoning Americans overseas. This is now the
third instance where President Biden and Secretary Blinken have
decided that American lives are irrelevant.
The Chairman. Mrs. McClain, the time has expired.
Mrs. McClain. First in Afghanistan, Israel, and now Haiti.
I yield back.
The Chairman. With that, Ms. Escobar from Texas is
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I'd like to thank
our witnesses for your service and for your presence here
today. This is such an important conversation. I'm eager to
dive in.
But, first, I want to say we recently lost two New York
Guardsmen and a Border Patrol agent and I'd like to express my
condolences, especially to the families and recognize their
incredible service.
General Richardson, I want to thank you in particular for
all of the engagement that I've had the honor and privilege to
have with you over the years. Thank you for your leadership.
I have the incredible honor of representing El Paso, Texas,
which is home to Fort Bliss, and over the course of that time,
you know, I will share one of the frustrations for me has been
that Congress has not focused on the Western Hemisphere to the
extent that I believe we need to, and when we are encountering
challenges at our nation's front door that's an example of us
acting too slowly and not quickly enough.
And, you know, as I listened to one of my colleagues on the
other side of the dais talk about the border which, again, I
agree with my colleague Ms. Jacobs, you know, presents
challenges but border communities like El Paso are among the
safest in the nation for a reason.
But as we think about challenges that we face at the border
we have got to think about investments beyond the border and
strategies beyond the border if we want to be successful, and
that's what I'd like to focus on actually with my first
question beginning with you, General Richardson.
SOUTHCOM in particular is one theater where our dollars,
though small in comparison to investments in other theaters,
can stretch quite far in terms of return on investment. There
is immense value in looking to secure our homeland and address
these threats at the source before they arrive at our door.
Can you give us some insight on the feedback you're getting
from our personnel in SOUTHCOM as well as the counterparts of
our cooperating nations on the value of these dollars? What
risks do we take on by under investing in these efforts
especially in an era of great power competition?
General Richardson. Yeah. So the--thanks, Congresswoman,
and thank you for your service.
And so, certainly, the investment that we make with our
partner nations in security cooperation--and I mentioned the
work that Colombia and Panama do together--so as migrants flow
out of Venezuela looking for a better life and being able to
get food and health care and be safe the operations that the
military is doing to go after the criminal gangs in Colombia
and then the border forces, National Border Police (SENAFRONT)
and National Aeronaval Service (SENAN) in Panama as they work
to do the same thing, to go after the criminal groups that are
conducting all the crimes, the counter--the drug trafficking,
the human trafficking, illegal mining, logging, all of it--
counterfeit goods.
And as they've done these operations against these criminal
groups and transnational criminal organizations they've
actually been able to find all these other things, all these
counterfeit goods, the drugs, the human trafficking.
And so they've actually doubled down operations and
continue those operations which they started last April in 2023
and they've continued those to get after the--you know, helping
in their respect to try and reduce migration and the criminals
that are doing the human trafficking.
And so the investment that we make with our partners is
huge in terms of them being able to counter the threats inside
of their countries and I think that they're doing everything
that they can to get after that.
But as their laws--some of their laws don't facilitate
stopping migration and stemming the flow we see activities to
do that but their laws don't support the military and police to
do that as they see human right as a--migration as a human
right.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, General Richardson. In my closing
few seconds I would just say I am equally alarmed by the
growing sophistication and power of the cartels. They are a
global threat.
But one of the ways to address the cartels and undercut
them and take vulnerable humans out of the hands of them as
human traffickers would be for us to--for Congress to open up
legal pathways instead of, you know, what I consider a
dereliction of our responsibility to reform outdated
immigration laws for decades.
Thank you all again for your service. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Waltz from Florida is
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Two weeks ago the FBI's Miami field office issued a public
alert seeking information on Majid Farahani, a member of a
Iran's ministry of intelligence and security, who has been
recruiting individuals, quote, ``for operations in the U.S. to
include lethal targeting of current and former government
officials.''
Those are the Trump administration Cabinet officials that
to this day have to have security because of the threat from
Iranian operatives on American soil and they're seeking to
avenge the 2020 death of Qasem Soleimani.
As you all know, the Justice Department has convicted an
Iranian operative for cooperating with Mexican cartels and
conspiring to blow up a restaurant here in Washington, D.C.,
some years ago.
So, General Richardson, has Iran attempted or is Iran using
Venezuela as a springboard to launch clandestine operations in
the United States?
General Richardson. I'd be able to talk to you about that
better in a closed session. But in terms of the ----
Mr. Waltz. Well, we--I mean, it's publicly reported,
General, that the Maduro regime is cooperating with Iran, is
providing documentation to help them get into the United
States.
General Richardson. We are concerned with the--with the
increase ----
Mr. Waltz. I mean, this is for the American people to
understand. We have a public notice.
General Richardson. Yes. Of their cooperation and
activities with China, Russia, and Iran.
Mr. Waltz. Can you comment on the level of cooperation?
I mean, the Maduro regime is sponsoring and facilitating
these activities, right.
General Richardson. Yes, they are sponsoring activities and
allowing visits to occur and the cooperation that they do with
these countries and it ----
Mr. Waltz. So let the record show the Maduro regime where
we have now--are easing sanctions--this administration is
easing sanctions under the Barbados agreement, is facilitating
assassins to come into the United States to assassinate senior
American officials.
General Richardson, also changing topics to the narcotics
that are flowing into this country. JIATF-South currently
employs a special--a ship special mission, which is essentially
a refueling resupply ship to allow our partners to extend their
range. We have one which is, I think, incredibly valuable.
But, Ms. Zimmerman, I'm surprised that we've received a
report back from the Pentagon that adding another ship so that
we can interdict on the Pacific and the Caribbean the Pentagon
is basically saying there's a low return on investment there.
Can you explain to the mothers and fathers in Florida, the
families that are being devastated by the flow of fentanyl and
other drugs into this country, why one resupply ship, not for
the U.S. Navy but to help our partners extend their range and
interdict these drugs, is not a good investment of their
dollars?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressman, I'd like to take that back and
get you a more detailed answer.
Mr. Waltz. You don't have an--I mean, you have a report
saying that it wasn't a good investment.
Ms. Zimmerman. We do. I understand that we're working to
make the best use of our resources. But I'd like to get you a
more specific answer.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. I'll look for that for the record and
I do find it disturbing you don't have that--you don't have
that information given your portfolio.
Can we just talk a bit more about Haiti? U.S. citizens are
trapped in Haiti. We have a member of Congress leading a group
down to rescue U.S. citizens from orphanages.
We've had multiple members of Congress rescuing U.S.
citizens that were trapped in the West Bank and elsewhere in
Israel, that were trapped and are still trapped in Afghanistan.
We have a breakdown here between the State Department and
DOD in terms of having assets and resources available to go get
Americans. I mean, it's just a basic function, and at this
point--I was informed last night that the State Department
revoked the clearance for these individuals to land in the
Dominican Republic.
So can you--can you just talk to me more broadly about
our--not a noncombatant evacuation operations (NEO) for just
the embassy--the embassy personnel will get taken care of. I'm
worried about Americans that are trapped in this deteriorating
situation.
General Richardson, Ms. Zimmerman, can you just talk about
what we have positioned? Because we have a mass--not only to
get Americans but is Guantanamo ready to take on what could be
a mass refugee flow onto Florida shores?
General Richardson. So we have plans ready, Congressman, in
terms of a noncombatant evacuation--a NEO plan, also a mass
migration plan that we would establish on Gitmo.
Mr. Waltz. What about for U.S. citizens?
General Richardson. And if we get a request from the State
Department in order to do that we have a plan to do that.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you. I'll take that up with State.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Vhair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Carbajal.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
and thank you to all the witnesses for being here today.
The political crisis in Haiti, Venezuela, and other
countries in the Western Hemisphere have put the United States
in a difficult situation at the border.
I'm eager to hear your plans to overcome some of these
challenges as well as plans to influence and sustain advantages
with China and Russia to gain a foothold in our backyard.
General Richardson. Thank you, Congressman. And so
certainly the funding that I received last year to increase my
security cooperation initiatives was hugely helpful and the
funding that we would receive this year as soon as the defense
bills are approved will be extremely important to continue that
effort.
But I would say 15 to 20 years of getting less than 50
percent of the requirement for security cooperation for
SOUTHCOM and the investment that that brings that--it can't be
made up in just one or two years.
So the sustained funding and the predictable funding is
very, very important and so--but it's not just the security
cooperation. It's the exercises. It's our ability of the
process with foreign military sales, excess defense articles.
As our nations are dealing with very old equipment,
outdated ground-based radar systems so they can see threats and
things like that, we have got to continue to work hard and the
Secretary of Defense has led a program to speed that up with
the foreign military sales and things like that to deliver
capability much, much quicker, and I appreciate the
interagency's work on that.
And then the work we have done with the whole of government
and the interagency to bring together all those instruments of
national power that I talked about in my opening statement not
just on the military side of the house--it's working together--
the diplomats, the information environment, the military, and
the economics.
Because we are doing a lot of things. We have just got to
integrate and synchronize a little bit better from Team USA in
support of Team Democracy.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, General.
General Richardson, as the ranking member of the Coast
Guard and Maritime Transportation Subcommittee I am focused on
JIATF-South, the detection and monitoring operations in your
AOR.
What support do you need to accomplish your objectives for
better drug interdiction?
General Richardson. So the work that JIATF-South has done
with the interagency we have just a huge synergy with JIATF-
South and the law enforcement community and the interagency and
so to continue to build that, and every year our partner
nations' abilities to utilize that detection and monitoring
both our law enforcement but partner nations too because we
want that in terms of them being able to increase the
interdictions as a result of that information.
And that continues to go up every year. It's 76 percent by
our partner nations, and so we see that they're very effective.
The ship special mission was brought up before that. A second
ship special mission(SSM) would be hugely helpful and would
definitely raise the bar for JIATF-South and the ability to
work with partner nations.
And so the funding and the resourcing that's provided for
JIATF-South and that ability for them to only continuous enable
those interdictions and disruptions is very helpful.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Guillot, congratulations on your new command. As
China continues its goal to project power outside of its
borders what new developments have resulted from China's risky
and aggressive intercepts of U.S. aircraft operating
internationally that concern in regard to your primary mission
to defend the homeland?
General Guillot. Congressman, fortunately we haven't seen
Chinese aircraft operate near our defense, excuse me, air
defense identification zones yet but I think that's coming as
early as this year.
That shows an overall concern I have about the growing
capability of China not only with the aircraft as you just
mentioned but also with ships and even submarines being able to
range further from China and closer to our shores.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
General Richardson, with the 25 seconds I have left,
hundreds of thousands of Venezuelan migrants have made their
way north due to years-long economic and humanitarian crisis.
Can you speak about how Southern Command is collaborating
with the State Department to alleviate this crisis?
General Richardson. So the work that we do very strong
relationship with Department of State with all the ambassadors
in the region, and then the work that we have done to work with
our partners ----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Gaetz.
Mr. Gaetz. So what's the difference between Haiti and a
failed state?
It's telling, right. We can't really identify them because
the gangs are in charge, the government has been thrown out,
and as a Florida man I'm deeply concerned about this wave of
people that we're about to have--that we are having coming from
Haiti and it will accelerate because I've gone to Opa-locka and
I've spent time with the folks that are engaged in Operation
Vigilant Century and they say the number-one push factor that
drives these Haitians into Broward County, Palm Beach County,
where they don't disperse throughout the country--they stay in
southeast Florida--that that driving factor is the
deterioration of conditions in Haiti.
So what are we doing to prepare for that wave and to ensure
that these people are not paroled into the United States as the
administration has done with people on the southern border but
instead are repatriated back at the dock at Port-au-Prince?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressman, we're doing a number of things
to ensure that we're keeping track of the situation and we're
prepared.
At the moment we have not yet seen large numbers, what we
would characterize as a maritime mass migration. But we are
alert to that ----
Mr. Gaetz. You anticipate a mass migration, though?
Ms. Zimmerman. We are alert to that possibility. I think
you're right that the driving conditions in Haiti could very
well press more people.
So we've recently approved some additional assistance that
we can provide to the Coast Guard. I think that that has now
fully been approved. We'll be providing notifications if we
haven't already to provide additional shipboard assistance ----
Mr. Gaetz. So okay. Let me stop you there because I've
talked to the Coast Guard and what they say would really
support them would be more naval vessels, would be DOD support,
and because I think you correctly said that there is an
anticipated mass migration here there are specific legal
authorities that we can access that I would implore you to
access.
Specifically, George W. Bush signed Executive Order 13276
and in that executive order there is the ability for any
president to designate an anticipated mass migration and then
get gray hull naval vessels into the Straits of Florida to
deter that migration and then to repatriate those people before
they get to Florida.
So, General Richardson, is it your best military advice
based on what we just heard from Ms. Zimmerman that we activate
the authorities, anticipating a mass migration?
General Richardson. So I think that we need to be postured
appropriately for that, exactly what you're talking about, and
I have put in a request for increased capability to do exactly
that and we are ready if a mass migration--if we need to deal
with a mass migration.
We did a full walkthrough of our contingency plan on Gitmo
last summer with all of the interagency and all of my
components.
Mr. Gaetz. When I talk to the Coast Guard folks they seem
to say that we don't have to go drop these folks off at Gitmo
where they become a burden on the U.S. taxpayer.
We can interdict at sea and then repatriate directly at
Port-au-Prince. When you say you're preparing for that does
that specifically mean DOD assets?
General Richardson. So for what happens on a daily basis
that the Coast Guard is doing and the repatriation under
Homeland Security authorities back to Cap-Haitien happens on a
daily basis.
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah. No, I got that. But when I go down to Opa-
locka and get eyeball to eyeball with these folks they say,
congressman, we really could use the DOD assistance. Not more
money for the Coast Guard, not more meetings, conference calls
and committees, but gray hull vessels in the Straits of Florida
doing the interdictions, doing the repatriations.
So when you say you're anticipating I think Ms. Zimmerman
laid it out correctly. So given the fact that an anticipated
maritime mass migration is specifically contemplated pursuant
to 46 United States Code (USC) 70051 can I leave this
discussion believing that it will be your best military advice
to the administration to utilize DOD assets for this purpose,
General Richardson?
General Richardson. If I'm requested to do that I will
definitely do that and ----
Mr. Gaetz. No, I want you to make the request, not be
requested. That's what I'm trying to ascertain.
General Richardson. Okay. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Gaetz. Yes, you will make that request for DOD assets
for the Straits of Florida?
General Richardson. So I will talk with District 7 and our
Coast Guard on the Atlantic side--Atlantic area and see if they
need additional DOD gray hulls. They have not requested that
specifically from SOUTHCOM and so but if there's a need for
that I would absolutely request it.
Mr. Gaetz. Thank you for that because I really think
getting ahead of this will ensure that the humanitarian
conditions will be far better, that we could perhaps deter some
of this because, I mean, it's tragic conditions.
When you talk to these folks and they say that these
Haitians are pouring gasoline on little babies and doing
everything they can to deter interdictions it sharpens the
minds of my fellow Floridians to want to make sure you guys are
doing everything possible and I greatly appreciate the exchange
today.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes gentleman from Connecticut, Mr.
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, and thank you to
all the witnesses for your testimony today.
General Guillot, again, it was a pleasure to meet you, and
congratulations again on your new assignment. In your testimony
you spoke about--you spoke about the ability to detect,
classify, and track potential threats to the homeland from the
sea floor to space and the cyber domain is a critical need for
U.S. NORTHCOM and NORAD, and that investments in capabilities
such as the Integrated Undersea Surveillance System--the IUSS--
will significantly enhance domain awareness to limit
competitors' ability to approach North America undetected.
Can you speak a little more? Again, I know in your written
testimony you mentioned the fact that now Russia is about to
deploy another Severodvinsk, which, again, would be on the West
Coast.
They already--2014 they deployed their first Severodvinsk
which, again, has been, you know, a real challenge for anti-
submarine warfare and our allies working together to, you know,
keep an eye on that and the IUSS is, again, another capability.
Again, could you talk again about--you know, the homeland
is facing something that we really haven't seen since the Cold
War in terms of the undersea and would appreciate your
thoughts.
General Guillot. Congressman, you're exactly right. The
ability to detect with undersea sensors is more important today
than ever before because of the advances in the Severodvinsk
(Sev), as you mentioned, now a threat to both coasts and the
quiet nature with which those submarines can operate mean that
they could very easily get much closer to the U.S. and then
deploy their large arsenal of cruise missiles to a point where
if that were allowed to happen the first detection we would
likely get would be--could be the explosions of the cruise
missiles.
So keeping our undersea advantage is imperative and I think
the first step in that is to increase our undersea sensor
capability to allow us to detect these threats further away
from the U.S. shores than we can today.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you.
And as we've discussed, I mean, the present situation at
least on the Atlantic is a team sport with our allies in the
air, on the surface, and under the surface in terms of trying
to track that threat.
I remember, Admiral Roughead, who was the former Chief of
Naval Operations (CNO), one time saying that the best anti-
submarine warfare is another submarine.
I mean, that obviously also has to be kind of viewed as a
priority if, again, we're going to have an effective system of
defense. Is that correct?
General Guillot. Sir, it is absolutely correct, and we get
great partnership, especially in the Atlantic. We have one
Atlantic technique--tactic, technique and procedure where
NORTHCOM, European Command (EUCOM), and Southern Command with
General Richardson all share information and we don't use the
strict line that you see on the Unified Command Plan (UCP) map
as a way to limit our capability.
We allow forces to flow freely across all those lines
wherever it makes sense for that other--you know, for the
overall situation even if it goes between combatant commands to
ensure that we can detect and then once we get those undersea
submarines track and follow them to ensure that they don't
become a threat to the United States.
Mr. Courtney. And with the Severodvinsk now on the West
Coast, again, that's just another mission that, again, we don't
quite have the same team lineup in that part of the world. So
it's--if anything it's more demand to the Navy.
General Guillot. Yes, Congressman, you're right, and the
fact that the Pacific is so much larger and, you know, we're
now facing two threats there with the Russian-specific threat
and then also the Chinese makes the Pacific threat a particular
concern of mine and NORTHCOM's.
Mr. Courtney. Well, thank you. Again, your timing in terms
of this discussion is very apt since we got a budget yesterday
which talks about cutting a Virginia-class submarine from the
Navy shipbuilding plan and, obviously, you know, not just in
NORTHCOM but and, frankly, every command that's going to just,
again, make a high demand platform even more stressed.
So, you know, this is going to be very helpful for us as we
move towards markup later this session.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Before I recognize Mr. Bacon I want to announce we're going
to be going up to the classified portion of this hearing in
about 15 minutes.
Mr. Bacon, you're recognized.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome all three of
you here. Thank you.
And I've enjoyed working with General Richardson in recent
years so I appreciate seeing you, and General Guillot and I are
fellow commanders of the Fighting 55th Wing, the largest wing
in Air Combat Command, third largest in the Air Force I think
for two decades, the most busy ops tempo that the Air Force
had. So congrats on your new position.
My first question is for General Guillot. How does
hypersonic weapons affect your warning times? Because I think
it's important for the Americans to hear with China having
nuclear-armed hypersonics, Russians building them, what does it
do for our warning times?
General Guillot. Thank you, Congressman. Good to see you
and thanks for recognizing the Fighting 55th's contributions
worldwide.
Hypersonics are probably the most destabilizing weapon that
we face now and one of the prime reasons is what you mentioned,
the shortened detection time and the fact that they don't
follow a traditional ballistic track means they're very
unpredictable and the area of uncertainty is huge based on
their speed and their maneuverability.
That's what makes them such a challenge to not only detect
but to track and eventually defeat.
Mr. Bacon. Is it fair to say we have about a 15-minute
warning time? I don't know if--I'm just trying to give our
citizens a sense how this changes.
Intercontinental ballistic missiles gave us about a 35-
minute warning time and I'm just trying to--how much is this
warning time reduced?
General Guillot. Yes, Congressman. There are cases where it
would be about half and--but I would add to that, though, is
the unpredictable nature of their maneuvering. Even with a ICBM
if it was 30 minutes very quickly we could figure out just
about where exactly that's going into a, you know, very small
circle of error probability.
However, with the hypersonic not only is it faster, giving
us less time to detect, it can fly lower which gives our
sensors problems, and then that maneuverability means it--you
know, a typical threat warning could be something as vague as
western United States as opposed to a particular city.
Mr. Bacon. Mr. Chairman, this is why I think it's so
important that we address this with Strategic Command
(STRATCOM) and the Pentagon and just our national command
authorities.
I don't think we're positioned right with our nuclear
command survivability and ensuring that we always have a
survivable element not at a base.
I think we're making ourselves vulnerable and some of the
things they're trying to push our DOD--I know this is not
NORTHCOM's purview but I think we as in this--in the HASC here
working with senior military leaders we have to come up with a
plan that ensures we always have a survivable command element--
that we can't be caught flat footed, because I worry about the
current--our current posture, and I think it leaves us
vulnerable.
And I want the Russians and Chinese to know no matter what
they do we can always respond. So I appreciate your aspect of
this is very important to this discussion so thank you.
General Richardson, I was talking to the previous
ambassador from Jamaica and he was telling me that the
Jamaicans would like to have our Coast Guard assigned there and
they would help with facilities, and that's in the perfect
position for interdicting drugs coming out of Venezuela and
Colombia.
Can you comment on that at all or have you heard any of
this dialogue?
General Richardson. I have not heard that dialogue. But we
work--we have a very good close working relationship with
Jamaica and the chief of defense there who is a Coast Guard
officer.
Mr. Bacon. I'm hearing--this is indirect, not direct from
him but via the ambassador--that this is an opportunity from
the Jamaicans' perspective that they'd like to work with us and
that that location is--would be important, you know, for the
drug routes coming out of Colombia and Venezuela.
So I hope you take a look at it. I would be grateful for
that.
I'll go back to General Guillot. How's our surveillance
radars? Do they need investment, like, current?
General Guillot. Congressman, they do. We do have some
programs in place, most notably the over-the-horizon radar
system.
That would give us capability against cruise missiles,
traditional air tracks as well as the hypersonics that you and
I just discussed. Keeping that program on track is the number-
one priority from NORTHCOM because of that great capability
that it would bring.
Mr. Bacon. How would you prioritize the anti-ballistic
missile (ABM) elements that we have in Alaska? Do they need
upgrading as well?
General Guillot. Yes. All of the systems that we have that
allow--give us the domain awareness that we need are the top
priorities of mine.
There would be one of these over-the-horizon systems there.
The LRDR--the long-range discriminating radar--is key for us to
defeat missiles from North Korea.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you very much. I appreciate all three of
you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Nevada, Mr. Horsford.
Mr. Horsford. Thank you, Chairman Rogers, and to the
ranking member for holding this important hearing.
General Richardson, it is good to see you again. Last year
I was in Trinidad and Tobago attending the CARICOM heads of
government conference. During that trip and in meetings
afterward I've had several conversations with regional partners
discussing how the United States and the Caribbean must work
together to address challenges in the region.
Today's resignation of Prime Minister Henry of Haiti as a
result of increased gang violence really further highlights the
fact that regional security, economic growth, and addressing
the climate crisis as well as energy resiliency are all
imperative to the success of the region.
So, General, how do you believe that the United States
would work with Caribbean nations to address these shared
issues and to create long-lasting partnerships in order to show
an alternative to China's influence in the region?
General Richardson. Yeah. So the--thank you, Congressman--
and the work that we do with the Caribbean is extremely
important because of, obviously, how close the Caribbean is to
our homeland and so the security cooperation, the exercises,
the regional conference that I do to bring leaders together,
but not just talk about things--actually have deliverables on
getting after those challenges that we identified during the
conferences is what we have really put emphasis on and so with
cyber, with critical infrastructure, and the activities that we
do in the exercise program.
Mr. Horsford. Well, I'm glad to see that the department is
taking these challenges seriously. I look forward to continuing
to work with the department and this committee to address the
threats facing our national security and the immediate risk
that faces us with the situation in Haiti.
Assistant Secretary Zimmerman, I agree with you that the
challenge of natural and manmade hazards do not wait for us to
resolve other ongoing national security crises. We must act
now.
How has the Department of Defense taken into account
climate resiliency in its everyday decision making process?
Ms. Zimmerman. Congressman, thank you so much.
Climate resilience has become an important part of how we
do business, not just in terms of looking directly at climate
change as an issue but really in terms of how we integrate
across the range of activities that the department does in
order to ensure that we have the operational advantage wherever
we need it.
So an example would be in the Pacific the Ronald Reagan
Missile Defense Test Range sits on a site that I think is only
six feet above sea level, and with the challenge of sea level
rise we have to make sure that we're taking the steps to
enforce that infrastructure so that we can continue to do what
we need to do from a security perspective.
Likewise, I think another example I would give would be in
the Arctic where climate change happening at a rate of three
times that that we see in certain other places has opened up
new approaches and has made it really an arena for strategic
competition.
So we see the militarization of the Arctic by Russia, China
considering itself as a near Arctic nation, and that creates a
lot of dilemmas that I think we have to ensure that we're on
top of.
And then the last I will say is that when we see extreme
weather here in the homeland that is something that we need to
respond to in support of our civil authorities when they ask
for it and when we can do so without affecting readiness.
But that increasing challenge, the number of incidents that
we are now responding to, I think also creates the possibility
that we'll be stretched more thinly.
Mr. Horsford. I would add, obviously, the Western
Hemisphere the devastating storms, droughts, and flooding which
have inflamed conflicts and contributed to instability and mass
migration.
So how can the department then, Assistant Secretary
Zimmerman, better partner with these vulnerable countries so
that existing risks are not exacerbated by these extreme
weather events?
Ms. Zimmerman. One of the ways that we're looking to do
that is through our security cooperation efforts. So we have
recently initiated a program called Defense Operational
Resilience International Cooperation (DORIC) which works with
partners right now in the Western Hemisphere in Africa to try
to gear some of our--we have, I think, $10 million this year
and we'll be renewing that--which works with our partners to
build partner capacity in areas that affect climate change or
affected by climate change.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We could put the entire U.S. fleet and the entire assets of
the Coast Guard in the Florida Straits and it wouldn't matter
if we had the wrong policy.
So, Ms. Zimmerman, do you know what the Biden
administration policy is towards if we faced a mass migration
from Haiti? What is the Biden administration policy?
Ms. Zimmerman. I think our policy remains as it has been,
that we will endeavor to conduct repatriation as soon as
practicable, as General Richardson outlined.
If the President does declare Caribbean mass migration we
have additional tools that the department will be able to
leverage in terms of directly responding ourselves.
Mr. Gimenez. So you expect that anybody interdicted on the
way to the United States will be returned back to Haiti--to
their country of origin?
Ms. Zimmerman. That is pursuant to laws and policy.
Mr. Gimenez. Okay. And you haven't heard otherwise from the
Biden administration?
Ms. Zimmerman. I have not.
Mr. Gimenez. Okay. Switching gears here, General
Richardson, good to see you. I've been down to South America
and I can say that everybody really, really appreciates you
down in South America.
And fentanyl--who's producing it? Who is transporting the
fentanyl into the United States?
General Richardson. And so what we see in in the SOUTHCOM
AOR in terms of fentanyl is more of the medical fentanyl that's
being stolen out of the hospitals and things like that.
In terms of the precursor chemicals that are coming in
we're starting to see a little bit of that. I think that that
is just the beginning, possibly, in this region and so,
obviously, working with our partners as they're discovering
this and those sorts of things of where these precursor
chemicals are coming and then putting together by the cartels
and then funneled into Mexico or put together in Mexico and --
--
Mr. Gimenez. All right. I only got five minutes so I have
to go. Senator--I'm sorry, General Guillot--that's your name?
General Guillot. Yeah. General Guillot.
Mr. Gimenez. Okay. So Mexico--the fentanyl flown in from
Mexico who's manufacturing it? Who's transporting it?
General Guillot. Congressman, as General Richardson said,
we see the precursor elements being brought in from abroad,
many or much from China and then assembled there under the
cartels and then distributed from there.
Mr. Gimenez. So if I were to tell you that fentanyl has
killed more Americans by far than all the Americans we lost in
Vietnam and Afghanistan and Iraq would that surprise you?
General Guillot. Unfortunately, Congressman, it would not.
I'm aware of that.
Mr. Gimenez. So the Chinese are shipping the precursor
chemicals to their allies, the multinational criminal
organizations based out of Mexico and other places. They then
manufacture it, then send it to United States and kills
Americans. Is that fair to say?
General Guillot. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Gimenez. And since back in 2001 a group of 19
terrorists came and killed 3,000 Americans and then we waged
war, like, 7,000 miles away for 20 years. What do you think our
response should be to some organizations that are killing tens
of thousands of Americans every single year?
General Guillot. Sir, I think NORTHCOM is ready to support
within the policy and as directed. At this point to address the
threat we're providing intelligence support to the lead federal
agencies that are addressing that and working with the Mexican
agencies, and our contribution to that is intelligence support.
Mr. Gimenez. I think this government is failing the
American people in a very big way, failing to protect our
children. It's the largest cause of death of men and women from
18 I think to, like, 49 in the United States.
And our duty--our collective duty is to protect the
citizens of the United States. That's the number-one duty that
we have and we're failing miserably at it. Not you because you
only follow orders, but this administration is failing
miserably at protecting the United States.
My time is just about up so thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlemen.
We will now adjourn this open session and reconvene in the
classified session in Room 2212 in about five minutes.
[Whereupon, at 12:31 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

March 12, 2024

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

March 12, 2024

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

March 12, 2024

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LAMBORN

Mr. Lamborn. Right now we rely mostly on our nuclear
arsenal to deter limited missile attacks from China or Russia.
Should the U.S. consider changing its missile defense policy to
also defend against the Russian and Chinese threat?
Ms. Zimmerman. We do not see the need to revise our missile
defense policy. In the 2022 Missile Defense Review, the
Department conducted an extensive review of the air and missile
threat environment, including both the People's Republic of
China (PRC) and Russian missile threats and the Department's
missile defense strategy and policy framework. We continue to
monitor PRC and Russian capability developments and intentions
closely. At this time, as the 2022 Missile Defense Review
asserts, the United States will continue to rely on strategic
deterrence, underwritten by safe, secure, and effective nuclear
forces, to address intercontinental-range nuclear missile
threats from the PRC and Russia.
Mr. Lamborn. Recent reporting indicates Russia is
proliferating advanced missile technology to North Korea. Do
you believe we should continue acquiring defensive systems,
such as the Ground Based interceptor, in sufficient quantities
to keep pace with this threat?
General Guillot. I believe the Department of Defense should
continue to implement a comprehensive, layered approach to
defeating missile threats, which certainly includes advancing
North Korean ballistic missile threats. As part of that effort,
I also support DoD's efforts to research, test, and develop
missile defeat capabilities, which could include kinetic and
non-kinetic ``left-of-launch'' efforts in addition to
destroying a missile after launch. The Ground-Based Midcourse
Defense (GMD) system, which currently employs Ground-Based
Interceptors and is scheduled to incorporate the Next
Generation Interceptor by 2028, is a critical component of
homeland missile defense.
Mr. Lamborn. Your testimony mentioned both the Chinese and
the Russian hypersonic missile threat. Do you believe our
nuclear deterrent is enough to dissuade our adversaries from
using these weapons against the United States? Would you then
say it is an imperative for the U.S. to field defensive
hypersonic capability?
General Guillot. The hypersonic threat from China and
Russia is illustrative of the complex evolving threats
challenging traditional notions of homeland defense. I believe
investing in defensive/offensive hypersonic capabilities would
only enhance our strategic deterrent while also providing
critical decision space for our national leadership.
Mr. Lamborn. Recently Congress required the Department to
field a Hypersonic Missile Defense System by the end of 2029
(It appears the Department is not budgeting to meet this
timeline). Given your assessment of the threat is that soon
enough?
General Guillot. While the Department of Defense's
strategic offensive forces remain a strong deterrent against
hypersonic attacks, NORAD and NORTHCOM would welcome earlier
fielding of hypersonic defenses; doing so would help to expand
the options and decision space available to national leaders in
the event of a crisis or conflict.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. NORCROSS

Mr. Norcross. General Guillot, given NORTHCOM's Arctic
areas of responsibility and interest, who in the Department of
Defense has specific responsibility and authority for the
determination of requirements and therefore the responsibility
and authority for budgeting for Arctic and extreme cold weather
environments technology research, development, and acquisition?
I am specifically interested in requirements and budgeting
related to advanced technologies for military infrastructure
like roads, buildings, utilities, and so on in extreme cold
weather areas.
General Guillot. NORTHCOM, EUCOM and INDOPACOM all have
operational requirements within the Arctic geographical area,
as assigned in the Unified Campaign Plan (UCP). Combatant
commanders can influence requirements and resources through
advocacy, while requirements validation and budget authority
are aligned under the Services' responsibility to organize,
train, and equip their forces. Each of the Services and the
Joint Staff have processes in place to validate infrastructure
requirements across the Services and joint mission sets, to
include in the Arctic and extreme cold-weather environments.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT

Mr. Scott. How can non-federal entities better support you
to achieve the national security goals related to countering
the PRC and Russia in your area of responsibility?
General Richardson. During my time in command at SOUTHCOM,
I have become convinced that Economic Security is National
Security, and our efforts by both our federal and Non-Federal
Entities (NFEs) are imperative to providing and supporting
economic investment and opportunity in the region. SOUTHCOM
coordinates with interagency partners and the Public/Private
Sector to identify opportunities for U.S. economic development
and investment in the region--development and investment that
adheres to international labor standards, has strong anti-
corruption measures, invests in local communities, ensures the
safety of locally hired workers, and adheres to the principles
of transparency. U.S. investment in the Western Hemisphere is
significant; U.S. direct foreign investment in the hemisphere
was $1.5 trillion in 2022, and U.S. goods and services trade in
the hemisphere totaled an estimated $2.4 billion in the same
year. Non-federal U.S. companies are a key part of Team USA
that should be proud to advertise the benefits that quality
U.S. investment bring to the region.
Our NFE partners are key in enhancing SOUTHCOM's
engagements to include those focused on countering China. In
particular, private sector investment in areas such as 5G and
cybersecurity are hugely important to providing Partner Nations
an alternative to solutions offered by PRC and Russia. Our
efforts in Costa Rica reflect the potential of such
partnerships between federal and non-federal entities and the
success we can achieve in outcompeting our adversaries.
Additionally, our NFE partners are involved with SOUTHCOM
exercises that focus on key issues such as cybersecurity,
countering IUUF, and maritime threats. For example, for the
upcoming international exercise Tradewinds 2024, we are
partnering with NGOs, Academia, and businesses to bring in
their expertise and resources to train the Caribbean Partner
Nations to counter those threats. We are also looking to expand
our partnerships with NFEs that have a focus on environmental
protection and disinformation in our AOR.
Mr. Scott. How can WHINSEC's mission be expanded to build
long-term, enduring partnerships in your area of
responsibility?
General Richardson. Since January 17th 2001, WHINSEC
fosters mutual knowledge, transparency, confidence, and
cooperation among its faculty and students through the
promotion of democratic values, the respect for human rights,
and increasing knowledge and understanding of United States
customs and traditions. All of WHINSEC's 13 courses include at
least 8 hours of dedicated curriculum focusing on human rights,
the rule of law, due process, civilian control of the military,
and the role of the military in a democratic society.
There are always opportunities to greater support the NDS
though additional curriculum in areas such as the space and
cyberspace domains as well as impacts of climate change which
are currently not offered due to a lack of assigned military or
civilian personnel who are specialized in these fields.
Long-term and enduring partnerships can best be achieved
through the increased participation of students attending
WHINSEC courses at Fort Moore, GA. In particular, the increase
in the number of cadets and junior NCOs who participate in
these courses where they become familiar with the U.S. customs
and traditions at the very start of their military careers
would establish a professional military education path where
students return to take multiple WHINSEC courses over their
careers. One limitation often encountered is the amount of IMET
and FMF available for countries which can be used to fund
increased student enrollment at WHINSEC.
WHINSEC alumni remain one of our best advocates and
recruiters for future students who collaborate in operations in
the SOUTHCOM area of responsibility. Another opportunity would
be center on increased sustainment of this critical alumni
network for both officers and NCOs.
Mr. Scott. How is SOUTHCOM experimenting with artificial
intelligence-enabled technologies, such as autonomous systems?
General Richardson. The SOUTHCOM Area of Responsibility
(AOR) allows DoD and industry to buy down risk associated with
experimentation. This region has a high tolerance for
technology experimentation and willing partners with diverse
climates and geography; accordingly, the permissive environment
helps to refine solutions and training, techniques, and
procedures for the larger DoD enterprise. As a test bed for
emerging technologies, SOUTHCOM is currently employing and
maturing an AI-enabled cyber defense focused predictive data
analytics capability, informed by cyber threat intelligence,
integrated across the command's relevant cyber terrain that
focuses on processing and exploiting historical and real time
collected sensing data. This capability would enhance
situational awareness of adversary activity within SOUTHCOM
cyberspace to drive operational decision-making in order to
secure and defend key and mission relevant cyber terrain and
support the execution of defensive cyber operations. Currently
SOUTHCOM is pursuing advancements in:

LOperationalizing autonomous systems with the
hybrid fleet in the Windward Passage and with UAS operations
aboard the Ship Special Mission (SSM).

LLong-duration UAS and sensors aboard unmanned
solar-powered aircraft with a 300-pound payload and projected
multi-day endurance.

LRenewable energy and contested logistics
migration by creating autonomous low-profile vessels and
deploying wind and solar-powered Sail drones to support
maritime situational awareness.

LSecure high-speed communications and cyber
protected Information Networks by developing laser
communications systems with a low probability of detection and
faster speeds than conventional solutions on the market.

LArtificial Learning and Machine Learning (AL/ML)
for improved data management, analytics, and dissemination.
JIATF-South is currently operating an AI Battle Lab that
leverages prototype technologies from the Office of Naval
Research, helps process data sourced from wide area maritime
patrols and open-source information.
Mr. Scott. Transnational criminal organizations are using
autonomous vehicles like quadcopter-style and fixed-wing drones
(also known as narcodrones) to transport illicit drugs like
cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine across the southern
border. How is SOUTHCOM utilizing its own authorities and
working with the Coast Guard to leverage autonomous technology
to counter these emerging threats?
General Richardson. SOUTHCOM's unique low-threat
environment is ideal for field testing of next-generation
technology to provide increased situational awareness and
maximize the impact of SOUTHCOM's detection and monitoring
authorities, which provide targets for available Coast Guard
and/or Partner Nation assets to interdict. We have autonomous
systems aboard the Ship Special Mission (SSM) and USCG National
Security Cutters. UAVs enable larger search areas and faster
target assessments than our ships could accomplish without
these technologies. We are also working with the Navy to
incorporate their ``hybrid fleet'' capabilities into our
detection and monitoring efforts. Whenever we identify drug
trafficking and support interdiction by our Partner Nations
within ranges that our Partner Nations can operate, we preclude
transnational criminal organizations from sending drugs over
our borders via ``narcodrones'' or by any other means. The
operational uses of these technologies are providing insight on
the development and anticipated deployment of new capabilities
to expand and increase effectiveness throughout the counter-TCO
enterprise. We would defer to DHS and NORTHCOM on the specific
use of these and other technologies by TCOs on the Southern
Border.
Mr. Scott. How many countries in your AOR have Soviet/
Russian equipment? What can the United States do to work with
them on replacing their inventory of Soviet/Russian stocks with
American equipment?
This advances two foreign policy objectives simultaneously.
It breaks their dependence on Russia and gets equipment to
Ukraine.
General Richardson. There are nine countries within the
SOUTHCOM AOR that have Russian equipment in their military
arsenals: Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Cuba, Ecuador,
Nicaragua, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. SOUTHCOM is closely
aligned with the Department of State and our U.S. Embassy
country teams in advocating for our partners to modernize their
forces with equipment from the U.S. or other Allies and
partners. We are continuously evaluating security assistance
investments to replace Russian equipment when appropriate.
Mr. Scott. What is the role of SOF in USSOUTHCOM?
General Richardson. Our Special Operations Forces are among
the most qualified, culturally sensitive, and linguistically
capable trainers in the U.S. military. Above all, they excel at
building trust and forging personal relationships that are
essential to supporting our national interests and maintaining
both our strategic partnership and our access in the region.
Rotations of small SOF teams provide a light footprint, but
also a persistent presence, which not only builds trust and
interoperability with our partners, but it also provides us
with a better understanding of regional dynamics and the
convergence of various threats. SOF are uniquely equipped to
shape the environment in crisis and conflict and maintain
steady-state operations, while also possessing unique expertise
that supports our partners in countering emergent threats that
threaten regional stability, such as TCOs. The unique
capabilities that SOF provide in the AOR have directly
contributed to our ability to counter strategic competitors and
malign activities, improved regional stability in the AOR, and
supported global contingency planning and integrated
deterrence.
Mr. Scott. Are you seeing a need to increase our
partnership with allies and friendly nations in the area of
space domain awareness and space operations?
General Richardson. Yes. Given the PRC's rapid expansion
into this domain and the potential dual use of PRC
infrastructure in the region for telemetry, tracking, control,
and domain awareness, it is critical that we remain
competitive. There are at least 10 PRC-linked space facilities
across five countries in the region, which is the most PRC
space-enabling infrastructure outside mainland China.
Thankfully, many of our key strategic partners are eager to
collaborate with the United States in the space domain. Nations
such as Chile, Brazil, and Argentina possess unique access to
facilitate international space operations. In addition to
working with key partners to build space domain awareness and
identify opportunities for future space operations, we continue
to illuminate and expose the malign intent and dual-use nature
of PRC infrastructure and space sites, so that partners can
make informed decisions regarding continued and future space
engagement with--and investments from--the PRC. As our partners
continue to seek military space support, we gain lasting
relations with partners whose space programs operate in
alignment with norms of responsible behavior in space.
Mr. Scott. The Department of Homeland Security's Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD) and Science and
Technology Directorate (S&T) are developing the Matrix Assisted
Laser Desorption and Ionization--Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF)
sensor technology to conduct rapid agnostic biodetection in
critical facilities and screening of individuals. Moreover, DHS
CWMD, has already conducted operational testing and this system
is now commercially available. Does USNORTHCOM have any plans
to partner with Department of Homeland Security's Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD) and Science and
Technology Directorate (S&T) to develop this potential solution
to defend the Nation?
General Guillot. Although there are no specific operational
requirements for NORTHCOM to partner with DHS CWMD or S&T for
this application, DoD has an enduring partnership with DHS and
has liaison officers in place to react to operational
requirements as needed. Additionally, the DOD CBRN Response
Enterprise (CRE) mission, when activated, provides critical
capability in supporting civil authorities while responding to
CBRN incidents, although the CRE provides a supporting role to
Federal, State, Local, Territorial, Tribal (FSLTT) first
responders who have the primary responsibility for initial
biological detection and bio-surveillance. I understand the
development of the MALDI-TOF sensor technology by Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) S&T is being explored by Defense Threat
Reduction Agency (DTRA) for possible future field applications.
As the command responsible for employing CBRN capabilities in
the US, NORTHCOM will continue to actively engage with all DOD
and IA organizations that bring capability and capacity to this
vital mission area.
Mr. Scott. How many explosive ordnance disposal mission
command and operational units should be assigned, allocated, or
under the operational control of the U.S. Army North, the land
component command of USNORTHCOM, for homeland defense and
defense support to civil authorities with the area of
responsibility work-load of 66,000 annual call-outs, including
4,500 call-outs specifically for military munitions; and 80,000
man-hours annually specifically for POTUS protection missions?
General Guillot. U.S. Army North's (ARNORTH) standing
homeland defense mission requires one Army Explosive Ordnance
Disposal (EOD) Group Headquarters (HQ), four Army EOD Battalion
HQs, and 22 Army EOD Companies to execute military ordnance
response missions, improvised explosives response missions, and
the United States Secret Service Very Important Person support
missions. During large-scale events, to include National
Special Security Events (NSSE), additional EOD assets are
sourced as required from across the Joint Force.
Mr. Scott. What authorities, if any, are you lacking to
effectively counter the UAS threat to the homeland?
General Guillot. NORTHCOM's authority to conduct UAS
engagement is currently limited to self-defense situations. The
Secretary of Defense has delegated Sec 130i authorities to
commanders of covered DoD facilities and assets through the
Services. NORAD's role in UAS engagement is also limited; NORAD
could only engage UAS through the Services if necessary for
national defense under certain rules of engagement. I am
concerned by the emerging challenges presented by small UAS in
the homeland. As part of my 90-day assessment, I am reviewing
the Commands' ability to execute assigned tasks and will make
recommendations on where we could and should do more.
Mr. Scott. What are the significant challenges the United
States would face in conducting a large-scale Arctic search and
rescue (SAR) response? How many personnel and dollars would be
needed to mitigate this risk?
General Guillot. The harsh climate, remoteness, and limited
infrastructure of the Arctic region create challenges for all
military operations, in particular Search and Rescue (SAR)
responses. These challenges include exposure and other
environmental hazards for isolated personnel coupled with
extended response and recovery times as compared to SAR
missions conducted in more hospitable and populated regions.
The U.S. Coast Guard is responsible for large-scale SAR
missions in the Arctic, which would require a whole-of-
government response in coordination with the international
civil SAR system. Key partners for those efforts include the
United States Coast Guard and NORTHCOM as federal SAR
coordinators, the State of Alaska as State SAR coordinator, and
could include other willing and capable Arctic nations. The
National SAR Plan and international SAR agreements govern how
the United States will respond to a large-scale SAR mission, to
include operations in the Arctic. The National Search and
Rescue Committee is best-suited to provide specifics on
personnel and funding requirements for Arctic SAR given its
national responsibility for SAR responsibilities and
interagency representation, to include the Departments of
Homeland Security, Defense, State, Commerce, Transportation,
Interior, the Federal Communications Commission, and National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Mr. Scott. What additional resources are needed by the
National Guard so that they can expand their contributions to
critical infrastructure resilience, Arctic domain awareness,
communications, and cyber operations?
General Guillot. The National Guard remains an essential
contributor to all NORAD and NORTHCOM (N&NC) missions, and I do
not distinguish between the active and reserve components when
establishing command requirements. As such, the National Guard
requires the same resources as the other elements of the Joint
Force to fulfill N&NC requirements. These requirements include
improved all-domain awareness and the ability to effectively
operate and communicate in all domains throughout the N&NC area
of operations--to include the Arctic and in cyberspace.
Mr. Scott. What role will autonomous vehicles play to
ensure more robust awareness at our borders to protect our
homeland from intelligence threats?
General Guillot. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
is the federal agency assigned primary responsibility for
counterintelligence activities inside the United States. At
present, neither NORAD or NORTHCOM has plans to employ
autonomous vehicles in this role, nor have we been requested or
tasked to provide them capabilities in our role supporting DHS
on the border.
Mr. Scott. Over half of NORTHCOM's area of responsibility
is in the Arctic where there is increased competition with
Russia and China over critical resources and shipping lanes
lie. Yet too few forces are trained in this arena. How is
NORTHCOM using autonomous vehicles to augment Intelligence,
Surveillance, & Reconnaissance (ISR) and force projection
capabilities in this area?
General Guillot. NORTHCOM is not using autonomous vehicles
to augment Intelligence, Surveillance, & Reconnaissance (ISR)
and force projection capabilities in this area.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. CARBAJAL

Mr. Carbajal. General Richardson, we are all aware of China
and Russia's growing influence in Latin American, especially in
defense cooperation such as arms sales and military training.
What are you doing to expedite defense engagements with our
Latin American partners to deter and defeat these efforts?
General Richardson. The best way to deter and defeat PRC
and Russian efforts in Latin America is to be present with our
partners everyday--and that is exactly what SOUTHCOM does.
Using all security cooperation tools, we work to build partner
capacity and interoperability. However, we do recognize that
U.S. processes can be long and cumbersome, and not always meet
our partners at the speed of need. Therefore, SOUTHCOM is
working closely with the Office of the Secretary of Defense and
our interagency partners to streamline these processes through
senior level working groups that have yielded some
improvements. While we work to make these processes more
responsive, we will not sacrifice the fundamental tenets of
respect for human rights and transparency--one fundamental
reason why the U.S. remains a trusted partner in the
hemisphere.
Mr. Carbajal. General Richardson, Hundreds of thousands of
Venezuelan migrants have made their way north due to years-long
of economic and humanitarian crisis.
Can you speak about how Southern Command is collaborating
with the State Department to alleviate this crisis?
General Richardson. During FY23 and FY24, Venezuelans have
accounted for the largest number of migrants encountered in the
Darien and at the U.S. Southwest Border. SOUTHCOM has been
supporting both our Interagency partners' and our Partner
Nations' efforts to address increased migration through the
Darien by strengthening Counter-TCO activities against threat
networks that exploit human trafficking opportunities, while
also conducting activities to improve citizens' quality of
life.
In 2023, SOUTHCOM began advising and assisting Colombian
and Panamanian forces in their national operations against
criminal groups trafficking humans. SOUTHCOM has also supported
our partners by deploying additional Security Force Advisor
Brigade (SFAB) teams to both nations and providing
institutional level advice including training in operations,
checkpoint operations, biometric data, medical aid, logistics,
and human rights. Additionally, we have embedded an
intelligence analyst with the Embassy Intelligence Fusion
Center at the U.S. Embassy in Colombia to provide Enhanced
Domain Awareness and Intelligence, Surveillance, and
Reconnaissance support. Our Joint Task Force Bravo based in
Soto Cano, Honduras, has transported over 685,000 pounds of
construction material, purchased by the Department of State
(DOS), for use at Panamanian/Colombian binational bases in the
Darien. Finally, we have provided Panama's Ministry of Public
Security with 81 Jeep J8s and $3M in spare parts to assist
their security efforts and address migration through the
Darien.
SOUTHCOM also maintains a relationship with DOS Population,
Refugees, & Migration (PRM) and other lead international
organizations in migration management such as the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) for information-sharing and
expertise exchange related to migration in the region.
Recently, SOUTHCOM's Partner Integration Division coordinated
with PRM and IOM to develop and execute a humane migration
management training for Army South personnel. This training is
consistent with the readiness activities DOD personnel
routinely conduct to ensure they are postured to implement
contingency plans if directed to do so. DOD readiness includes
being prepared to support the Department of Homeland Security-
led mass migration operations when conditions exceed DHS
capacity to conduct operations without the support of other
interagency partners, when DHS requests DOD support, and when a
presidentially declared mass migration tasks DOD to assume the
custody and care of migrants temporarily housed at Naval
Station Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. DOD's role in any U.S. mass
migration response is to support DHS-led mass migration
operations, working closely with other federal agencies,
including the U.S. Department of State.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER

Mr. Gallagher. Your predecessor, General VanHerck,
expressed significant concern regarding the vulnerability of
our defense critical infrastructure in the cyber domain, as
well as critical infrastructure which does not reside on DoD
installations or federal property. What do you believe to be
the most important area for immediate investment and
development in the defense of our critical infrastructure?
General Guillot. The most immediate need for the defense of
critical infrastructure is domain awareness. We must have the
ability to detect, classify, and track potential threats to the
homeland from the seafloor to space and in the cyber domain. We
must also invest in the capability to expedite the processing
and sharing of information gained from our domain awareness.
The most immediate need in the defesne of critical
infratrucutre mission area is increased cyber protection tools
and Cyber Security Service Providers.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BANKS

Mr. Banks. NORTHCOM plays a key role in ensuring the
homeland is safe from Chinese disruption in the event of a
conflict.

LMs. Zimmerman: What is the Department doing to
ensure that our ports, which we rely on to surge forces forward
in the event of a conflict, aren't disrupted by Chinese hacking
operations?
Congress passed my provision in last year's NDAA to
prohibit U.S. ports from using Chinese software and logistics
platforms like [log-ink] LOGINK to counter this threat. The
Department of Transportation is supposed to enforce that ban
later this spring. We've also seen the threat posed by Chinese
cranes at those ports.

LMs. Zimmerman: What is the Department doing to
press the Department of Transportation to implement that ban,
as well as deal with the threat from Chinese port cranes?
Ms. Zimmerman. DoD, through USTRANSCOM, has been heavily
involved in USG Port Security initiatives. DoD leverages
collaboration with the Department of Transportation's Maritime
Administration on the Strategic Seaport Program to ensure
sufficient DoD access to seaports to meet DoD's force
projection requirements.
DoD has been heavily involved in USG Port Security
initiatives and in USG efforts to understand and respond to the
threat posed by Chinese cranes at those ports, and we strongly
support Administration efforts to replace those cranes, which
was announced earlier this year.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. BERGMAN

Mr. Bergman. General Richardson, last year you testified
about the adoption of Huawei's 5G technology and the
counterintelligence threat it creates in your region. Does
Chinese telecommunications equipment remain a threat in the
region and what are you doing to promote the use of trusted
vendors in the region? What are the barriers to adoption of
trusted vendors?
General Richardson. Yes, Chinese telecommunications
equipment remains a threat to informational and operational
security in the region. Chinese telecommunications equipment
supports approximately 70 percent of all telecommunications
networks in the region. This equipment allows Chinese companies
to potentially store and extract data from anyone using the
cellular networks, including U.S. persons. Chinese
telecommunications equipment is also enabling ``safe city''
development, which gives China access to host nations' security
and surveillance networks.
U.S. Southern Command leads a Working Group with
interagency stakeholders to streamline efforts across the AOR
to support our partners in building safe and secure 5G networks
through trusted vendors. The Working Group seeks to counter the
efforts of our adversaries and untrusted vendors in the AOR
that pose a threat to informational and operational security.
One way that it counters those efforts is by identifying
information that can be shared with our partners about the
risks of using untrusted vendors in their network architecture.
It also identifies opportunities for engagements and best
practices that can be implemented. The Working Group's efforts
have contributed to significant wins in and for Partner
Nations, where the governments have strongly rejected overtures
from our adversaries and untrusted vendors to build 5G networks
due to the documented security risks we have provided them.
Additionally, SOUTHCOM continues to partner with the
Departments of State and Commerce in programs such as the
Regional 5G Workshop in Costa Rica, held on April 9-10 2024 and
organized by the Department of Commerce's Commercial Law
Development Program (CLDP) and the Department of State's
Digital Connectivity and Cybersecurity Partnership (DCCP) to
advance partner nation understanding of the threats posed by
untrusted vendors and the alternative technical solutions
available.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. WALTZ

Mr. Waltz. JIATF-South currently employs one Ship Special
Mission operated under the Military Sealift Command. The ship
is currently deployed to the Caribbean and Eastern Pacific and
is a contractor-owned and operated ship to resupply and extend
the operational range of our partner countries to support the
counternarcotics mission.
The Committee asked the Department whether adding at least
one additional ship to ensure coverage on each side of central
America would help reduce the drug flow into the United States.
Ms. Zimmerman: In the report we received back from the
Pentagon it said that adding one more ship would enable a
minimal increase in the disruption of cocaine and would not
represent the best return on investment of counter-drug funds.

LDo you know how the Department quantified
``return on investment''? Is it the street value of drugs, or
lives of Americans?
Ms. Zimmerman. ``Return on investment'' focuses on the most
effective use of DoD counterdrug funds to reduce U.S. overdose
deaths.
Based on current experience with the one Ship Special
Mission (SSM), the deployment of an additional SSM would result
in the interdiction of only slightly more cocaine and
marijuana--the two illicit drugs transiting the JIATF-South
area of operations. In the U.S. Southern Command posture
statement, GEN Richardson stated that foreign partners
operating from the SSM seized over 12 metric tons of cocaine,
which is less than 4 percent of the nearly 308 metric tons of
cocaine seized or otherwise disrupted in Fiscal Year 2023.
Cocaine is a significant threat, but it is only one part of the
illicit drug problem. Fentanyl is responsible for most U.S.
overdose deaths. The vast majority of illicit fentanyl entering
the United States arrives from Mexico in vehicles traveling
through ports of entry along the southwest border.
The annual cost of leasing, operating, and sustaining the
SSM is approximately $30 million. There is no funding in the
DoD counterdrug budget for a second SSM. If the DoD counterdrug
program were to receive an additional $30 million per year,
funding spent on supporting law enforcement efforts to counter
Mexican cartels and other networks trafficking illicit fentanyl
and investing in enterprisewide capabilities (e.g., new data
tools, greater analytic capabilities) is more likely to save
additional American lives than the leasing of another SSM.
Mr. Waltz. The easing of sanctions under the Barbados
Agreement was intended to serve as an incentive for the Maduro
government to move forward with fair and free elections.
However, in the following months, Maduro has further targeted
the opposition, disqualifying the primary winner Maria Corina
Machado from being on the ballot and arresting human rights
activists. It appears like Barbados is morphing into Doha 2.0.
I'll also point out that on February 20th, Russian Foreign
Minister Sergei Lavrov visited Maduro to reaffirm their
``strategic relationship.''

LHas Russian and Chinese support allowed Venezuela
to circumvent economic sanctions and how has this support
encouraged them to flagrantly disregard Barbados?
General Richardson. Since at least 2020, Venezuela has
mostly relied on economic ties to China to evade sanctions.
Most of Venezuela's sanctioned oil is exported to private
Chinese refineries at heavy discounts to pay off Caracas' debt
(in the billions), according to open source reporting. The
legal/illegal nature of these dealings probably provides the
Maduro regime with a steady flow of revenue it can use to
sustain loyalty among key political and military leaders.
Comparatively, Russia has not played a substantial role in
facilitating Venezuelan oil exports. Our understanding is that
Russia is mostly involved in assisting Venezuela with moving
funds outside of the U.S. SWIFT system, according to OFAC.
However, Russia's shipment of oil to Venezuela this past
February, the first in five years, probably was an initial
attempt at reinvigorating oil cooperation. Caracas probably
calculates that continued diplomatic and economic support from
Beijing and Moscow will enable the Maduro regime to willfully
disregard the Barbados Agreement and undermine the regime's
political opponents/candidates before the 28 July presidential
election.
Mr. Waltz. Delays at our public and private yards
conducting maintenance and modernization work have left the
U.S. with only 60% percent of our attack submarine fleet
available for operations, instead of the 80% goal set by the
Navy. In addition, adversarial submarine activity of our
Pacific and Atlantic coasts, particularly with Russia's
advanced nuclear boat Severodvinsk, presents a constant nuclear
threat to North America.

LGeneral Guillot: Have there been recent
incidences of NORAD being unable to track adversarial vessels
that enter your AOR due to the reduced availability of U.S.
ships and subs?

LDo you have enough sonobuoys to track these
highly sophisticated threats?

LIs your AOR adequately resourced to track these
increased Russian patrols off our coasts?

LHow are the submarine industrial maintenance
delays affecting our capability to project forward as well as
maintain (as well as strengthen) our strategic undersea arm of
the nuclear triad?
General Guillot. NORAD provides maritime advisories and
maritime warning messages per the NORAD Agreement and Terms of
Reference. NORTHCOM is responsible for Maritime Homeland
Defense and tracking of adversary vessels, while NORTHCOM's
tracking of adversary surface ships has not been affected by
availability of U.S. ships or submarines.
NORTHCOM has had sufficient sonobuoys to conduct Maritime
Homeland Defense mission. I defer to the Department of the Navy
for global sonobuoys levels.
The Department of Defense, through the Joint Staff-led
Global Force Management process, provides NORTHCOM with ready
forces for maritime homeland defense operations. In steady
state operations, forces assigned to NORTHCOM are sufficient to
track adversary surface patrols. The Joint Staff adjudicates
follow-on requests with the Services and other Combatant
Commands for additional forces if requested. Additionally, the
process of force sharing with other Combatant Commands provides
forces not assigned to meet priority operational requirements.
Investments in Integrated Undersea Surveillance Systems will
further enhance maritime homeland defense.
The Defense Industrial Base (DIB) is critical to our
ability to produce and sustain the full range of capabilities
needed to give U.S., allied, and partners forces a competitive
advantage. I defer to the Department, U.S. Strategic Command,
and the Department of the Navy regarding the submarine
industrial base.
Mr. Waltz. Russian influence has extended into the next
frontier for maritime trade- the arctic. The arctic water ways
open an extremely strategic water way cutting down on seafaring
trade while also providing a strategic outpost for a potential
military conflict. Russia, as an ``arctic state,'' have seized
polar exploration via heavy polar icebreaker vessels.
As one of eight ``arctic states'' the U.S. appears unable
to compete and power project in the High North due to only one
active U.S. Coast Guard heavy polar icebreaker vessel that
itself is over 50 years old.

LGeneral Guillot: How is NORTHCOM bolstering
resources for the U.S. to project power in the ``high north''?

LHow does the U.S. intend increase our maritime
trade element in the Northwest and Northeast passage trading
routes?
General Guillot. NORTHCOM has consistently supported the US
Coast Guard's requirement for icebreakers. NORTHCOM is
bolstering power projection in the High North by advocating for
the Services to resource their published Arctic strategies.
Both NORTHCOM and NORAD are working to increase the frequency
and participation in joint exercises as most recently
demonstrated during the execution of Arctic Edge 24, which took
place from February 23rd to March 11th. Improving the Joint
Force's ability to employ and win in the Arctic is a command
focus area. With regards to US trade policy, I defer to the
Department of Commerce.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. RYAN

Mr. Ryan. The war in Ukraine has shown us that investments
in data, AI and compute are what's going to allow us to stay
ahead of the curve in a future conflict. How are you thinking
about taking a more data-driven and AI-enabled posture in
SOUTHCOM?
General Richardson. SOUTHCOM continues to lean forward as
an experimentation hub for emerging technologies and is
actively leveraging and pursuing Artificial Learning and
Machine Learning (AL/ML) for improved data management,
analytics, and dissemination. JIATFSouth is currently operating
an AI Battle Lab that leverages prototype technologies from the
Office of Naval Research and helps process data sourced from
wide area maritime patrols and open-source information. We have
engaged AI leaders and DOD partners to support AI advancements
to fit more SOUTHCOM use-cases ranging from predictive
maintenance of aircraft to object classification in video and
imagery analytics. We are actively collaborating on proposals
to exploit AI capabilities being developed elsewhere to suit
more use-cases within SOUTHCOM and other COCOMs. Our Chief Data
Officer is actively preparing the data-driven groundwork needed
to expand our use of AI in the future. We remain ready to
innovate with new capabilities as the resources and technology
become available.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LALOTA

Mr. LaLota. The U.S. relies solely on the LC-130Hs--
operated by the NYANG--for their unique ability of transporting
personnel, equipment, and supplies to remote locations in the
polar regions. The aging fleet represents a significant
national security risk, particularly in light of increasing
activities by Russia and China in these regions. How does this
capability align with our strategic objectives in the Arctic,
and what role does the LC-130H fuel transportation capabilities
in these austere environments play in enhancing our defense
posture against near-peer threats?
General Guillot. NORAD and NORTHCOM require Arctic airlift
capabilities to support campaigning in peacetime, crisis, and
contingencies. The airlift must support sustainment efforts in
a variety of environments, including forward operating
locations. While I defer to TRANSCOM regarding the specific
types of aircraft suited for Arctic sustainment operations, the
LC-130 have been, and remains today, a vital asset for the
execution of the NORAD and NORTHCOM mission. In particular, I
understand the LC-130H is capable of carrying the Aerial Bulk
Fuel Delivery System (ABFDS) used for transporting and
delivering fuel in military cargo aircraft. The ABFDS supports
the concept of agile combat employment, allowing for resilient
airpower generation in contested environments, to include the
Arctic.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SLOTKIN

Ms. Slotkin. The United States has a fentanyl problem. The
flow of fentanyl through border crossings at the southern
border is having a devastating effect on communities in
Michigan and elsewhere. The recent national security
supplemental funding bill passed in the Senate included more
than $23 million to combat drug cartels moving fentanyl across
the border, and hundreds of millions in funding for new
technological capabilities to detect fentanyl and other drugs.
To what extent would this funding help address the flow of
fentanyl across the border if passed into law? What is the
Department of Defense doing to help the Department of Homeland
Security fix our fentanyl problem?
Ms. Zimmerman. Improved technological capabilities would be
extremely helpful to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
in detecting illicit fentanyl being smuggled across U.S.
borders. Even a tiny amount of fentanyl can kill, and every
interdiction helps save the lives of Americans. However,
interdictions alone will not solve this problem. That is why
the focus of DoD's counter-fentanyl efforts is providing
intelligence analysts to support law enforcement partner's
efforts to disrupt and dismantle the illicit networks that are
the source of the problem, such as the Sinaloa Cartel and the
Cartel Jalisco New Generation (CJNG), for example.
DoD works closely in support of virtually every DHS
component that is involved in combatting fentanyl and the drug
trafficking organizations that produce, smuggle, and sell it.
DoD also provides extensive support to other U.S. Federal,
State, and local civilian law enforcement agencies.
During calendar year 2023, 19 different DoD components (11
Combatant Commands/Theater Special Operations Command elements,
4 Joint and Joint Interagency Task Forces/Fusion Cells, 3
Combat Support Agencies, and the National Guard) provided
intelligence analysis support to Federal, State, and local
civilian law enforcement agencies. At the Federal level, DoD
analysts supported almost 900 requests for assistance from at
least a dozen law enforcement partners (primarily the Drug
Enforcement Administration and DHS Homeland Security
Investigations, but also the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
Customs and Border Protection, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, and the Department of the Treasury, among others),
to support dozens of different civilian law enforcement
operations targeting various aspects of the entire illicit
fentanyl supply chain in more than 50 countries.
DoD intelligence support enabled civilian law enforcement
agencies to target key foreign actors in the illicit fentanyl
supply chain, including: Sinaloa cartel and CJNG criminal
actors most directly involved in illicit fentanyl trafficking;
corrupt government officials enabling or facilitating illicit
fentanyl production and trafficking; money launderers; chemists
involved in illicit fentanyl production; companies knowingly
enabling or facilitating diversion of fentanyl precursors; and
pill press manufacturers with lax controls or due diligence.
At the state and local level, DoD's National Guard State
Counterdrug Programs provide extensive support to the High
Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) programs. Mission
activities include aerial observation and reconnaissance, drug
demand reduction outreach, ground observation and
reconnaissance, linguistic support, training, transportation,
analytical support for the 33 regional HIDTAs. In Fiscal Year
(FY) 2023, National Guard support contributed to more than
1,000 drug seizures in the United States. DoD also provides
foreign language translation services to U.S. civilian law
enforcement agencies. The Sinaloa Cartel and CJNG are based in
Mexico, but members of their global networks operate in many
countries and communicate in a variety of languages. In 2023,
DoD's Utah Translation and Analysis Center supported
approximately 160 requests for support from over 40 civilian
law enforcement agency representatives for Spanish-English and
Chinese (Mandarin)-English translation services.
Ms. Slotkin. I believe a root cause of the surge of
immigration at our southern border is the level of violence and
instability many people face in Central and South America. To
what extent do social, economic and political trends in your
AOR drive migration, and what is SOUTHCOM doing to help nations
within your AOR address these trends?
General Richardson. [No answer was available at time of
publication.]
Ms. Slotkin. My constituents are concerned with the recent
deployment of active-duty troops to the U.S. southern border
for temporary periods in order to assist the Department of
Homeland Security during surges in illegal border crossings. We
know that these troops do not take up law enforcement roles,
but nonetheless I remain concerned that additional deployments
of active-duty troops to the border could threaten readiness in
the region. I'd respectfully ask for written responses to the
following questions: a. How many active-duty troops are
currently stationed at the southern border, and for how long
does the Department expect them to remain there? b. The border
security legislation that recently passed the Senate would fund
more than 1,500 new Customs and Border Protection personnel and
for tens of thousands more detention beds for Immigration and
Customs Enforcement. To what extent would these proposed
investments, if passed into law, reduce the need for Active
Duty personnel on the southern border?
General Guillot. As of 18 April 2024, there are
approximately 210 active-duty personnel and 2,450 National
Guard personnel stationed along the U.S. southwest border, as
authorized by the Secretary of Defense. I respectfully defer to
the Office of the Secretary of Defense regarding Department-
level expectations for the duration of the southwest border
support mission.
The Department of Defense is responsible for determining
the number of personnel required to support the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) and Customs and Border Protection
(CBP). While I welcome efforts to increase the number of CBP
personnel, I defer to the Office of the Secretary of Defense
regarding how such an increase might affect DoD support along
the border.
Ms. Slotkin. The United States has a fentanyl problem. The
flow of fentanyl through border crossings at the southern
border is having a devastating effect on communities in
Michigan and elsewhere. The recent national security
supplemental funding bill passed in the Senate included more
than $23 million to combat drug cartels moving fentanyl across
the border, and hundreds of millions in funding for new
technological capabilities to detect fentanyl and other drugs.
To what extent would this funding help address the flow of
fentanyl across the border if passed into law? What is the
Department of Defense doing to help the Department of Homeland
Security fix our fentanyl problem?
General Guillot. As I understand it, the Senate-passed
Emergency National Security Supplemental Appropriations Act for
2024 would provide funding to the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA)
and Customs and Border Protection (CBP); I would defer to those
agencies regarding specific plans for how those funds would be
used to address illicit trafficking.
USNORTHCOM, in coordination with OSD, supports U.S.
departments and agencies with counterdrug and counter-
transnational criminal organization (TCO) responsibilities,
including DHS, in order to disrupt and degrade illicit
networks. That support is primarily provided through
intelligence analysis that empowers NORTHCOM's partners to
target illicit networks, along with integrated aerial detection
and monitoring directed toward improved characterization of TCO
networks.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GIMENEZ

Mr. Gimenez. This administration announced an additional
$100 million from DoD 331 funding, putting the total amount of
331 funding for the Multinational Security Support mission
(MSS) mission in Haiti at $200 million. This funding will be
used to ``provide logistics support, supplies, and services''
to countries participating in the Multinational Security
Support mission. What will this money actually be used for?
Ms. Zimmerman. The Logistic Support, Supplies, and Services
(LSSS) DoD will provide in support of Kenya, the Bahamas, and
Jamaica--the countries contributing personnel to the MSS
mission--include the establishment of a Life Support Area (LSA)
at the Port-auPrince airport. The LSSS that will be provided at
the LSA includes billeting and meals for MSS personnel,
maintenance of vehicles and other equipment, basic medical
services, and other supplies and services required for the day-
to-day functioning of the mission.
Mr. Gimenez. General Richardson, we are very proud to
continue to support all the missions and Department of Defense
men and women serving at Homestead Air Reserve Base. It is our
understanding that there are ongoing Air Force discussions
about divesting the current F-16s and closing the Air Reserve
Base to fund other priorities. It is our strong opinion that
Homestead is crucial to our National Defense due to its
strategic location, capacity, and capabilities that support the
Joint force in SOUTHCOM, NORTHCOM and around the globe. As a
Combatant Commander, what is the strategic importance of
Homestead?
General Richardson. Homestead Air Reserve Base (HARB) is
located in the southernmost tip of Florida and is home to the
482nd Fighter Wing; it has been a crucial component in our
country's pilot training, air readiness, and protection since
its construction in 1942. HARB has also provided support for
South Florida after major storms and hurricanes, and it has
been key in the distribution of critical humanitarian aid to
the countries across the Caribbean after catastrophic weather
events. The base is invaluable in its contributions to the
safety of South Florida and to the nation. SOUTHCOM has the
view that HARB is indeed of geo-strategic importance to our
National Defense, and our operations at SOUTHCOM in particular.
HARB is located in close proximity to SOUTHCOM headquarters and
also provides a strategic deployment point for our operations
in the Caribbean and Latin America.
SOUTHCOM's Theater Special Operations Command (TSOC),
Special Operations Command South (SOCSOUTH), is based adjacent
to HARB. SOCSOUTH is SOUTHCOM's lead for countering our
competitors and our strategic competition efforts, and it
provides our special operations forces for our operations,
exercises, and training engagements throughout the AOR. It also
provides our USSOUTHCOM Situational Assessment Team (SSAT)
which can and does quickly deploy from the HARB airfield in the
event of a regional disaster or crisis, to serve as the
Combatant Commander's ``eyes and ears'' to evaluate the
situation so that we can scale and scope an appropriate
response. HARB's location also provides great coordination and
synchronization of our efforts thanks to the colocation of
multiple interagency partners that compliment and support the
important national defense work that we do. Additionally, HARB
serves as a key planning element for many of USSOUTHCOM's
contingency plans. Specifically, for SOUTHCOM's humanitarian
response plans, HARB is utilized as an intermediate staging
location.
Mr. Gimenez. General Richardson, I recently traveled to the
Panama Canal to see with my own eyes the malign Chinese
Influence in South America. Ports at both ends of the Canal are
managed by companies from the PRC. Panama joined Beijing's Belt
and Road Initiative in 2018, becoming the first nation in the
Western Hemisphere to embrace Beijing's massive infrastructure
development strategy. What tools do you have to fight this
initiative, to keep the Panama Canal free and open, and what
more do you need from Congress to ensure China doesn't dominate
a canal that moves roughly $270 billion dollars' worth of cargo
annually and taken by 40% of all US container traffic?
General Richardson. SOUTHCOM works effectively to combat
Chinese influence in the Panama Canal Zone through Key Leader
Engagements, Security Cooperation, and bilateral military
subject matter expert exchanges. Our goal is to preserve
Panamanian sovereignty, and ensure neutrality of and access to
the Panama Canal. Reauthorizing FISA Section 702 is a critical
tool to help SOUTHCOM blunt PRC malign activity in and around
the Panama Canal.
Infrastructure is one of our partners' critical needs, and
the PRC is leveraging that need to achieve influence overmatch
in the region. We need to be responsive in our processes if we
want to address our partner nation requirements and outcompete
the PRC in this domain. Panama is a regional leader and
significant partner granting U.S. access in support of mutual
strategic efforts. Presence matters and our Joint Exercise
Program is the principal means to maintain trained and ready
forces and exercise contingency plans focused on the security
of the Panama Canal. We have established an Economic Working
Group partnering with the Department of Commerce, State
Department, and USAID to mobilize the critical interagency
partners that can address the economic challenges in the region
and provide a compelling alternative to the PRC's investments
and efforts. SOUTHCOM continues recurrent, face-to-face
interactions with senior political and military leaders across
the region. FMF, FMS, and Security Cooperation are great levers
that make huge inroads when delivered at the speed of relevance
for our partners. The security cooperation focus is to expand
public security forces' domain awareness and their ability to
secure key infrastructure on the canal in support of
contingency plans and treaties. Finally, the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) is providing technical support to the Panama
Canal Authority to help ensure the canal operates successfully
for the next 50 years.
Mr. Gimenez. Communist influence is running rapid in Cuba
as Russia and China seek to spread anti-democratic, anti-
Western and anti-American misinformation and disinformation
campaigns. In your statement, you said that they are actively
seeking to ``bolster the authoritarian rule of regimes in Cuba,
Nicaragua, and Venezuela. Last July, it was reported that,
China made deals with Cuba to set up an electronic
eavesdropping station, just 90 miles from my district. Last
October, it was reported and confirmed by the U.S. State
Department that Cubans are being deceived and recruited by the
Russians to fight in Ukraine. USSOUTHCOM's strategy focuses on
Strengthening Partnerships, Countering Threats, and Building
our Team. What are you currently doing in Cuba in those three
lines of effort? What more can we do to help the suffering
people of Cuba under the communist, authoritarian regime?
General Richardson. SOUTHCOM is limited by current policy
and law from engaging with or conducting any security
cooperation activities with the Government of Cuba.
We are aware of media reports on electronic eavesdropping
emanating from Cuba and take these reports seriously. As
always, we protect sensitive information and follow all
national guidelines to secure our communications.
------

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MS. SEWELL

Ms. Sewell. You highlight the Global Water Security Center
at the University of Alabama which utilizes DOD funding to
provide education, training, and research related to water,
food, energy, and natural disasters. Can you discuss how the
Global Water Center assessments help combatant commands'
strategic planning and contribute to our national security?
Ms. Zimmerman. The Global Water Security Center (GWSC) at
the University of Alabama leverages water-related research and
environmental science to help key decision makers improve
security at the intersection of water, energy, food, and
health.
The GWSC produces a range of analytic products aimed at
helping DoD components, including Combatant Commands,
understand how environmental conditions such as droughts,
flooding, and heat waves affect operational readiness, cause
humanitarian crises, increase regional and subnational tensions
and conflicts, and threaten critical infrastructure. This
analysis can then inform operational planning, including
through Departmental wargaming.
GWSC analyses have ranged from seasonal outlooks on
possible impacts of El Nino on flooding, food, and water
availability to longer-term assessments of the impact on
changing water resources on European allies. This information,
coupled with separate planning by the Combatant Commands and
coordination with allies and partners, contributes to national
security by reducing the impacts of environmental disruptions
to critical missions and by providing warfighters with enhanced
domain awareness regarding the environmental conditions that
they will face across the globe.

[all]
