- OVERSIGHT OF U.S. MILITARY SUPPORT TO UKRAINE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

[H.A.S.C. No. 118-6]

OVERSIGHT OF U.S. MILITARY SUPPORT
TO UKRAINE

__________

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD

FEBRUARY 28, 2023

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-964                       WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

One Hundred Eighteenth Congress

MIKE ROGERS, Alabama, Chairman

JOE WILSON, South Carolina           ADAM SMITH, Washington
MICHAEL R. TURNER, Ohio              JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
DOUG LAMBORN, Colorado               JOHN GARAMENDI, California
ROBERT J. WITTMAN, Virginia, Vice    DONALD NORCROSS, New Jersey
Chair                            RUBEN GALLEGO, Arizona
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                SETH MOULTON, Massachusetts
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California
ELISE M. STEFANIK, New York          RO KHANNA, California
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          WILLIAM R. KEATING, Massachusetts
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi             ANDY KIM, New Jersey
MIKE GALLAGHER, Wisconsin            CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
MATT GAETZ, Florida                  ELISSA SLOTKIN, Michigan
DON BACON, Nebraska                  MIKIE SHERRILL, New Jersey
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   VERONICA ESCOBAR, Texas
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JARED F. GOLDEN, Maine
MICHAEL WALTZ, Florida               SARA JACOBS, California
MIKE JOHNSON, Louisiana              MARILYN STRICKLAND, Washington
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            PATRICK RYAN, New York
RONNY JACKSON, Texas                 JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
PAT FALLON, Texas                    GABE VASQUEZ, New Mexico
CARLOS A. GIMENEZ, Florida           CHRISTOPHER R. DELUZIO,
NANCY MACE, South Carolina               Pennsylvania
BRAD FINSTAD, Minnesota              JILL N. TOKUDA, Hawaii
DALE W. STRONG, Alabama              DONALD G. DAVIS, North Carolina
MORGAN LUTTRELL, Texas               TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
JENNIFER A. KIGGANS, Virginia        STEVEN HORSFORD, Nevada
NICK LaLOTA, New York                JIMMY PANETTA, California
JAMES C. MOYLAN, Guam                MARC VEASEY, Texas
MARK ALFORD, Missouri                Vacancy
CORY MILLS, Florida
RICHARD McCORMICK, Georgia

Chris Vieson, Staff Director
Ryan Tully, Professional Staff Member
Rob Ikoku, Professional Staff Member
Owen McGeary, Research Assistant

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS PRESENTED BY MEMBERS OF CONGRESS

Rogers, Hon. Mike, a Representative from Alabama, Chairman,
Committee on Armed Services....................................     1
Smith, Hon. Adam, a Representative from Washington, Ranking
Member, Committee on Armed Services............................     2

WITNESSES

Kahl, Hon. Colin H., Under Secretary of Defense for Policy.......     5
Sims, LTG Douglas A., II, USA, Director for Operations, J-3, The
Joint Staff....................................................     7
Storch, Hon. Robert P., Inspector General, U.S. Department of
Defense........................................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared Statements:

Kahl, Hon. Colin H...........................................    61
Sims, LTG Douglas A., II.....................................    65
Storch, Hon. Robert P........................................    71

Documents Submitted for the Record:

USA Today article submitted by Mr. Clyde.....................    81
The Washington Post article submitted by Mr. Courtney........    86
Global Times article submitted by Mr. Gaetz..................    89
Additional articles submitted by Mr. Gaetz...................    94

Witness Responses to Questions Asked During the Hearing:

Dr. DesJarlais...............................................   139
Mr. Fallon...................................................   139
Ms. Houlahan.................................................   139
Ms. Mace.....................................................   139

Questions Submitted by Members Post Hearing:

Mr. Gallagher................................................   145
Mr. LaLota...................................................   145
Dr. McCormick................................................   146
Mr. Moylan...................................................   146
Mr. Rogers...................................................   143
Mr. Scott....................................................   143

OVERSIGHT OF U.S. MILITARY SUPPORT TO UKRAINE

----------

House of Representatives,
Committee on Armed Services,
Washington, DC, Tuesday, February 28, 2023.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in room
2118, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike Rogers (chairman
of the committee) presiding.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE ROGERS, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM
ALABAMA, CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

The Chairman. The committee will come to order. Before we
start, I wanted to notice to every member that you'll find in
your desk drawer, in addition to a seating chart of the members
of the committee, a chart of all the staff, both sides of the
aisle.
It's just been one of those things that's always driven me
nuts over the last 20 years, is not knowing who all these
people are that work for us and keeping up with them as they
change. So that'll be in your desk drawer.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the hearing in
recess at any point, so ordered.
A few housekeeping matters before we begin. First, we will
adjourn the public portion of this hearing at 12:30 today and
immediately move upstairs for the classified portion.
Second, I want to welcome back to the committee Mr. Veasey
after his brief hiatus. I'm glad that you remembered where we
were.
And finally, after consultation with the minority, I ask
unanimous consent that Mr. Clyde of Georgia, a member of the
Appropriations Committee, be allowed to question witnesses at
today's hearing. Without objection, so ordered.
Last Friday, we observed the 1-year anniversary of Putin's
illegal and brutal invasion of Ukraine. The American people
have responded with extraordinary support for the Ukrainians.
Millions of Americans have donated their time and money to
charitable organizations helping the Ukrainian people. Some
have even volunteered to fight alongside the Ukrainian defense
forces.
Congress has responded by appropriating over $100 billion
in military, economic, and humanitarian assistance to Ukraine
and our NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization] allies. To
date, the administration has distributed over $75 billion of
that money, including $46 billion in security assistance.
These are unprecedented numbers, and it requires an
unprecedented level of oversight by this committee and by
Congress. We're up to the task.
Last year, Chairman Smith started monthly classified
briefings with the administration officials that have continued
into the new majority. Many of us have traveled to Ukraine and
surrounding countries to witness firsthand the train-and-equip
mission.
We've made classified information on the situation in
Ukraine available to all Members. And our staff have constantly
been briefing--being--are constantly being briefed with the
latest developments by the Department.
But today is the first time the Committee of the House is
holding an open public hearing on the matter. I've asked the
Inspector General and the Under Secretary to appear today
because it is imperative that the American people understand A,
where our security assistance is going; B, how it's being used;
C, and what protections are in place to ensure it doesn't fall
into the wrong hands.
But oversight is about more than just accounting. It's
about ensuring the administration is setting strategic goals
and implementing a policy to achieve them. That's why we all
are here with very real concerns.
Since the beginning, the President has been overly worried,
in my view, that giving Ukraine what it needs to win would be
too escalatory. This hesitation has only prolonged the war and
driven up the cost in terms of dollars and lives.
This conflict must end. And the President must be willing
to do what it takes to end it with victory. Continued
reluctance and indecision only empowers Putin, and it sends the
wrong message--the wrong signals to President Xi and the
Chinese Community Party.
And with that, I yield to my friend and colleague, the
ranking member.

STATEMENT OF HON. ADAM SMITH, A REPRESENTATIVE FROM WASHINGTON,
RANKING MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I welcome our witnesses
as well. And really, thank you for the work you've done. You've
all appeared before us in classified settings to update us on a
very regular basis on the effort in Ukraine.
We appreciate the cooperative relationship between the
executive branch and the legislative branch on this matter. And
more than anything, we appreciate your leadership in supporting
Ukraine so effectively over the course of the last year.
I think it's hard to really imagine the massive undertaking
that has been done in the last year since Russia made its
decision to invade. And really since in the weeks and to some
degree months before the invasion, when we came to realize from
our intelligence community that this was going to happen.
First of all, we were about the only country in the world
that thought it was going to happen. Even the Ukrainians
themselves, right up literally to the day of the invasion,
thought that we were exaggerating the intelligence and that
this wasn't actually going to happen.
So from pretty much a dead stop, the Biden administration
had to pull together a massive coalition to do something that
almost all of the countries involved in that coalition had
never contemplated doing, and certainly had hoped they would
never have to do.
And we've done that with a remarkable, remarkable outcome.
The way that coalition was pulled together and the forces that
have been given and the weapons that have been given to Ukraine
to enable them to be as successful as they have been, combined
of course with their unbelievable courage and tenacity, is
really a remarkable accomplishment. And I think we need to
understand it in that perspective.
Obviously, we would like Ukraine to win tomorrow, Russia to
be completely pushed out. But I think we also have to be
realistic about the challenge that we faced and how we've gone
about meeting that challenge, and really how effective we've
been in doing that.
Now, the purpose of this hearing specifically is on
oversight. I think we have had a lot of oversight on this
effort from the very beginning. And that is part of the reason
why the effort has been so successful.
There are--there are constant efforts to sort of spin
stories, primarily coming from Russian propaganda, about
corruption and weapon systems going where they're not supposed
to be. But people who have looked at this, and I know the
chairman has done this in great detail, have found that there
is no instance of that happening. We have seen the
effectiveness.
And the best evidence of this, clearly and unequivocally,
is the fact that the Ukrainians have been as successful on the
battlefield as they have been. If the weapons and equipment and
support that we were sending them was being sent elsewhere or
stolen or misused, they would have lost a long time ago.
Because I think one of the other things that we forget here
is even us, in the U.S., we saw the war coming, we supported
Ukraine, but even us along with everybody else thought the
Ukrainians didn't stand a chance. We thought that the Russians
would be in Kyiv in a week or two, a month at the most.
So the fact they've been as successful as they have been is
the best evidence we have that these systems and support that
we are sending them is being as well used as it possibly can.
And I do want to touch upon the point that the chairman
made about how the administration hasn't been quick enough. You
know, one of the things that we've heard, not just from critics
of the war who don't want to support it, but even from people
who do support it, is that there can't be a blank check.
That's been sort of the criticism that you take if you want
to sort of make it sound like you're still with Ukraine, but
you want to be responsible. And I think that's appropriate,
okay.
But no blank check means no blank check. It means we don't
just send everything that people ask for in the blink of an eye
without even thinking about it, okay. We think about it and we
get the Ukrainians what they really need.
And I'm going to go ahead and hit upon one of those
examples, because I think this is a really good example of the
problem, and that is the F-16, which everyone has become
obsessed over here in recent weeks. We have considered that
request, and I've had many conversations with the witnesses
before us and with the DOD [Department of Defense] as well.
And the honest truth is the cost of trying to get the F-16
up and ready to operate in Ukraine, even if we--even if we
basically said there's nothing more important than that one
weapon system and [inaudible] all of our time and all of our
resources on doing it, best case scenario, we could maybe get
some operational F-16s into Ukraine within a year, maybe 8
months if we really pushed it. And this is getting lucky, all
right.
Because you don't just have to train the pilots. You have
to train the mechanics. You have to have airfields that can
accommodate the F-16. And you have to have the spare parts to
make it work.
So we looked at that and we determined that is not a wise
use of the resources that are necessary to win the fight.
That's what no blank check means, you don't just send it
without thinking about it.
We thought about it and reached a very intelligent
conclusion that this is not the right system. And oh, by the
way, a fourth-generation fighter in this particular fight is
going to struggle to survive. There are isolated circumstances
where the Ukrainians have been able to use the MiG-29s that
they have. Very isolated, because it's a fourth-generation
fighter in the face of a ton of air defense.
What we are getting the Ukrainians is those air defense
systems that they desperately need to survive right now and the
artillery and the HIMARS [M142 High Mobility Artillery Rocket
System] and the weapon systems that they do need. So the
administration is doing exactly what it needs to do, getting
equipment as quickly and as responsibly as possible to make
this work.
And I also want to make everybody aware of the fact the
Russians are fighting a massive information campaign. Yes,
they're fighting on the battlefield, and I'll look forward to
hearing more details about that today. But they are also trying
to break the coalition.
You know, the Russian military has performed incredibly
poorly. The Ukrainians have performed incredibly heroically.
And the war is not going the way that Putin wanted it to. But
he is not giving up. And he knows his only hope is to break the
coalition that is trying to support Ukraine.
And they're trying to do that in a variety of different
ways. I mean, you can--you can see all the different arguments
about how, well, NATO really started this because of NATO
expansion and a whole lot of other nonsense arguments that are
circulating out there.
But the other part of the way they're doing it is any break
in the coalition they see, they're poking and they're prodding,
okay. They want to undermine the Biden administration.
So why we have--while we have constructive criticism of
what's going on, let's make sure that that criticism is
constructive and we maintain our unity. And I know it is very,
very difficult for the folks on the other side of the aisle to
say anything positive about the Biden administration.
But part of holding this coalition together is to
acknowledge the incredible job that has been done in the last
year, and to maintain that unity and to not jump at every shiny
object that seems to be criticism of the Biden administration,
like the F-16.
Right now, and I've asked this question, we are getting
every single weapon system that we can to Ukraine. There is not
a decision being made about, eh, that might be escalatory. It's
about what can we get to them. How can we maintain the support.
We've spent a lot of money. There is not a limitless amount of
money or a limitless amount of equipment.
So I think those decisions are being made, being made
wisely. I look forward to this hearing. I think it's perfectly
appropriate that we have aggressive oversight, as we've had
since the beginning. And that's part of the reason why we've
been as successful to date as we have been.
With that, I yield back. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses.
The Chairman. I thank the ranking member. I now want to
introduce our witnesses.
The Honorable Colin Kahl is the Under Secretary of Defense
for Policy. Dr. Kahl has been the primary official overseeing
the DOD's response to Ukraine.
The Honorable Dr. Robert Storch is the Inspector General of
the Department of Defense. Together with the IGs [Inspector
Generals] of the State Department and USAID [United States
Agency for International Development], his office is carrying
out audits and investigation of the assistance that we are
providing to Ukraine.
And Lieutenant General Doug Sims is the Director of
Operations for the Joint Staff. He assists the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs in developing and providing operational guidance
on Ukraine and other military operations.
I welcome the witnesses. Thank you for your time. Thank you
for your preparation. I know this takes a lot of effort to get
ready for these hearings, and it is appreciated and helpful.
Dr. Kahl, we'll start with you.

STATEMENT OF HON. COLIN H. KAHL, UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR
POLICY

Dr. Kahl. Thank you. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith,
members of the committee, it's a real honor to appear before
you today alongside my good friend Lieutenant General D.A. Sims
over there and Dr. Storch, our Department's Inspector General.
I want to begin by expressing the unwavering support of the
Department of Defense for Ukraine's sovereignty and security in
the face of Russia's unprovoked and brutal invasion. I know
that support is shared by and is enabled by Congress and the
American people.
So I want to thank you for your crucial and continued help
to get Ukraine the military capabilities and other types of
assistance that it needs to remain in the fight. Thank you,
too, for holding this important hearing at this pivotal time
for the security of Ukraine, of Europe, and of the world.
As we mark 1 year since Russia's further invasion of
Ukraine, it's clear that Russia has failed to achieve any of
its objectives. Its military is paying tremendous costs.
Ukraine remains united and determined to expel Russia's
invading forces from its territory. And NATO unity is stronger
now than it has been in decades.
We are seeing intense fighting in eastern Ukraine as Russia
seeks points to exploit and Ukraine defends tenaciously. What
happens in the coming months may prove decisive, and we are
focused on providing Ukraine with the capabilities it needs
right now to defend its people and its territory and change the
dynamics on the front lines.
I'd like to take a few minutes to lay out our priority
capabilities, the ones we're providing to Ukraine now and in
the coming days, weeks, and months.
First, we have focused on a layered, integrated approach to
air defense to counter Russia's attacks on population centers
and civilian infrastructure. The Patriot capability from the
United States as well as that provided by Germany and the
Netherlands will give Ukraine advanced long-range capability.
These are complemented by medium- and short-range
capabilities provided by the United States, as well as our
allies and partners.
Second, we continue to work with allies and partners to
deliver a steady flow of artillery rounds and other ammunition
so Ukraine can sustain its fight.
Third, to enhance Ukraine's ability to maneuver, the United
States will provide Abrams main battle tanks, the best tanks in
the world. The U.K. [United Kingdom] has also committed
Challenger tanks, and other European states will provide
Leopard tanks.
These main battle tanks are complemented by other vital
armor capabilities from the United States, including Bradleys
and Stryker fighting vehicles, and other fighting vehicles from
our European partners.
Finally, we have expanded U.S.-led collective training to
enable the Ukrainians to better integrate fires and maneuver.
Our assistance to Ukraine is possible thanks to the
tremendous bipartisan support from Congress. As you know, we
have now provided $31.7 billion in support since Russia
launched its further invasion of Ukraine a year ago. And our
allies and partners have now provided over $19 billion in
addition to what we've done.
The Department of Defense appreciates the most recent
additional supplemental appropriations act, which provided
Presidential drawdown authority, funding for the military
services to replace items sent to Ukraine, and funding for the
Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative, or USAI.
Even as we focus on getting Ukraine what it needs, we've
always prioritized accountability, and Ukraine has too. We have
adapted our accountability practice for--practices for the
combat environment to address the risk of illicit diversion,
using mechanisms that go above and beyond our standard
practices.
One year ago, Russia launched its brutal invasion to
destroy Ukraine as a free and sovereign nation, threatening
European security, transatlantic unity, and the security of the
world. Today, an independent, sovereign, democratic Ukraine
endures. The incredible people and the armed forces of Ukraine
remain unbowed and unbroken. And NATO and the wider community
of democracies around the world is stronger than ever.
The stakes for our national security remain significant. We
are determined to support Ukraine's fight against tyranny and
oppression, and in doing so to defend the American interests
and values that are so clearly at stake.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kahl can be found in the
Appendix on page 61.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Kahl. I'd like to recognize
General Sims now for 5 minutes to summarize his statement.

STATEMENT OF LTG DOUGLAS A. SIMS II, USA, DIRECTOR FOR
OPERATIONS, J-3, THE JOINT STAFF

General Sims. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith,
distinguished members, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. I
appreciate today's opportunity to update you on the U.S.
military efforts to help the Ukrainian people in their
continued fight against the Russian invasion.
Today marks the 369th day since Russian forces invaded and
began their illegal and unprovoked large-scale invasion of
Ukraine. As we meet today, the current situation between
Ukraine and Russia is generally static, with both sides
employing heavy amounts of artillery, resulting in minimal
changes of territory and significant numbers of casualties.
In our follow-on session, I'm prepared to discuss
particulars of Ukrainian disposition, but generally, and as
you've seen reported in open sources, the most active portion
of the battlefield today is around the town of Bakhmut.
As I have briefed before over the past 2 months, the
Russian army, with assistance of private military contractor
Wagner Group, has fought savagely to defeat Ukrainians--or
Ukraine's defenses, employing extreme amounts of artillery and
waves of thousands of partially trained mobilized soldiers and
personnel contracted from prisons.
The Russians have made incremental gains at significant
cost. Ultimately, as I have described before, the fighting has
replicated the conditions of the First World War. Key to
changing this paradigm is creating a Ukrainian armed forces
capable of breaking this state of fighting.
In this regard, since I last updated this--since I last
updated this committee, the concentration of U.S. effort has
been focused on combining equipment and munitions with people
and training. The intent and efforts of the U.S. military are
designed to generate combat-credible forces capable of
combining fire and movement to achieve maneuver and increase
the overall capabilities of the Ukrainian armed forces.
Importantly, this training effort is not solely the work of
the U.S. Armed Forces, but is a cohesive--a cohesive approach
with our allies and partners. Collective training is ongoing
throughout Europe and is dramatically increasing Ukrainian
combined arms organizations.
All told since January, the U.S. military has trained
another 1,000 Ukrainians, bringing the total by the United
States, trained by the United States, to just over 4,000. As I
speak, Ukrainians are training in multiple locations in Europe,
working with U.S. service members and military trainers from
our allies and partners.
Key to our ability to conduct collaborative training has
been the recent increase in maneuver-related equipment. The
U.S. provision of Bradley Fighting Vehicles, Strykers, and
Paladin howitzers, combined with similar fighting vehicles and
tank contributions from our partners, is notably increasing the
capability of the Ukrainian armed forces.
In addition, the U.S. continues to supply critical
munitions and individual equipment, from howitzers, howitzer
ammunition, to medical and cold-weather gear.
Finally, and critically important to Ukraine's ability to
continue to defeat Russian efforts to destroy civilian
infrastructure, U.S. Armed Forces will soon complete the
training and equipping of Ukraine's first Patriot battery.
As you know, our air defense experts are providing key
training at Fort Sill, Oklahoma. We are confident the
Ukrainians will employ Patriots with the same expertise they
are demonstrating every day with their current air defense
capabilities.
Thank you for what this committee and this Congress have
done and continue to do to provide oversight and resources in
support of Ukraine as they continue the fight against the
illegal and unprovoked large-scale invasion. While the
Ukrainians bear the real burdens of this war, your support and
that of the American people has had a profound impact of
Ukraine's future.
I look forward to your questions and discussion today.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of General Sims can be found in the
Appendix on page 65.]
The Chairman. Thank you, General.
Mr. Storch, you're recognized.

STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT P. STORCH, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

Mr. Storch. Chairman Rogers, Ranking Member Smith, and
distinguished members of the committee, thank you for inviting
me to appear today to discuss the Department of Defense Office
of the Inspector General's comprehensive independent oversight
of U.S. security assistance to Ukraine, as well as our active
participation in a whole-of-government approach to ensuring
robust oversight of the full range of American assistance.
During the year following the 2022 Russian invasion, the
DOD OIG [Office of the Inspector General] completed four
Ukraine-related oversight projects, with a fifth report
released just yesterday.
We currently have some 20 ongoing and planned audits and
evaluations that are focused on, among other things, ensuring
that tax dollars are used properly, that there's appropriate
accountability for weapons and other material, and that U.S.
stocks are appropriately replenished so they're available
should they be needed elsewhere.
Additionally, the DOD OIG's Defense Criminal Investigative
Service is actively engaged in conducting fraud prevention and
investigative activities that play a critical role in ensuring
the integrity of U.S. assistance to Ukraine.
The DOD OIG currently has more than 90 professionals
engaged in oversight of security assistance to Ukraine. In
2022, we issued two management advisories that identified
several areas of concern that could directly impact the DOD's
ability to transparently track and report the supplemental
appropriations for Ukraine.
Earlier this year, we initiated an audit about examining
DOD's execution of funds appropriated to assist Ukraine. We
have long been focused on end-use monitoring, known as EUM, and
enhanced end-use monitoring, or EEUM, the DOD's tracking of how
our country's partners employ military assistance and sensitive
equipment after those assets are transferred to them.
As early as 2020, we issued a report on how the DOD was
conducting EEUM of military assistance to Ukraine. In October
2022, we published a classified report that identified
challenges DOD personnel responsible for EUM and EEUM face when
there are limited or no U.S. personnel present and the actions
the DOD was taking to address those issues in Ukraine.
As the situation on the ground has continued to evolve, we
recently initiated our third evaluation on EEUM in Ukraine, and
we will continue to focus on this important area.
Yesterday we publicly released our most recent report
related to the Ukraine effort, making recommendations to assist
the Army with its maintenance, inventory, and other processes
for pre-positioned equipment in the region.
In addition to the topics above, our ongoing and planned
projects cover the waterfront of American security assistance
to Ukraine, addressing critical issues like the replenishment
of U.S. stocks, intelligence sharing, security control for the
transport of weapons and equipment, their maintenance and
sustainment, awards of non-competitive contracts, and the
training of Ukrainian armed forces.
And as noted at the outset, DCIS [Defense Criminal
Investigative Service] agents are drawing on their experience
around the world to conduct outreach and investigations to help
prevent and address fraud or other criminal conduct. We are not
conducting this oversight alone.
We are partnering closely with the Department of State OIG
and the U.S. Agency for International Development OIG, and many
others across the oversight community in a coordinated approach
to ensure comprehensive oversight of all U.S. assistance to
Ukraine.
Along with our oversight partners, the DOD OIG established
and leads the Ukraine Oversight Interagency Working Group,
which brings together 20 oversight entities in a whole-of-
government approach. Just last month, my office and the State
and USAID OIGs, in coordination with the larger working group,
published our Joint Strategic Oversight Plan, which publicly
describes our completed and ongoing work.
As detailed in the plan, we are employing the proven model
that has been used for years to ensure comprehensive oversight
of overseas contingency operations, and we will work together
in this effort for as long as the conflict and the need for
oversight continue.
At the end of January, I traveled with the leaders of the
State and USAID OIGs to Germany, Poland, and into Ukraine in
order to obtain the latest on-the-ground perspective, to build
on our coordinated approach, and to deliver an unambiguous
message to American and in Kyiv high-level Ukrainian officials
about the expectations for accountability for U.S. assistance.
The trip made clear that the situation is fluid and calls
for continuous agile oversight. The DOD OIG, working hand in
glove with our oversight partners, will continue to make
independent oversight of assistance to Ukraine a matter of the
highest priority. And we will continue to keep the Congress and
the public informed about our work.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today, and
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Storch can be found in the
Appendix on page 71.]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Storch.
Before we move into questions, I wanted to remind everybody
that the maps that you have in front of you, while they're
unclassified, we haven't been given permission by the
Department yet to distribute them beyond the committee, so I'd
ask you to leave those here when you leave.
And I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Kahl, if Russia were to be successful in taking control
of Ukraine, what would that portend for a potential of China
taking an effort at Taiwan?
Dr. Kahl. Well, Mr. Chairman, we've seen what a world looks
like when revisionist authoritarian powers go on the march and
they're unchecked by the free world and they carve out spheres
of influence by gobbling up their neighbors. That world was the
1930s, and it culminated in the worst human tragedy in history,
the Second World----
The Chairman. So it would--enhance the likelihood that
could happen.
Dr. Kahl. I think if Russia is successful in Ukraine or is
seen as successful in Ukraine, it will embolden other
aggressors elsewhere to do similar things.
The Chairman. That's my point. Chair now yields the balance
of his time to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Clyde.
Mr. Clyde. I thank Chairman Rogers for his invitation to be
here today and for yielding me his time to discuss this
important matter of oversight of U.S. military support to
Ukraine.
As we all know, the United States has authorized over $100
billion in aid, to which our government holds a responsibility
to the American people that it be used for its true, just, and
intended purpose. It is the responsibility of Congress to
ensure that every single penny of American taxpayer money is
being effectively used as intended to assist the Ukrainian
people in their fight against Russian aggression.
Just 2 weeks ago, I had the pleasure of joining the
chairman to visit several of our NATO allies in Europe to
receive an update on the war effort in Ukraine and the ongoing
oversight work directly related to U.S. military aid.
Accountability of the weapons shipped in is absolutely
paramount, especially the most sensitive weapons, to ensure
that they are being used for their intended purpose and not
diverted for a nefarious purpose.
As a supply officer with both multiple peacetime
deployments and multiple combat deployments in my 28 years of
Navy service, I am fully aware of the challenges of maintaining
visibility and control of critical military hardware and
components when the supply lines are long and the theater is
kinetic.
So Mr. Storch, I would like to start with you as a
Department of Defense Inspector General. In all your
inspections and oversight, in-country and out, have you found
any instances of sensitive weapons, like Stinger missiles,
being either lost or diverted to those not authorized to have
them?
Mr. Storch. Thank you very much for the question. I'm
obviously not at liberty to talk about any investigations, but
we have not substantiated any such instances, no, sir.
Mr. Clyde. So you can confidently say that to your
knowledge, every sensitive weapon is currently under control of
those who should have them--who should have them?
Mr. Storch. Well, thank you very much for the question.
That's why we're engaged in a--we're laser-focused on this
issue and engaged in robust oversight to make sure that's the
case.
We're doing audits and evaluations that look at the weapons
from the time they begin at the port, while they're transferred
throughout, as they get to the transshipment points, and then
they go into the country.
And then as I mentioned in my statement, we're now
conducting our third evaluation of the EUM, and with regard to
the sensitive assets, the EEUM, the enhanced monitoring, to
ensure that the Department of Defense is conducting that
monitoring in a robust way.
Additionally, as I mentioned, we have the DCIS, the Defense
Criminal Investigation Service. They have vast experience all
over the world in doing investigations arising out of conflict
situations. And so again, we're very much alert to any
instances where that sort of conduct would occur.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. All right, moving on, as I understand it,
your office is currently working on, among other things, an
audit of DOD award and administration of non-competitively
awarded contracts in support of Ukraine. Has there been any
waste, fraud, or abuse uncovered or reported to your office in
these investigations?
Mr. Storch. So I want to--I appreciate the question. I want
to be careful and not get out ahead of my skis, because the
audit is ongoing.
Mr. Clyde. Okay.
Mr. Storch. So we are looking at those issues in our audit
and we'll report out on what we find. But the purpose of the
audit is to ensure that the DOD has the controls in place to
make sure that doesn't happen.
Mr. Clyde. According to your testimony, you said that there
were some posters, both in Ukrainian and English, the language,
sent out about a particular hotline that people could call if
they wanted to report something. So without compromising any
identities, have any whistleblowers come forward with
information using that particular method of reporting, to your
knowledge?
Mr. Storch. So thank you for referencing the hotline. It's
something we worked closely on with our partners----
Mr. Clyde. I read your testimony.
Mr. Storch. At [the Department of] State and USAID, and the
goal is provide an avenue for people to report what they think
may be wrong. We have gotten all sorts of types of allegations
over that, and we're, you know, continuing to look at them.
Mr. Clyde. Okay. Mr. Chairman, for the record, I would like
to submit a--an article from USA Today. And it says, ``U.S. has
spent billions in Ukraine war aid, but is that money landing in
corrupt pockets?'' It was updated as of yesterday, February the
27th.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 81.]
Mr. Clyde. Thank you.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman's time
has expired.
Mr. Clyde. Thank you very much----
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the ranking member.
Mr. Smith. Thank you very much.
Dr. Kahl, I want to follow up a little bit on what the--
what Chairman Rogers was asking about in terms of the policy
behind this. As the Under Secretary for Policy, you seem like
the appropriate person to ask that question to.
This policy is not without risk, I think we all know that.
First of all, it is costing an enormous amount of money in
terms of tens of billions of dollars. We are also acutely aware
of the fact that we do not want to get into a direct conflict
with Russia, and we don't want NATO to get into a direct
conflict with Russia.
But can you state for us clearly why you still believe this
is the correct policy to support Ukraine in this war, what the
implications are for our own national security? Because I think
it's a legitimate question, the American taxpayer, you know,
why are spending money.
It seems like a long way away. You know, and not to be
overly crass about it, but a lot of constituents ask the
question, what's all this got to do with me.
I think the policy is sound, but I want to give you the
opportunity to say here's why this matters to U.S. national
security.
Dr. Kahl. Well, thank you. Look, I think the entire
international system is grounded on the principle of
sovereignty and territorial integrity. It's at the heart of the
U.N. [United Nations]. And that may sound kind of wonky, except
that the entire rules-based order that that undergirds is what
ultimately minimizes the number of international conflicts and
wars that we see.
If countries like Russia are allowed to go on the march to
swallow up their neighbors, if might makes right, if the strong
do what they will and the weak suffer what they must, then the
rule of law will be replaced with the rule of the jungle. And
we will live in a very dangerous world.
And I'll just give you one example. If you're sitting in
Tehran or in Pyongyang or in Beijing, and you're contemplating
aggression against a neighbor, and in all those circumstances
that's conceivable, you're going to ask yourself what would be
the reaction of the international community.
And had the international community stood by, had the
United States not exercised its leadership to rally not only
the democracies in Europe and North America, but countries
around the world to Ukraine's aid, the lesson that dictators in
other countries would take is that aggression can--won't be
punished. And that it pays. And that would make the world a
much more dangerous place for Americans.
Mr. Smith. Very well stated. And I think one other argument
to make in this is a lot of people who are concerned about this
point to our policy in Iraq. And certainly there were a ton of
mistakes made there.
But the thing that a lot of people forget is on your point
of sovereignty, what kicked that whole thing out was Saddam
Hussein trying to take over Kuwait, and then setting his eyes
on Saudi Arabia. Now, how we handled that is highly debatable
in terms of the long term, both what we did in 1991, what we
did in 2003.
But the principle of sovereignty and the principle of
exactly what you just stated, not allowing a country like
Russia or China to think that they can simply grab territory by
force, is core to our own security and to the security of the
world long term.
And as we speak, we are very aware of the Taiwan situation
with China. But China, and I haven't added up the number of
countries, but it's more than a half dozen, have sovereign
territory now that China to one degree or another claims.
And if, you know, just like Russia says that Ukraine
shouldn't exist, they should be part of Russia, China has the
same argument in lands currently controlled by Vietnam, by the
Philippines, by Japan, by India, all across the world. It kicks
off a very, very dangerous situation if President Putin is
successful in Ukraine.
And I think we need to remember that even while we are
aware of the cost and while we are aware of the necessity of
making sure that we check where this money is going. Which, as,
you know, Mr. Storch outlined, I think we're doing.
But the policy itself is really crucial to peace and
stability in the world, and ultimately to our own national
security in the United States. None of that makes it easy. We
all want peace in Ukraine as quickly as possible.
But right now, as has been stated clearly, the path to
peace in Ukraine is simple. Putin can stop his war and take his
troops out of sovereign Ukraine. And that stops the war in the
blink of an eye. But until that happens, we have to support
Ukraine to force Putin to that choice.
So I appreciate you articulating that, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the ranking member. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Wilson, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Wilson. Thank you, Chairman Mike Rogers and Ranking
Member Adam Smith, for this very important bipartisan hearing
on the issues of Ukraine and immediately the effect that it has
on the Chinese Communist Party.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today. I
believe the world is in a global competition between
democracies with rule of law opposed by authoritarians with
rule of gun.
Today's conflict is war criminal Putin's mass murder in
Ukraine. This I believe if--Ukraine must be victorious to deter
the Chinese Communist Party from attacking the 24 million
people of Taiwan. Ukraine must be victorious to stop Iran from
its efforts to vaporize Israel as it develops intercontinental
ballistic missiles to devastate American families.
With that, Mr. Storch, there have been billions in U.S.
weaponry and financial aid flowing to Ukraine, and more coming
to stop war criminal Putin. We're all concerned about
accountability.
And the American people need to know, because somehow this
hadn't recognized, and that is that in all of the legislation
that's passed to provide for funding, there have been 39
provisions that provide for reports to be provided to Congress
on oversight and accountability.
And with that, what is the DOD Inspector General's plan,
and what are the broader coordination with the State Department
IG, USAID IG, and other relevant IGs, what's the structure to
protect the American taxpayer?
Mr. Storch. Thank you very much for the question. We are
actively engaged on an ongoing basis with the State OIG, the
USAID OIG, and all of our partners in the working group in
ensuring comprehensive oversight over all aspects of assistance
to Ukraine.
Obviously my office, the DOD OIG, has primary
responsibility with regard to the security assistance, and we
have, as we speak, approximately 20 ongoing and planned audits
and evaluations that cover every aspect of that security
assistance, including the broad range that I mentioned in my
statement.
We're also working with our partners to make sure that
there aren't any gaps with regard to the different types of
assistance that are being provided. We're reporting out
transparently. We did the Joint Strategic Oversight Plan [JSOP]
that I mentioned.
And we're going to continue to report out. We have a report
coming at the beginning of April under one of--under the NDAA
[National Defense Authorization Act] that will be providing an
update on our work. And we're going to continue to update the
JSOP and our other work so this Congress and the American
public are fully informed regarding our oversight efforts.
It's on us to ensure that there's appropriate oversight
across the board to ensure that taxpayer dollars are being
spent appropriately and the equipment is being used as
intended.
Mr. Wilson. And thank you so much for what you do. But
please, let's get this publicized so the American people can
trust what the expenditures are.
And Dr. Kahl, I am really concerned about foreign military
sales. Delivery to Ukraine? Hey, delivery to Taiwan. And our
allies are making the best of their ability to provide.
And then for example, we're providing 31 Abrams tanks.
Somehow the media presented that that we would not have any
tanks in the future. They leave out that we have 8,000 tanks,
Abrams tanks. We potentially have 22,000 actually, Abrams
tanks. But the 31 was presented as just debilitating the United
States.
We can do better. And so what's being done, particularly
working with Chairman Mike Rogers and others, to have an
expedited foreign military sales? It's absurd, with pre-
positioning of equipment when we hear that it may take a year
to get equipment to Ukraine.
Dr. Kahl. Well, thank you, Congressman. As you know, we
predominantly use two sets of authorities at DOD to get Ukraine
weapons: PDA, Presidential drawdown [authority], which allows
us to draw from stocks; and then USAI, which allows us to put
things on contract.
When we draw things out of stocks, things generally arrive
in Ukraine within days or a handful of weeks. When we put
things on contract, it depends. Sometimes it's weeks, sometimes
it's a handful of months. Sometimes it is longer than that.
So it really depends on which authority we are using. But
we have surged a tremendous amount of security assistance into
Ukraine. More than $31.7 billion in a year. I don't know that
there's any historical precedent for that. The vast majority of
that has come out of our stocks and has come very rapidly.
I'll just say I share your frustration with the broader
foreign military sales process. We are getting after that
problem through a ``tiger team'' at the Department of Defense
that has identified I think about 80 process improvements that
can streamline these things. It's still too slow.
And all I would say is that there's nothing, as we draw
things down from our stocks, that is making the FMS [foreign
military sales] problem worse. It's a different--it's kind of
an apples and oranges issue. Because FMS is more aligned with
the USAI authority in terms of putting things on contract.
Mr. Wilson. We need to follow the example of the Czech
Republic and then last week, Poland, providing equipment
immediately. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is expired. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Courtney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And again, I want to
begin by recognizing both your efforts and Ranking Member
Smith's efforts to hold recurring updates and briefings for--by
this committee. And in my opinion it has been that healthy
process which has provided the foundation for the bipartisan
votes that have passed supplemental funding really over the
last year.
And again, the witnesses have been part of that process, so
thank you for your contribution.
Just to--and you know, footstomp what I think my friend Mr.
Wilson just indicated, is that included in those supplemental
funding bills were actually specific, explicit language by
Congress directed towards the Offices of Inspector General to
be engaged at the maximum level.
And again, Mr. Storch, if you could just sort of confirm
that for the record that, again, you've been around for a long
time, thank goodness. But again, it also has been with
congressional support that your efforts are taking place.
Mr. Storch. Yes, sir, thank you very much for the question.
We very much appreciate that support. And we're committed to
the greatest possible transparency in our oversight efforts.
Mr. Courtney. So, and again, when we talk about a blank
check, I mean, I think clearly we in the Congress had our eyes
wide open when these large amounts of funding were authorized
and appropriated, that we wanted oversight at every step of the
way.
In dealing with, again, Ukraine's efforts to deal with
waste, fraud, and abuse, Dr. Kahl, there's an international
organization which kind of keeps score on countries', you know,
efforts in terms of dealing with corruption and fraud, and it's
Transparency International.
In the last year, at the same time that this unprecedented
almost infusion of money has been flowing in, not just from the
U.S. but also from the EU [European Union], Ukraine's position
on Transparency International's ranking actually improved. It
was one of the few countries in the world. It went up six
places.
And I wonder if you could just sort of, with that backdrop,
talk about your perspective as far as the seriousness with
which the Ukrainian government has approached this whole
question of making sure that this help goes to the right place.
Dr. Kahl. Thank you. You know, I've worked the Ukraine
issue now for about 9 years. And in our engagements over that
entire period, corruption was the number one issue we raised
with Ukrainian officials. And I think there have been
improvements over time, especially in the defense sector,
where--which is obviously most germane for DOD.
I will just tell you in our engagements with senior
Ukrainian officials now, I was in Kyiv in January, the
Secretary talks to his counterpart about every other week, the
importance of accountability, of transparency, and of combating
corruption are always points of emphasis for us.
But it's not just what we--what our talking points say. We
have to put, you know, our effort into it. We've provided the
Ukrainians with ways to track the systems we provide, to
include scanners and software.
We've done, when it's safe, a remote visit, visits to
sites. We don't see any evidence of diversion in our reporting.
We think the Ukrainians are using properly what they've been
given. But we'll continue to footstomp the importance of
accountability and transparency for all the reasons you
mentioned.
Mr. Courtney. And looking again at President Zelensky's own
efforts, I mean, I would say he courageously took steps to
remove officials, some very close even to his office and
political supporters of his own.
Which shows, I think, you know, tremendous commitment to
not just talking about trying to address this problem, but
actually taking action to remove people, which, you know,
again, I think just sort of demonstrates, you know, true
commitment. I think, you know, that should be also acknowledged
in terms of the seriousness with which, you know, he and his
administration is pursuing this goal.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to, as long as we're
entering newspaper articles, I would like to ask that the piece
in this morning's Washington Post, ``Zelensky Takes on
Ukraine's Top Internal Enemy,'' be admitted to the record.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 86.]
Mr. Courtney. And again, that walks through the whole
question of how they improved their score with Transparency
International in the midst of, you know, dealing with an
existential threat to their country.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman from Connecticut. Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Lamborn, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lamborn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
having this hearing. And thank you all for being here today.
General Sims, I'd like to ask you the first question I
have. Last week, Vladimir Putin announced the suspension of
Russia's participation in the New START treaty [Treaty on
Measures for the Further Reduction and Limitation of Strategic
Offensive Arms]. This followed an earlier declaration by the
U.S. State Department that Russia was violating the New START
treaty.
So it appears that Russia has taken New START hostage and
is using it to get us to stop funding Ukraine. Is the Joint
Staff developing plans and options should Russia further
violate its limitations in New START? For instance, if it
starts uploading its nuclear delivery systems above the caps.
General Sims. Sir, thank you for the question. Sir, I'll
save some fine-tuning on that question for our follow-on
session, if that's okay. And certainly pass any of the policy
implications to Dr. Kahl to answer.
But I would simply say we continue to maintain the
strongest nuclear force in the world. We continue to monitor
the nuclear situation around the world, to include Russia. And
if I was an American, I would not be worried about the nuclear
situation.
Mr. Lamborn. Very good. And Dr. Kahl, if you could follow
up on that. What are some of the diplomatic or other things
that the administration is doing in response to Russia's latest
stance on New START?
Dr. Kahl. Thanks. It's a really important question. Look, I
think as a practical matter, the suspension doesn't make a lot
of difference for the reason you mentioned, which is that they
were already out of compliance with the inspections regime,
using COVID [coronavirus disease] and other things as excuses.
It's also interesting that Putin decided to suspend as
opposed to leave the treaty. And I think that's actually an
indication that it's not effective leverage over us. It won't
be effective leverage over the Biden administration.
Yes, we believe arms control and strategic stability matter
for the safety of the American people and for the world. But
frankly, Russia is in no position for an unconstrained nuclear
arms race. They do not have the money, especially given the
strain on their military from the war, sanctions, export
controls.
So you know, I think this was a way for him to generate
some rhetorical headlines. But I think as a practical matter,
it has not changed the situation. Russia remains a dangerous
power with a lot of nuclear weapons, and we have to be vigilant
against that danger.
Mr. Lamborn. Okay, thank you. And I do think it was a
mistake for President Biden to re-up New START when he first
took office without any discussions at all with the Russians. I
think we could have perhaps gotten some concessions or some
further understanding. So I think that was a mistake.
However, I will be--I will compliment the President, and
the ranking member will be glad to hear this, I think it was
right for him to go to Ukraine recently. And I think that that
sent the right signal.
We all hope and pray that--to God that there is no use of
nuclear weapons by Russia in Ukraine, tactical or anything
else. And we don't want to give away what our response would be
should that happen, and a lot would depend on the specific
circumstances.
But what would be some of the consequences to Russia should
that unthinkable thing happen?
Dr. Kahl. Thank you for that, and I'm happy to talk about
this at--in greater detail in the classified setting. But what
I'll say here is the following.
We've made it very clear to Russian leadership at the
highest levels through intelligence channels, my boss Secretary
Austin to his Russian counterpart, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff to Gerasimov, our National Security Advisor to
his counterpart in the Kremlin, that any use of nuclear weapons
in Ukraine on any scale would be considered a world-changing
event that would bring about severe consequences far in excess
to anything the Russians have experienced to date.
And that a lot of the restraints we've been operating under
would no longer obtain in a world where Russia crossed that
threshold. But the good news is I don't think they're likely to
do so.
Mr. Lamborn. Yeah, and what they have to lose would be far
more than what they would have to gain.
And lastly, General Sims, Russia has made some, I think,
exaggerated claims that it has used hypersonic weapons in
Ukraine, just as they exaggerate a lot of things about their
capabilities. Can you shed any further light on that particular
question?
General Sims. Sir, we know they've employed advanced
conventional--conventional munitions. I wouldn't go into detail
here in this session on the particulars. I would tell you that
the--they're doing so at their--at great expense. They're
finding now that their weapons of all types are in--in dire
straits, in many cases.
And I think what they're also seeing is that the Ukrainians
have been very prepared for many of their weapons and are
shooting down their weapons at a very high rate.
Mr. Lamborn. Very good. Thank you again for being here, and
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes
the gentleman from California, Mr. Garamendi, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
the work that you're personally doing in reaching out and
trying to make sure that the supplies are getting to where they
need to go, particularly the journey that you took 2 weeks ago
to Greece, Romania, and Poland.
My question first goes to you, Mr. Storch. Thank you for
your detailed explanation of the various projects that you have
underway, you and your colleagues have underway. I'd like you
to very briefly, or as whatever necessary, summarize the
reports that you have provided over the last year, or year and
a half.
There seems to be two different pieces to that, one of
which you have already talked to, and that is suggested
improvements in the auditing, in the transfer of weapons and
the like. And if you'd like to go into that a little more.
And secondly, if you would summarize the findings of those
reports, following up on the question earlier about what you
actually found.
Mr. Storch. Yes, sir, thank you very much for the question.
As you say, the reports that we've issued to date over the past
year since the 2022 invasion really have fallen largely into
two categories. A couple of them have looked at issues that we
identified relating to the way in which the money that was
appropriated is being tracked and the way in which it is being
entered into the systems.
And so the concerns there are that if there aren't
additional improvements, that those could result in a lack of
transparency or impair the transparency of those funds. So the
Department has been making progress in those areas. We've
continued to look at that.
And as I mentioned, we've recently initiated an audit
that's looking at the actual execution of the funds
appropriated. So that's--that's sort of an ongoing priority, is
how is the money being spent. We did identify issues with the
systems and with the procedures in place, made recommendations
to help to address.
Mr. Garamendi. Let's be clear then, is the Department
following on your recommendations and making progress to
achieve the goals that you've stated?
Mr. Storch. So, yes, sir. The first management advisory
didn't actually have specific recommendations. It raised a
number of concerns. The second one did have one recommendation,
and that related to putting in place procedures that were more
robust in ensuring things were tracked properly.
The Department has made progress in that area. The
recommendation remains open, we're continuing to track it. And
then we'll continue to look at that in the course of the
ongoing audit.
Mr. Garamendi. And so you continue to look for perfection,
as you should.
Mr. Storch. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. The second thing, the findings that you--
beyond the recommendations for the procedures----
Mr. Storch. Right.
Mr. Garamendi [continuing]. The findings. Did you find any
indication that there was a diversion of equipment of any kind?
Mr. Storch. Again, the second set of projects that we've
released are evaluations looking at the controls that DOD has
over this end-use monitoring and enhanced end-use monitoring.
Once the weaponry goes into Ukraine, it--there needs to be
appropriate accountability and tracking. And so the DOD has
responsibilities to do that.
So in the first of those reports, we did make a number of
findings and recommendation. Most of those have been addressed
and the recs have been closed. There are a couple that are
outstanding relating to night vision goggles and steps that are
being taken.
The Department has made progress in those areas. And what
we're going to do is we're going to look at the current state
of that in connection with the newly announced EUM, EEUM
evaluation that I mentioned. So there's been progress, and
that's an ongoing process.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. And I would just comment quickly
I'm very pleased that you're setting up a very robust operation
in Ukraine itself, that you're reestablishing within the
embassy the various auditing groups necessary to carry it out.
Is that the case?
Mr. Storch. Well, what we have done, sir, is we've--we
forward deployed a significant number of people into the region
to do oversight over the supply and training mission, most of
which occurs before any weaponry crosses into Ukraine.
Then using some of the same techniques, frankly, we used--
not just my office, but across the IG community--during the
COVID pandemic, we're doing additional monitoring relating to
the EUM and EEUM and getting information from the military
personnel who are at the embassy regarding what's currently
being done.
If we need to go further and go in, we will. But at this
point, we have it covered.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you very much. The bottom line is that
the programs are working, that diversions are not happening,
and that the equipment's getting where it needs to go, is that
it?
Mr. Storch. We're doing oversight to make sure the
Department has placed all the controls it needs to make sure
that happens, sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Didn't quite get to what I'm talking about.
You've not found problems of any great significance, is that
correct?
Mr. Storch. Right. Well, again, a lot of these audits and
evaluations are pending, but with regard to the areas I've
mentioned, we have limited findings. The Department has been
addressing them. And we're going to continue to look at the
issue. So yes, that's correct.
Mr. Garamendi. Thank you.
Mr. Storch. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Wittman, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Wittman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to thank our
witnesses for joining us today.
We look at the gains that Ukraine has made with assistance
from around the world and what's happening to Russian forces.
Degraded presence, about 40 percent of its pre-war fleet of
tanks gone. And today, 97 percent of the Russian army is in
Ukraine. And even with that, they're struggling.
The issue is for us the munitions that we're providing to
Ukraine. In last year's NDAA, we provided both funding and
contracting tools to accelerate replenishing our munition
stockpiles, essentially our weapons magazines.
I want to talk, though, about where I think there's a
strategic mismatch. We give those contracting tools, yet how we
evaluate where the needs are to me is in contradiction to that.
The needs are supposed to be evaluated on the threats in
Europe. What's that--what's that threat scenario?
And as we see, the DOD has up to 2 years to determine that
threat scenario. So if we're looking at the scenario 2 years
down the road and whatever's happening at that time in Europe,
and we are today accelerating the replenishing of our munitions
stockpile, to me there's a mismatch.
Because what's--what--giving 2 years to determine what the
needs are, what the threats are, and we're spinning up today to
build weapons stockpiles that may be mismatched with what we
see 2 years from now doesn't seem to me to be a good policy.
So Dr. Kahl, can you tell us, based on our force structure
requirements on both munitions and ground forces in Europe, how
do we make sure that we are making the right determinations
about what to build today so we don't have, again, a mismatch?
I mean, we're talking about weapons magazines being
depleted today, but if we're building weapons that may not have
a role in where we need to be 2 years from now, how do we--how
do we correct that mismatch?
Dr. Kahl. Yes, thank you, it's a very important question.
So obviously we've made significant investments because of the
money that Congress has generously given us and the authorities
to spend it over longer periods of time to recapitalize our
munitions.
That means increasing production, but it also means
addressing supply chain bottlenecks and creating a longer term
demand so that industry is actually responsive. I think what
the Ukraine conflict showed is that frankly our defense
industrial base was not at the level that we needed it to be to
generate munitions.
So right now, our priorities are making sure that we are
increasing production for the things that we anticipate that
Ukraine will continue to need. So a good example is 155
millimeter ammunition for the NATO standard howitzers. But also
the Guided Multiple Launch Rocket Systems, the GMLRS, that
launch off the HIMARS systems.
Those are going to matter a year from now, 2 years from
now, 3 years from now, because even if the conflict in Ukraine
dies down--and nobody can predict whether that'll happen--
Ukraine is going to need a military that can defend the
territory it's clawed back and deter the Russians from doing
this again.
The other investments we're doing of course are to
replenish our own stocks. And there actually I think we're
relatively confident we're making the investments that we made
not only for Russia contingencies, but also for contingencies
vis-a-vis China, North Korea, Iran, et cetera.
But beyond that, we can go into some of the specific
details in the classified setting if you'd like in terms of how
we're making targeted investments.
Mr. Wittman. Well, that leads me to the next question. The
allocations that we're making today to Ukraine are based on a
pre-Ukraine Russian conflict scenario. So if we are holding
back those munitions based on that scenario, then are we
inadvertently holding back the things that Ukraine may need
based on what would be an antiquated scenario? So that I think
is a question.
And then also, how are the determinations made about what
we are doing to replenish our stockpiles and what we're sending
to Ukraine? How is that interacting with our needs in the
INDOPACOM [U.S. Indo-Pacific Command]?
Dr. Kahl. Yes, so actually it's a very important point. So
we have a total munitions requirement that is essentially a
metric against which we need munitions for a whole range of
contingencies. So they are not pegged to any one contingency,
it's a pool of munitions we can draw on from a range of
different scenarios.
We have adjusted that floor to account for the fact that
Russia is bogged down in Ukraine. Their land forces have been
badly attrited. It has changed the dynamic for a future Russia
contingency.
At the same time, we have requirements for operational
plans in other parts of the world, could be North Korea, Iran,
China, et cetera. So Secretary Austin is--has been laser-
focused on making sure that as we draw down from our own
stocks, we are getting Ukraine what it needs without taking
undue risk to those other plans.
And I think we have so far accomplished that. But we also
need to recapitalize so that we can build up that hedge in the
event that something bad happens elsewhere in the world.
Mr. Wittman. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman. Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Norcross, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And certainly
appreciate the ongoing insight and the most recent visit to the
region.
The amazing thing that the United States does better than
anybody in the world, hands down, is the logistics, the ability
to move men, equipment, resources is short of remarkable.
I just want to touch base, Chairman, and [inaudible] Mr.
Wittman, 3 years ago there were some disturbing reports on the
industrial base issues on our ammo plants, our explosives and
accelerants. And we had been very much focused on that.
Had we not actually sped up the recapitalization, I think
we would be even in a worse place. But we still have a quite a
ways to go.
My question goes to Dr. Kahl and the general.
Putin leaves no chance when he speaks to the people of not
only his country but the world but to imply the nuclear option
over and over again. And it finds an audience in the United
States. People are worried about what might happen.
We have seen time and time again there's a discussion about
the red lines and what they are. And if we go back a year what
a red line was then, certainly may or may not be the red line
of today. And that is why I want to ask about the evolving or
changing red lines.
The calculations that we have made, and HIMARS is one of
those discussions. Early on we didn't want to do it. What
calculations are going into effect that something that we are
providing is or is not going to change the red lines?
How do we determine what those red lines are, and how have
they changed since the beginning?
Doctor, if you could go first.
Dr. Kahl. Yeah, it is something we watch very closely, I
think for all the reasons that you have mentioned. Clearly,
Putin's rhetoric from the very outset of the war on nuclear
matters has been irresponsible and dangerous. We have attempted
not to take the bait, while in private making it clear to them
that if they were to cross certain lines of using nuclear
weapons on any scale, what a world-changing event that would
be.
As a general matter, I do not think that we are holding
back security assistance from Ukraine at the moment, largely
for escalatory reasons. I think most of the decisions we are
making on security assistance are driven first and foremost by
our assessment of what Ukraine needs right now, given the
amount of money that the American taxpayer has given the
Department to work with. How do we use that money for what they
need right now?
And then the other is, you know, what can we provide that
doesn't have huge impacts on our own readiness and our ability
to respond to our own national security crises in other parts
of, of the world.
So, really, those are the two things that we are measuring
against. I think at the moment we feel relatively comfortable
on where we are on the escalatory dynamic vis-a-vis Russia. But
it is something that we consult with our intel--intelligence
community colleagues constantly to make sure we are setting the
rheostat, you know, about right without self-deterring
ourselves.
Mr. Norcross. Thank you.
So, General, when we started a year ago there has been much
discussion from the committee and those in Congress about what
we are able to send to them. How much of an impact has that
``red line'' been? And has it changed since a year ago?
General Sims. Sir, I would tell you what we have sent over
the last year has made a gigantic difference to the Ukrainians.
If you start where we were last year at the onset, it was about
providing things at the moment that they needed. They were
Javelins. They were Stinger missiles. They were things that
they needed to defeat the Russian army as they came across the
border around the country.
Those things were provided in good order. They were used
extremely well by the Ukrainians.
As the conditions changed, so too did the requests from the
Ukrainians in terms of what they thought was necessary and, as
we talked with our Ukrainian counterparts, what we thought
would be most advantageous and available to them. All the
while, as Dr. Kahl mentioned earlier, balancing it against our
current readiness and our ability to meet any requirements
around the world.
Those have certainly morphed over time. And so, as you have
seen, sir, now, the provision of Bradley Fighting Vehicles, of
tanks. And our partners make these same assertions. They have
all been done with these things in mind.
And I feel very confident that as we go forward we will
continue to do so and make decisions in a very thoughtful and
understanding manner.
Mr. Norcross. Exactly my point, that we are not holding
back because of these red lines or nuclear threats. These are
actual determinations made by what is best for the Ukrainians
and their use at any time.
With that, I yield back. Thanks.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Dr.
DesJarlais.
Dr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate the
panel being here for this timely hearing on the oversight of
U.S. military support to Ukraine.
Mr. Storch, can you tell us roughly how much money has been
given total to the Ukrainian war effort since we began last
year?
Mr. Storch. Well, it depends a little bit how you count it.
But I believe it is over $113 billion, approximately.
Dr. DesJarlais. How much of that is for lethal aid or what
we would consider standard military equipment?
Mr. Storch. I am afraid I don't have that number at my
fingertips.
Dr. DesJarlais. Have you got a breakdown roughly, 60/40,
20/80 in terms of what is going to the government, what is
going to military aid?
Mr. Storch. There is security assistance, there is economic
assistance, there is humanitarian assistance. The numbers are
in the JSOP, but it is approximately, I think, a little over 60
percent of it is the military assistance.
Dr. DesJarlais. Okay. And I ask this question because
whether or constituencies back home are for or against this
war, they don't have the benefit of the hearings that we have,
the classified briefings that we have. And so, you know, we
want to know that we can tell the taxpayers that our money is
being spent wisely.
And this hearing today is coming on the heels of a SIGAR
[Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction]
report released this week titled ``Why the Afghan Security
Forces Collapsed,'' in which the Special Inspector General
reports, among other things, that rampant corruption gradually
eroded the capabilities of the Afghan National Defense and
Security Forces, as well as the legitimacy of the Afghan
government.
So, we need to make sure we don't make those same mistakes
in Ukraine.
And a month ago John Kirby claimed, from the
administration, that he has not seen any signs so far that our
budgetary assistance has fallen prey to any kind of corruption.
Would you agree with that statement?
Mr. Storch. So, on the issue of corruption, you know, one
of the reasons we do all these reviews is to ensure the
integrity of the systems in place and that controls are there
so to help to prevent it from corruption.
And as I mentioned, we have DCIS that is there to
investigate any allegations that might arise.
With regard to the Afghanistan report I would just say I am
aware that has been issued. Our folks are looking at that. But
it is obviously a very different situation in Ukraine, very
different mission. In Ukraine there aren't large numbers of
troops on the ground. It is not building the military from the
ground up. It is primarily a train and supply mission,
something our office is very well equipped to oversee.
Dr. DesJarlais. Right. And the Inspector General went on to
say in his report that the United States played into the hands
of political leaders and contributed to their corruption by
spending money faster than it can be accounted for.
So, I think when we say we spent roughly $100 billion, we
ought to break that down and have a clearer message from DOD.
And we have had hearings where we have suggested that to keep
the public onboard.
I understand what the strategy is and what the benefit is,
but we want to make sure the people back home get this. And it
didn't help last year, for example, in a briefing unnamed
senior officials said that there was about 100 Kamikaze
Switchblade drones provided to Ukraine, that they couldn't tell
where they were, who was using them, and didn't know if they
would ever know exactly where they had come from--or where they
would be used at. And so, those type of statements aren't
helpful.
But I think that you had mentioned earlier that we have a
proven model. And maybe you can elaborate and make us feel a
little bit better that this proven model that you are
referencing has worked somewhere else and that we are
accounting for the equipment that we are sending.
Mr. Storch. Yes, sir, absolutely. We do have a proven
model, I believe, using the lead IG, IG model that has been
used in overseas contingency operations showing how we can work
together as an oversight community to provide comprehensive
oversight.
So, we currently are engaged, for instance, on oversight
over the operation Enduring Sentinel mission, the over-the-
horizon counterterrorism mission that has followed on in
Afghanistan. And we have a number of projects at DOD OIG
related to that.
We are also coordinating with our partners. We report out
quarterly in public reports on our work in that area. It is
obviously an area where we have done a lot of other work as
well.
But the point of it is, with Ukraine we have not just the
three of us, but actually 20 different oversight entities,
including GAO [Government Accountability Office], including all
the military audit agencies, and all the rest working together
to ensure that there aren't any gaps, that we are covering the
waterfront and all types of assistance--security, economic,
humanitarian, other assistance. That we are doing oversight
over all of it so that the American public knows that the
taxpayer dollars are being spent appropriately.
Dr. DesJarlais. Is there a specific example, like loss
reports, that is due within a specific time, say 30 days? Or a
condition that they give us 100 percent accuracy on inventory?
Or is there anything in place that would make more clarity?
Because it seems like we all say that this is accounted for
but yet there is a lot of disparity when we ask for specific
examples of how we know this equipment's accounted for.
Mr. Storch. So, we are doing a robust series of oversight
projects to ensure the accountability of equipment from the
very beginning until it gets into Ukraine. And then once it is
in Ukraine we are doing continued work in that critical area. I
mentioned that----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 139.]
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Carbajal, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony today.
We recently marked the 1-year anniversary of Russia's
illegal invasion of Ukraine. During that year the United States
and many other nations have stepped up to provide aid. The
United States has provided approximately $30 billion in
security assistance. That has been instrumental in allowing
Ukraine to keep fighting.
It is important we conduct thorough oversight of taxpayer
dollars going to this cause. And I think we have been doing
just that.
Dr. Kahl, we want the war to end quickly and on Ukraine's
terms. You stated in your testimony that our goal is to put
Ukraine in the strongest possible position for future
negotiations.
Within the 5-year near-term focus areas, how is the
Department working with industry to maximize production in
support of Ukraine and in backfilling our defense stocks that
have been leveraged to date?
Dr. Kahl. Thank you for that.
So, DOD is working with industry to increase production of
certain capabilities to continue meeting the needs of Ukrainian
forces while ensuring that the United States is ready to defend
itself and our allies and partners. And this is that balancing
act.
And DOD has identified over $2 billion of industrial base
investments to increase and/or accelerate production of things
like Javelin, Stinger, HIMARS, these Guided Multiple Launch
Rocket Systems, 155-millimeter artillery shells, and Patriot
missiles.
And we are also trying to make the best use of the
multiyear authorities that Congress has given to us to make
sure that we are getting after the munitions challenges more
broadly.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Dr. Kahl, while we hope for a quick end to this conflict,
we must plan, obviously, for the long term. How do the five
focus areas evolve over time?
And what long efforts can we start planning for deployment
in the long term to ensure that Ukraine has what it needs for
continued defense against Russia that doesn't seem like it is
going to go away?
Dr. Kahl. Well, you know, as the President has said, we are
in it for as long as it takes. You know, Putin's theory of
success is that he can outlast everybody, outlast the
Ukrainians, outlast the United States, outlast NATO and the
rest of the world. We are going to prove that that is just the
latest of a string of miscalculations by Putin.
I think as Lieutenant General Sims noted, what we have
prioritized has adjusted across the course of the war. So, in
the initial period of the war, when it was essential for
Ukraine to win the battle of Kyiv and to use systems they could
get right now, right away, we emphasized anti-armor systems
like Javelin; man-portable air defense systems; loitering
munitions; drones; Soviet legacy ammunition, artillery and air
defense systems.
As the conflict shifted to the east, we focused on NATO
standard artillery systems and, also, providing them HIMARS and
the GMLRS.
This winter we have focused on more advanced air defense
systems, so think NASAMS [National Advanced Surface-to-Air
Missile System], Patriot, but also armored and mechanized
systems to help them change the dynamic going into the spring
and summer.
And so, we will continue that process as we move forward,
as Ukraine's needs change. And I do think it is incumbent upon
all of us to think about what Ukraine needs over the medium
term to make sure they can defend whatever territory they claw
back from the Russians, and deter the Russians from going at it
again when and if there is a halting to the fighting or, you
know, a peace settlement, or even if there isn't. And so, the
Department is focused on constantly iterating on that analysis.
Mr. Carbajal. Do you think we are succeeding to that end?
Dr. Kahl. I think we are.
Look, I think that if we are all honest with ourselves
about where we thought things would be a year ago when Russia
launched this invasion, I think it was a pretty dire,
pessimistic assessment. And while I don't know how the war is
going to end, I think we already know one conclusion for sure
which is Russia has lost. Russia has lost.
They intended to take over all of Ukraine. That didn't
happen. It is not going to happen.
They intended to divide NATO. NATO is stronger.
They intended for Russia to emerge out of this war a great
power in a multipolar world. They will emerge from this
conflict a shattered military power.
And so, again, I don't know exactly where the lines, the
final lines will be drawn when this conflict comes to a close,
but I know our policy has been successful in keeping a
sovereign, democratic, independent Ukraine alive, and ensuring
that Vladimir Putin suffers a loss.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Dr. Kahl.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Gaetz,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gaetz. Mr. Storch, you are our watchdog. Ukraine has a
corruption problem. Right?
Mr. Storch. There is a long history of issues with
corruption in Ukraine. I don't----
Mr. Gaetz. Infrastructure minister arrested for stealing
$400,000.
Deputy head of Zelensky's office can't explain where the
sports cars came from, so he had to resign.
Deputy defense minister resigned over contracting
corruption. But the Defense Ministry put out a statement that
his resignation was a worthy deed.
And the wife of a former Ukrainian politician was found
with $22 million in cash crossing the border into Hungary last
year.
It seems as though a lot of the zeal for enforcement of the
anticorruption effort seems to align with the Republican
control of the House of Representatives in our country. Maybe
that is a coincidence.
But let's get to this end-use monitoring you testified to.
The Arms Control Act of 1996 requires end-use monitoring
for certain defense articles that are sold or leased. Right?
Mr. Storch. Correct.
Mr. Gaetz. And there is no feature of anything we have
passed that exempts what we have given to Ukraine from those
requirements in the Arms Control Act. Right?
Mr. Storch. Not exempts. There are different provisions as
to how that plays out in different circumstances.
Mr. Gaetz. But that is controlling law, controlling policy.
And here is, here is the upshot. As you testify here today
you cannot testify truthfully under oath that the DOD has
complied with the policy and law regarding end-use monitoring
during all times of this conflict. Isn't that right?
Mr. Storch. So, I want to be careful here when I respond to
you, Congressman, to make sure that I am clear.
We are conducting a series of evaluations that look at the
controls that DOD has in place to ensure that they are taking
the steps that are required.
Mr. Gaetz. I get all that.
But here is the operative question: We haven't complied
with end-use monitoring according to the law with everything we
have sent to Ukraine to date, have we?
Mr. Storch. So, our 2020 report, which is our last public
report on this, made a number of recommendations. All of those
have been----
Mr. Gaetz. I know. I know. But you are sort of dodging the
question.
You cannot testify that we have complied with the end-use
monitoring requirements at all times during this conflict, can
you?
Mr. Storch. So, our, we have an ongoing evaluation right
now.
Mr. Gaetz. I get that it is ongoing. I am looking
backwards.
You cannot testify that everything has complied with the
law on the end-use monitoring, can you?
Mr. Storch. So, some of that gets into the classified
report that----
Mr. Gaetz. Right. Right.
Mr. Storch [continuing]. We issued previously.
Mr. Gaetz. But I think everyone watching this could see
that if you could testify to that, you would. You are citing a
classified report. I don't know why that report is classified.
I think the American people deserve to know if this 1996 law is
being followed or not. You can't testify that it is being
followed. And so I think they can draw reasonable conclusions
from that.
Do we have--Dr. Kahl, do we have DOD personnel in Ukraine
now?
Dr. Kahl. We do. We have a couple dozen at the embassy.
Mr. Gaetz. Other than the embassy, any other personnel?
Dr. Kahl. No.
Mr. Gaetz. How about CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], are
there training folks in Ukraine?
Dr. Kahl. I am not going to talk about that in an
unclassified setting. Happy to talk about that further in the
classified briefing.
Mr. Gaetz. Is the Azov battalion getting access to U.S.
weapons?
Dr. Kahl. Not that I am aware of. But if you have
information, I would be happy to hear it.
Mr. Gaetz. I seek unanimous consent to enter into the
record the Global Times investigative report that indicate--
that talks about training. It is from the Atlantic Council's
Digital Forensics Research Lab citing the Azov battalion was
even getting stuff as far back as 2018.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 89.]
Mr. Gaetz. Any reason to disagree with that assessment, Dr.
Kahl?
Dr. Kahl. Is this the--I am sorry, is this the Global Times
from China?
Mr. Gaetz. No. This is----
Dr. Kahl. That is what you read.
Mr. Gaetz. Yeah, it might be. Yes. Would that be a
reasonable----
Dr. Kahl. As a general matter, I don't take Beijing's
propaganda at face value.
Mr. Gaetz. No, no. Yeah, but just tell me if the allegation
is true or false. I mean, it----
Dr. Kahl. I don't have any evidence one way or the other.
Mr. Gaetz. Okay.
Dr. Kahl. As a general matter, I don't take Beijing's
propaganda at face value.
Mr. Gaetz. Fair. Fair enough. I would agree with that
assessment.
April 2022 President Biden is describing the supplemental
funding that we are providing to Ukraine. He says, ``It is also
going to help schools and hospitals open. It is going to allow
pensions and social support to be paid to the Ukrainian people
so they have something, something in their pocket.''
So, help me understand how the U.S. taxpayer is paying for
pensions in Ukraine is a good idea for our country?
Dr. Kahl. I would defer you to other parts of our
government. The Department of Defense doesn't have a role in
pensions in Ukraine.
Mr. Gaetz. You are a senior Biden administration official.
The President said that it is really important that we keep
funding the pensions in Ukraine.
I would observe that the U.S. Census Bureau says that in
2022 the U.S. pension shortfall is $1.4 trillion. So, while we
have a corrupt Ukrainian government, while we have our watchdog
here who can't say that we followed the law in end-use
monitoring, we have the President of the United States saying
we need to fund pensions in Ukraine, meanwhile the pensions of
our fellow Americans are in greater jeopardy.
Mr. Chairman, I see that my time is expired. But I seek
unanimous consent to enter a number of articles into the
record, if I may.
The Chairman. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
beginning on page 94.]
Mr. Gaetz. Very well.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Khanna, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Dr. Kahl, one of the experts that I was talking to told me
that Russia has six times the artillery as Ukraine. Is that
true?
Dr. Kahl. Not anymore. I think the reality is that we don't
know precisely how much artillery Russia has left. But we do
know that they have expended an extraordinary amount of it and
that they are running low, which is why they are turning to the
likes of North Korea and others in desperate search of more
artillery.
Mr. Khanna. Where would you put the ratio at now?
Dr. Kahl. It is hard to say. We could talk more about this
precisely in the classified setting.
And a lot of it also depends on the assumptions you make
about the viability of ammunition that Russia has had in
storage for 40 or 50 years, going back to the Soviet days. So,
it is a little bit of an art rather than a science.
I do think the Russians continue to have artillery. But
they are, they are suffering tremendous shortages at the front
of artillery, which is why they are turning to countries like
North Korea.
Mr. Khanna. And as someone who deeply admires the
President's policy and Tony Blinken's role, your role, and has
voted for all the aids packages, I guess my question is what is
your confidence level at this point that Ukraine will be able
to hold all the territory it currently holds in a war of
attrition?
Dr. Kahl. I think that, as Lieutenant General Sims has
testified, the front line right now is kind of a grinding slog.
And you are likely to see incremental gains on both sides.
So, for example, the Russians have made some incremental
gains around Bakhmut in recent weeks and months, but at the
cost of thousands and thousands of casualties in these human
wave attacks from the Wagner prisoners and others. So, you may
see small portions of territory change hands in the coming
weeks and months.
I do not think that there is anything I see that suggests
the Russians can sweep across Ukraine and make significant
territorial gains any time in the next year or so. And we are
making sure the Ukrainians have the capabilities to stop them
from doing that, while at the same time giving them the
capabilities to go on the offensive themselves to claw back
more territory.
Mr. Khanna. And I assume, Dr. Kahl, your assumption is
contingent on the House continuing to support Ukraine with aid,
or are you saying already with what we have given?
Dr. Kahl. No, I mean, well, so, first of all the House, the
Senate, the American people have been extraordinarily generous.
We have spent about $31.7 billion in security assistance over
the last year. We have about $12 billion remaining from the
money that you all provided at the end of last year for the
remainder of this fiscal year.
It is true that Ukraine continues to depend on assistance
from the United States and our allies and partners. And that
will be true for some period of time.
So, yes, if the world walked away from Ukraine, then the
balance would tip in Russia's favor. But there is no reason to
believe that----
Mr. Khanna. And how many more rounds of aid do you expect?
And I say this as someone who supported them and wants to
continue to support them. But just in terms of the American
public, how many more times do you think Congress needs to
provide aid?
Dr. Kahl. You know, it is difficult. And it is difficult
because we don't know the course and trajectory of the
conflict. The conflict could end 6 months from now, it could
end 2 years from now, or 3 years from now.
I think the President has said that the United States will
continue to support Ukraine for as long as it takes.
I think we have had a good conversation today about why
that is in the vital national interest of the United States.
So, I would hope that Congress would continue to be supportive.
But we should only come and ask for what Ukraine really
needs and, as this conversation has said, what we can account
for and demonstrate to the American people is actually
benefitting our interests.
Mr. Khanna. And what do you think at the end is the end
game? I mean, obviously we talk about a just peace. What does
that look like to you? And how does--how do we get there?
Dr. Kahl. Well, of course, Ukraine has detailed its
principles for a just peace. We just had more than 140
countries in the U.N. General Assembly essentially ratify their
approach.
I think a just peace would involve Russia withdrawing from
the territory that they have illegally occupied from Ukraine.
But, ultimately, the Ukrainians are going to be the ones that
determine what peace settlement is--is acceptable or not.
Our position has been to make sure that at whatever point
they enter into those conversations they do so from a position
of strength.
Mr. Khanna. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank the gentleman.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Waltz,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kahl, did we successfully deter Russia from invading
Ukraine? Did deterrence work?
We had a whole series of diplomatic, economic, sanctions,
the most powerful sanctions the world has ever seen, not to
mention our ongoing security assistance at the time. Did that
work? Was it successful?
Dr. Kahl. Clearly, because he invaded Ukraine, Putin was
not deterred.
Mr. Waltz. So, it is safe to say deterrence failed in this
case?
Dr. Kahl. Well, one possibility is also that Putin was not
deterrable as it related to going into Ukraine. He has been
deterred as it relates to going after the United States or
NATO.
Mr. Waltz. So, you would postulate that no matter what we
provided Ukraine, deterrence would have failed?
Dr. Kahl. I actually think our intelligence community is
split on this view. Their, their assessment was that almost no
amount of weapons prior to the conflict could have deterred----
Mr. Waltz. I ask this----
Dr. Kahl. [continuing]. Putin going into Ukraine.
Mr. Waltz. Well, I ask this in the sense that I was in
Ukraine the month before, and at the time the answer that the
Ukrainians were receiving, that we received was that Stingers,
too escalatory; anti-ship missiles, too provocative; long-range
artillery, certainly off the books and improbable. Other things
will take too long to train on.
And what we have seen is Stingers, too provocative; then we
provide them. Harpoons, too provocative; then we provide them.
HIMARS, can't do that; then we give them. Patriots, absolutely
not; then we give them. Tanks, Bradleys, heck no, takes too
long; now here we are a year later, we are providing them.
I think, you know, as we are patting ourselves on the back,
providing an ally the arms they need to defend themselves if we
have decided it is within our interests after entire cities and
whole regions have been devastated, probably isn't a good
strategy. Would you agree with that?
Dr. Kahl. Well, we did provide hundreds of millions of
dollars in assistance in the months leading up to the war. And
then, of course, Congress----
Mr. Waltz. Actually, if we really rewind the clock, I mean
starting in 2014, we provided only non-lethal aid until 2017.
Was that a mistake?
Dr. Kahl. Well, you know, I was then national security
advisor to then-Vice President Biden----
Mr. Waltz. Yes. That is why I am asking.
Dr. Kahl [continuing]. And he favored providing lethal
assistance like Javelins. That is--everybody knows that.
Mr. Waltz. And the Obama administration----
Dr. Kahl. Made a different decision.
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. Decided. Was that a mistake?
Dr. Kahl. I think in retrospect we should have provided
them Javelin missiles. That has been the position of then-Vice
President Biden.
Mr. Waltz. Which the Trump administration then provided?
Dr. Kahl. It was a complicated tale----
Mr. Waltz. Yes, right. All right.
Dr. Kahl [continuing]. I think as you recall from the
transcript.
Mr. Waltz. Let's just, let's move to burden sharing because
I think this is absolutely an issue I hear from my constituents
and something we need to, we need to address as a policy
matter.
The United States provided $30 billion in security
assistance. The next nearest is Germany at $3.5, a tenth of
what we have provided. U.K. less than $3 billion. France less
than a billion, they are in the hundred--hundred millions. And
poor Estonia has provided three times, just by percentage of
GDP [gross domestic product], what France has provided.
So, all in total, even though our economies of the EU and
the United States, roughly the same, the Europeans have
provided less than half of what--what we have. And we haven't
even gotten into the, you know, the rest that makes up the full
$100 billion.
Is that--is that fair? Is that effective burden sharing
from your perspective?
Dr. Kahl. Well, obviously we have been working with our
allies and partners throughout. And the Secretary of Defense
has held now nine of these Ukraine Defense Contact Groups. They
meet monthly.
Mr. Waltz. No, I understand.
Dr. Kahl. I am going to answer your question.
Mr. Waltz. Yes.
Dr. Kahl. If you actually take the top 20 contributors of
security assistance to Ukraine as a percentage of GDP, the
United States ranks tenth. And there are a number of European
countries that are above the bar. You mentioned Estonia.
Latvia----
Mr. Waltz. Sure.
Dr. Kahl. [continuing]. Is also up there. But countries
like Poland, Finland, Norway, Denmark, the Czech Republic,
Sweden are all above us as a percentage of GDP. And then some
of the countries that you mentioned are below us in terms of--
--
Mr. Waltz. But I am talking about the--I mean right on the
front lines, clearly in their interests, Germany in particular,
what have we done to get Germany, and France, and Italy, and
these large economies clearly in the heart of NATO, in the
heart of Europe, and directly, if we buy into the matter that
this is in our interests because if Putin slices through
Ukraine he will keep going, what have we done effectively to
get them to step up to the plate at least dollar for dollar or
dollar for euro?
Dr. Kahl. I mean, I think the Defense Department has
certainly worked alongside the White House and the State
Department on diplomacy in this regard from the very beginning.
That is why the Secretary of Defense holds these monthly
meetings. They started in Ramstein Air Base in Germany.
The Germans as of now have provided $3.58 billion. The U.K.
has provided $2.85 billion.
Mr. Waltz. I read out the statistics.
Dr. Kahl. Yes.
Mr. Waltz. I would just postulate going forward over the
long term, just as we had in the Gulf War where we had an
effective diplomatic effort to pay for this, this is a global
issue----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chair now recognizes----
Mr. Waltz [continuing]. I think we need to do a lot more to
[inaudible].
The Chairman [continuing]. The gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Keating, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Waltz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Keating. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank the Chair and the ranking member for having
this hearing on an ongoing basis on an important issue of
oversight.
This is an all-of-government approach that we have here.
Secretary Yellen is in Ukraine right now. And we do have
sanctions that no country has ever seen before.
In terms of your area particularly, Mr. Storch, or for
anyone that is here, some of those new sanctions, how helpful
will they be in terms of the people that are trying to skirt
those existing sanctions and get around them?
And how helpful will they be in the overall effort?
Mr. Storch. Well, I will just start from the oversight
perspective. We have this working group. Part of the working
group is the Department of Treasury OIG. So, it is probably
more a question for them than for the DOD OIG because we have
oversight over the security assistance.
In terms of a policy decision, that is not really sort of
what OIG's do, so I will turn it over to Dr. Kahl.
Dr. Kahl. I will just say I think, obviously, the sanctions
have put a dent in the Russian economy. We will continue to
magnify that.
I think from a DOD perspective, the bigger constraint on
the Russians is more likely to be the export controls which are
making it very difficult for Russia to recapitalize the
military that has been shattered in Ukraine.
Mr. Keating. Just a quick question: Does Germany have
different laws than we do in terms of their defense?
Dr. Kahl. I mean, all the allies and partners we work with
have different constraints, different laws.
You know, Germany was not--one of the reasons we didn't
provide lethal assistance back in the Obama administration was
because Germany was so opposed to doing it. So, the fact that
they provide any lethal assistance was a huge sea change for
them.
Now, I know that is frustrating for a lot of folks who want
our allies and partners to do the most they can. We share that
desire. But, yes, our allies and partners all have their own
domestic political constraints, their own domestic regulations.
And a lot of them have had to change their own laws and
practices in order to provide the historic support for Ukraine
that we have seen.
Mr. Keating. Question. You know, when we read something in
the newspaper regarding someone being dismissed from his
position in Ukraine and being replaced, you know, this is a
sovereign issue that each country has. They make their own
decisions.
But just a question, and I want to do this so we can avoid
classified setting, just a question generally. If those
decisions are made and they deal--do deal with something that
would be a concern in our oversight and everything, is that
communicated to the U.S. and their allies informally?
Dr. Kahl. I would say sometimes we are aware of the moves
before they happen, and sometimes we are aware when we read
about them just like you do. I think the point from our matter
of U.S. policy is the importance of getting after corruption,
in Ukraine or anywhere else, is at the top of our points of
emphasis with Ukrainian leaders.
I do think they are taking these issues seriously. I think
it is a problem they are going to continue to work on. But the
fact that they are making any progress in the midst of this
existential fight I think is quite remarkable, frankly.
Mr. Keating. Thank you.
Mr. Storch, just an observation. I was a prosecutor before
I was a Member of Congress. And, you know, when there is a line
of questioning that occurs and your job is one of monitoring
and an ongoing investigation, whether something is there or not
but you are in the process of doing it, and you are asked a
question publicly about what the outcome of that might be
before it ever occurs, that must put you in a very difficult
position to answer a question and it might give the perception
you are not answering the question when, indeed, you are not
able to answer the question if you are doing your job properly.
Do you want to comment on, sometimes on the difficulty of
that line of questioning when it is posed in a public setting
like it is here?
Mr. Storch. I appreciate, very much, the observation. And
that is exactly right, obviously.
You know, our job in the IG community is to do independent
oversight. And as an old boss of mine used to say, we hit it
right down the fairway. I can't do that in golf, but my office
does that in oversight. So, we are looking at these issues. We
are trying to determine what happens. And we are going to
report out as transparently as we can.
But to try to get ahead of an ongoing audit, or evaluation,
or to talk about, I can't even begin to speculate about
investigations, puts me--puts us in a very difficult position.
So, I appreciate the sensitivity.
If I can on corruption, I would just add when I was over in
Kyiv, that was one of the things we really emphasized, both
myself and my counterparts from the other two OIGs. And we met
with everybody up to the prime minister and down the minister
of defense and others, the importance of ensuring that
corruption was being addressed and that we are being
transparent about it. They all said they understood that.
Now, obviously, as a career prosecutor and an IG, you know,
we are in the trust-but-verify business. But certainly they
indicated that they understand that issue.
And, finally, I would just add that sort of in one of
life's coincidences, I actually previously worked in Ukraine as
a resident legal advisor for the Department of Justice, working
on anti-corruption issues. So, I hope that perspective helps my
office as we look at what is going on here.
Mr. Keating. I yield back.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Indiana, Mr. Banks, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kahl, you helped write the dangerous Obama-era Iran
deal, the JCPOA [Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action]. You
helped negotiate it.
Last November, President Biden was caught on video saying
the deal was dead. Yet, just this month the administration has
renewed sanctions waivers that are key to the deal.
Why, in your opinion, is the Biden administration so
hellbent on reentering the new Iran deal?
Dr. Kahl. Thank you for your question.
Just as a technical matter, I was not involved in the
negotiation of the Iran deal.
Mr. Banks. You helped write it. Is that fair?
Dr. Kahl. I didn't. But I----
Mr. Banks. You were, you were involved with it?
Dr. Kahl. Well, I worked in the administration when the
deal was negotiated.
The President, and Secretary Blinken, and others in the
administration have made clear that we are not about to reenter
the JCPOA any time soon.
Mr. Banks. Why did they attempt to reenter it?
Dr. Kahl. Well, because Iran's nuclear progress since we
left the JCPOA has been remarkable. Back in 2018, when the
previous administration decided to leave the JCPOA, it would
have taken Iran about 12 months to produce one fissile, one
bomb's worth of fissile material. Now it would take about 12
days.
And so, I think there is still the view that if you can
resolve this issue diplomatically and put constraints back on
their nuclear program, it is better than the other options. But
right now, the JCPOA is on ice because there was an arrangement
on the table last summer that the Iranians were not willing to
take.
And, of course, Iran's behavior has changed since then, not
the least of which their support for Russia in Ukraine, which
is the subject of the conversation here today.
So, I don't think we are on the precipice of reentering the
JCPOA.
Mr. Banks. So, you are declaring defeat for the new Iran
deal on behalf of the Biden administration?
Dr. Kahl. I think our view, actually I am just stating what
both the President and Secretary of State have already said,
which is that the JCPOA is not on the horizon in the near term.
The administration's position remains that a diplomatic
deal to put constraints around Iran's program remains the best
alternative to prevent Iran from getting a nuclear weapon.
But the President has also made clear that his policy is
that Iran will not get a nuclear weapon, period. And that if a
diplomatic outcome is not possible, that we have other options
to deal with that problem.
Mr. Banks. So, does it concern you that Putin and China are
on the side of negotiating the same deal that you helped craft
during the Obama administration?
Dr. Kahl. There are no active P5+1 [U.N. Security Council's
five permanent members plus Germany] negotiations, so China and
Russia being at the table or not being at the table are not
terribly germane.
Mr. Banks. Can you shed light for us on why we tapped
Russians to help negotiate on America's behalf in the renewed
negotiations during the Biden administration?
Dr. Kahl. It is not clear to me what you are referencing.
But I think that during the Obama administration, at least, the
Russians were able to compartmentalize differences that we had
in some areas and the common view of not wanting Iran to get a
nuclear weapon.
I think we are not in the same place right now because the
Russians, because of how badly they are doing in Ukraine, are
becoming increasingly dependent on Iran and, therefore, I think
are a lot less likely to put pressure of any kind on Iran to
accede to any diplomatic agreement because they are trying to
get Iran to ship them more drones, missiles, and other
capabilities.
Mr. Banks. In 2021, did you expect the invasion of Ukraine?
Dr. Kahl. In 2021? Well, in 2021 we warned the world
about----
Mr. Banks. Before.
Dr. Kahl. I am sorry?
Mr. Banks. You expected it? You anticipated it?
Dr. Kahl. Beginning in the fall I think it is of public
record, beginning in the fall we had very good intelligence
that Vladimir Putin was putting the pieces in place to be able
to carry out a large-scale invasion. We began to downgrade,
declassify, and share that information with the world in the
fall of 2021.
Mr. Banks. Then why--shed light for us then, why did the
Biden administration lift sanctions on Nord Stream 2 if we
anticipated it?
Dr. Kahl. Well, I think the timelines are different in
those. You should correct me if the record is different. I
believe the Nord Stream conversations were several months
before. And, largely, that was in order to stay united with
Germany, but also to give us a leverage point.
In fact, what is interesting is that had that not gone
forward, the ability of Germany to then essentially walk away
from the deal would not have been effective punishment or
leverage over the Russians. But these were not linked in time.
Mr. Banks. In hindsight should we regret the decision to
lift those sanctions?
Dr. Kahl. You know, I work at the Defense Department. I
wasn't involved in any of those deliberations, so I would
really defer----
Mr. Banks. You don't have an opinion about it?
Dr. Kahl. [continuing]. Those questions to the Treasury
Department and State Department.
I don't have, I don't have an opinion on that conversation.
No, I don't.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Dr. Kahl. Thanks.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Houlahan, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Houlahan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I have been a staunch advocate for providing support to
Ukraine since President Putin's unjustified invasion just about
a year ago. Given my past in the Air Force, it probably isn't a
shock to anyone that I am particularly advocating for the
transfer of American aircraft. In fact, I started doing that in
April of last year and, most recently, in a letter with my
colleagues from the For Country Caucus.
We asked President Biden to transfer specifically F-16
aircraft to the Ukrainian military, as President Zelensky
requested.
I understand that on Friday that President Biden said in an
interview that Ukraine ``doesn't need F-16s now.'' And on
Sunday, NSA [National Security Advisor] advisor Jake Sullivan
emphasized that ``F-16s are a question for a later time.''
Last year I also proudly co-led a bill with our former
colleague Rep. Kinzinger to authorize funding to provide
training for Ukrainian fighter pilots, recognizing that, of
course, training may need to happen before they are ready to
fly our jets, and in the event that we ultimately do transfer
them.
We submitted this language for inclusion in last year's
NDAA. And the final law included that language authorizing the
United States to provide training for Ukrainian soldiers, both
on manned and unmanned aerial capabilities, including tactical
surveillance systems, and fixed and rotary aircraft, such as
attack, strike, airlift, and surveillance aircraft.
So, my two or three questions for you. Under Secretary
Kahl, in your written testimony you noted that you have
expanded U.S.-led training of Ukrainian air forces on combined
arms and joint maneuver operations. Could you speak to whether
or not this training included aircraft such as authorized by
the fiscal year 2023 NDAA?
That is my first question.
My second question also for you is what exactly would a
later time be as, you know, quoted by President Biden?
And we may, finally, have to save this for our classified
briefing, but could you please elaborate on what information
the President is relying on, or perhaps was relying on, when he
said that Ukraine doesn't need F-16s now, despite pleas from
Ukraine's own president?
Dr. Kahl. Thank you for that.
So, no, we have not started training on F-16s. Our
assessment is that a delivery timeline for F-16s, even on the
most expeditious timeline, and the training timelines are
essentially the same, that is they are about 18 months. So, you
don't actually save yourself time by starting the training
early, in our assessment.
And since we haven't made the decision to provide F-16s,
and neither have our allies and partners, it doesn't make sense
to start to train them on a system they may never get. I mean,
they could end up getting British Tornadoes, or Gripens, or
Mirage aircraft. And, therefore, you wouldn't want to train
them on F-16s.
So, it just, in our judgment, is not the appropriate time
to start training.
It is true that the President has, and the National
Security Advisor have said that, you know, we don't see F-16s
as the top priority right now. The President did have this
conversation with President Zelensky in Kyiv last week. It is a
priority for the Ukrainians but it is not one of their top
three priorities.
Their top priorities are air defense systems, that is
keeping their interceptors and air defense network alive
against Russian cruise missiles and the like, and Iranian
drones.
Artillery and fires, which we have talked about, and armor
and mechanized systems.
A couple of just data points on F-16s that I think actually
speaks to your second and third questions. We have looked at
this very carefully about what it would take to get Ukraine F-
16s. So, if we were to do new production it would take 3 to 6
years to get them F-16s. We could look at older-block F-16s
that could potentially deliver on a faster timeline, let's call
it 18 to 24 months. Maybe you can even shave a few months off
of that.
Then the question would be how many? The Ukrainians have at
times asked us for as many as 128 fourth-generation aircraft, a
mix of F-15s, F-18s, and F-16s.
Our Air Force estimates that over the long term Ukraine
would probably need 50 to 80 F-16s to replace their existing
air force. If you do that--if you did that with new F-16s, so
say block 70, 72s, that would cost $10 or $11 billion.
If you did it with older block 30 or 32 aircraft, and let's
imagine you only did half, 36 of those, it would still cost $2
to $3 billion. And just as a reminder, that would consume a
huge portion of the remaining security assistance that we have
for this fiscal year.
So, these are the tradeoffs that we are making in real
time. Would it make sense to, you know, spend $3 billion on a
capability that will arrive a year and a half from now when
that $3 billion is needed for Patriot interceptors, or more
Bradley Fighting Vehicles, or more 155-millimeter ammunition,
or more GMLRS, et cetera, et cetera?
And so that is the trade--tradeoffs we are making at the
moment.
Ms. Houlahan. I am nearly out of time. I appreciate that.
I guess my only concern is when we started talking about
this 10 months ago, 10 months has gone by. And so I just don't
know when the clock should start. And when we see that this----
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 139.]
Ms. Houlahan. I appreciate it. I yield back.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. Very important topic, very timely.
I had a couple more questions about the end-use monitoring
for Mr. Storch.
Your office published a report in October stating that the
Department of Defense was unable to provide end-use monitoring
in accordance with DOD policy because of the limited U.S.
presence in Ukraine. So, the report identified the challenges
that the DOD personnel who are responsible for conducting end-
use monitoring and enhanced end-use monitoring face when there
is no U.S. personnel present, or at least limited presence
there.
Have we learned any lessons or discovered any best
practices to improve that end-use monitoring in Ukraine despite
the lack of people there on the ground?
Mr. Storch. So, to be clear, the report that was issued in
October of 2022 was a classified report. So, happy to talk more
in detail about that during the later session.
I believe it is accurate to say that what the report did is
it acknowledged the challenges that are faced in those
circumstances such as they were in Ukraine, and the steps that
were being taken at the time to try to address those.
Now, as I say, happy to talk more.
The reason we initiated the current evaluation, and the
reason I didn't want to get ahead of what we are finding, is
that as the situation changes, and conditions on the ground
evolve, we want to go back and we are going back and looking at
what is going on now, what steps have been taken to try to
address those challenges, and where they are, and how things
move forward. And, frankly, Congressman, given the importance
of the issue, I think that is something we are going to be
looking at as long as this goes on. Right? And so, that is
where we are.
Mr. Johnson. And I think we agree we have to do that. We
owe it to all involved.
And I know that there are classified portions. There
probably are unclassified things that you could discuss. But
does the Department have any concerns about the self-reporting
that is coming out of Ukraine?
So, you know, specifically Ukraine, we all know Ukraine has
a documented history of corruption and government waste in the
past. I know a lot of that is being alleviated. But what gives
you confidence that the Ukrainians are being entirely
forthcoming and transparent with us when it comes to what we
have seen so far?
Mr. Storch. So, you know, at some level that is why we do
these audits and reviews; right? Okay, so we want to go, we
want to look at the evidence, and then be able to assess
independently where things are.
As I mentioned, I went to Kyiv. We met with the prime
minister, we met with the minister of defense. They told us
they understood the importance of addressing corruption.
When we were out there actually, coincidentally, a number
of corruption cases had been announced. They very strongly
pointed out those did not involve U.S. security assistance or
U.S. assistance generally. But having said that, they were
corruption cases. And the point they were making is they were
trying to address them.
So, as I say, I have got a long history. I have been going
out to Ukraine and working out there on behalf of the United
States Government for more than 15 years, and in the anti-
corruption area. And so, I, you know, I hear what they are
saying.
And then we are in the trust-but-verify business. And the
way we do that on this issue is by doing these evaluations that
look at what is actually going on. Because, again, there is
sometimes a misunderstanding. We at the DOD OIG, we don't go
out and count the--count the missiles. Right?
Mr. Johnson. Right.
Mr. Storch. We don't do the monitoring. It is up to the DOD
to meet the requirements of the law and the policies that
implement it regarding monitoring. And then we do oversight to
make sure that is happening, that it is happening in accordance
with the law, and it is happening appropriately. And we make
recommendations to help the DOD to improve that.
So, that is the process we are engaged in now and, as I
say, I think we are going to continue to be engaged in.
Mr. Johnson. There are just some inherent challenges, as we
are acknowledging, that when people are--we don't have DOD
personnel there. So, we want to ensure, of course, that, you
know, sensitive weapons end up where they are supposed to be.
And do you think that we need U.S. inspectors on the ground to
do that? Or I mean, we are trust but verify, what are the
details of that, I guess?
Mr. Storch. I am sorry, do you mean from my office or DOD
personnel?
Mr. Johnson. Well, U.S. inspectors.
Dr. Kahl. I can talk to that a little.
Mr. Johnson. Okay.
Dr. Kahl. I can talk to that a little bit.
So, first of all, you know, we are not just taking the
Ukrainians' words for it. They are, they provide us information
on their inventories, their transfer logs.
We have provided them handheld scanners. That data gets
transmitted directly back to us so that we can keep custody.
We have shared NATO standard inventory and logistics
software, which we also have access to that data.
And then, of course, we do have a presence at the embassy.
We have an Office of Defense Cooperation. And they have done
six different site visits out from Kyiv. These are day trips.
That is a dangerous place, and we don't have outposts across
the country. And they have seen no signs of diversion, or that
the Ukrainians are not following procedure.
So, look, this is an active combat zone. And it is not like
Iraq and Afghanistan where we have thousands of soldiers all
over the country. So, there are inherent restrictions. But we
are trying to maximize the use of technology and the people we
do have on the ground to get the best site picture as possible.
And then, of course, the IG will do oversight to make sure we
are doing our job the right way.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from New Jersey, Ms.
Sherrill, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
I recently met with many of our NATO allies and members of
the Ukrainian Parliament, and two things really became clear.
One is that U.S. leadership has been effective. We have
overseen a lot of the support for Ukraine. And our allies
appreciate that, as well as our intelligence sharing.
The Chairman. I don't think your microphone is on. Yeah,
you might want to borrow Ms. Escobar's or Ms. Slotkin's.
Ms. Sherrill. Steal Ms. Slotkin's.
The Chairman. There you go.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you.
I was saying that two things have really become clear. U.S.
leadership has been instrumental in this fight and has been--
that has been noted by our allies across the world, and
appreciated.
But sadly, what has also become clear is the broad-scale
use of war crimes by the Russians. Kidnapping of children, over
6,000 verified cases. And that is simply what we are able to
verify. I would say that is very low.
Rape, rape of mothers in front of their children, young
children. Rape of daughters and mothers.
As I am hearing from my Ukrainian community as they come
into the district, targeting of civilian infrastructure.
And so, it becomes clear. And when you hear from the
Ukrainian parliamentarians you hear that they believe this is
an attempt by the Russians to demoralize them, to make them
want to quit this fight, when in fact it has had the opposite
effect and understanding of why this fight is so important.
And so, that is why we on this committee take our, take our
job so very seriously for making sure that we can support
Ukraine. And the only way we can continue to do that
effectively is with the support of the American people.
And so, our understanding of the oversight, our
understanding of how Ukrainians are overcoming their history of
corruption is so important so we can convey it.
And I--I really appreciate your explanation of all of the
measures we have in place. But I don't think what is coming
through is what I heard when I was on the ground in Kyiv from
the embassy, that they are seeing all--the weapons that come in
get to the front. They are getting pictures of those weapons on
the front lines. They are seeing them in use. They feel very
confident that the weapons that we provide them at the border
of Poland are in fact making it to the front. And we are
certainly seeing their effective use time and time again.
Can you talk a little bit more about why we believe that
the weaponry that we have sent to Ukraine is in fact making it
to the front, and how we have not seen the use--we have not
seen those weapons, for example, for sale on international
markets?
And maybe that is a question for Dr. Kahl. I think, Mr.
Storch, you are doing the aftermath of it. But how do we feel
right now in time about providing all the assistance we have
provided to Ukraine and our confidence that it is actually
getting where we want it to go?
Dr. Kahl. So, part of it is what we are seeing and part of
it is what we are not seeing.
So, what we are not seeing is any evidence of significant
diversion. I think our assessment is if some of these systems
have been diverted it is by Russians who have captured things
on the battlefield, which always happens. But that there is no
evidence that the Ukrainians are diverting it to the black
market or some other [inaudible].
That is not surprising, given the intensity of the fight
and the fact that they are clearly using what we are providing
them and what our allies and partners are providing them to
maximum effect. So, they are asking us for more because they
are using everything that we have provided them.
I would just say as a general matter, you know, the
inventory comes in to the various places in Europe where the
security assistance flows in. All that inventory is taken note
of. It is scanned, et cetera. It gets given to the Ukrainians.
They are responsible for giving us the information on where it
ends up and the logs of that information, sharing with us
digital confirmation of where things go.
They also have scanners. That information comes back to us.
And they have this NATO standard software that helps keep
inventory, which we also have access to that information. And
we do these site visits.
So, look, this is an active war zone. There are always
going to be things that you don't know are happening or you
don't see. But we are not seeing any evidence of systemic
diversion of the equipment that the United States has provided.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you.
And in my final few seconds, is there more we could be
doing as a committee to support ensuring that the weapons are
being used appropriately?
Mr. Storch. Well, I would just say hearings like this are
great. I think oversight and transparency is really important.
The things that Dr. Kahl talks about, that is the
information that we are getting as we have our teams out there
doing evaluations, looking at every aspect of the security of
this equipment from the beginning until it gets to the front
lines in Ukraine. And to make sure that everything that can be
done is being done to ensure that it is being used properly and
as intended.
So, I think hearings like this are great. And we appreciate
the committee's support as we do our oversight. And we will
keep you informed as we go forward.
Ms. Sherrill. Thank you. With that I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlelady.
Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Mrs.
McClain, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to thank Mr. Rogers for giving me the
opportunity to go on a CODEL [congressional delegation] and
actually see the inventory of weapons that we are sending, and
just how they are getting from point A to point B and how we
are tracking them. You know, that, I can assure you, raised my
level of confidence.
There is a saying: one look is worth a thousand reports.
But I want to shift gears for just a moment because
although I think we are doing some things very well, I think we
need a little bit of a reset with the American people, or I
should just say my constituents in my district.
They have been raising concerns with me about our
involvement in this war. They are worried that we are getting
dragged into a never-ending war with no clear and precise
outcome that has been, in their opinion, right, perception is
90 percent of reality, that has a clear end in sight.
They believe that we are spending money and resources on a
fight overseas rather than getting our own fiscal house in
order.
If you could, and anyone can answer, in simple terms just
lay out to the American people the reasons why it is so
important for Ukraine to defeat Russia in this war,
particularly from the eyes of the Americans?
So, what is the implications for the United States if
Russia actually does defeat Ukraine?
Dr. Kahl. I think the implications would be both in Europe
and felt around the world. You know, the United States did get
dragged into two world wars in Europe because aggressors
weren't stopped. Aggressors, you know, initiated their
conflict. The free world didn't hang together. The aggressors
weren't deterred, they weren't stopped. And so the United
States eventually was dragged into those conflicts. So, we
don't want to see that happening again.
Mrs. McClain. So, it is a deterrent--and I don't mean to
put words in your mouth--but it is more of a deterrent so we
don't end up into a world war?
Dr. Kahl. I think it is to demonstrate to other would-be-
aggressors that if they engage in the type of aggression that
Russia has, they would face similar consequences.
And I think it will matter very much, for example, if you
are sitting in Beijing wondering about crossing the Taiwan
Strait. You will ask yourself, if I do that will the world
react like they did when we went after and absorbed Hong Kong,
which was to just kind of----
Mrs. McClain. Yes.
Dr. Kahl. [continuing]. Look the other way? Or the way the
world reacted in Ukraine?
And if it is the latter, then aggression across the Taiwan
Strait is a lot less likely.
Mrs. McClain. And can you expand on that, sir, just a
little bit more? What would a Russian victory or defeat mean
for China?
Dr. Kahl. Well, I think, first of all, Russia is China's
closest ally. They, of course, signed a strategic partnership
without limits shortly before the war.
We have seen growing indications that China might be
considering providing Russia with some assistance, lethal
assistance, which would be very troublesome.
So, China has a stake in the outcome here. But, also, I
think China would, you know, they speak a lot about the
importance of sovereignty and territorial integrity. But,
frankly, China would benefit greatly from a world that allowed
big powers to gobble up their small neighbors.
Mrs. McClain. And would you care to comment, what would the
loss of Ukraine mean for NATO?
Dr. Kahl. Well, first of all, Ukraine is not going to lose.
There will be no loss of Ukraine. I think Vladimir Putin hoped
that that would happen. It is not, it hasn't happened, it is
not going to happen.
Ukraine continues to maintain most of its territory. They
are fighting tenaciously. The Russians do not have the
capacity, in my view, to take over Ukraine.
But, obviously, if they were to do so it would position
Russian forces and all the developments inside of Ukraine right
on Ukraine's door--I mean right on NATO's doorstep as it
relates to Poland and the Baltic States, which is I think one
of the reasons why you have seen Poland and the Baltic States
so engaged in Ukraine.
Mrs. McClain. And can you talk a little bit about the
economic impact that that would, that that would mean, or that
would have on the United States?
Dr. Kahl. Well, I think, you know, you have already seen
that Russia's aggression, especially their--what they have done
to limit the ability of grain to get to global markets through
the Black Sea, has already had an impact on global security,
writ large.
Obviously, the energy instability which is generated by the
war has also had an economic consequence.
So, I think the war is already having significant
consequences because of Russia's aggression. And had it been
unchecked, I think those consequences would have been worse.
Mrs. McClain. And we would have been farther along.
Thank you. With that time, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Texas, Ms. Escobar, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
express my gratitude, Mr. Chairman, to you and the ranking
member for these ongoing conversations and this opportunity for
us to provide oversight and for the American people to feel
comfort, I hope and I believe, with the information that is
being delivered.
I would like to thank our witnesses as well.
You know, I would be remiss if I didn't remark on the
incredible change that I have seen happen over the last 3 years
since my--since I attended the Munich Security Conference in
2019 versus the Munich Security Conference last week or 2 weeks
ago, whenever it was.
When I was there in 2019, there was significant question
about the West and whether the West would continue to support
NATO and just the fears about how untethered things seemed. But
last week, or the week before, whenever it was--sorry, time
escapes me--but this year's Munich Security Conference, the
incredible unity and the strength demonstrated by our allies
and our friends, especially with regard to Ukraine and our
defense of democracy.
And I am very proud of the role that the United States has
played in rebuilding NATO and ensuring that the West has come
together in a way to defend our friends and allies and help
stop the Russian aggression.
And I would like to, Dr. Kahl, just in that vein, because
there has been just such a lot of conversation, obviously,
about the F-16s and about why the United States and some of our
friends are not stepping up as quickly as some would like. My
colleague, Representative Houlahan, she was about to ask a
question, and I would like to follow that up, because I am
curious as well.
But her question, she started as her time ran out, when
should the clock start on those F-16s? You know, you laid out
for us very clearly and very effectively, you know, the
considerations involved, and also the financial implications as
well, and that is on Congress, right, to make sure that we
provide the continued support and to put our money where our
mouth is.
But when should that clock start ticking for the F-16s? And
is that something you can discuss in this setting?
Dr. Kahl. Look, I think it is--you know, a more modernized
Ukrainian air force will be important in the medium and long
term for Ukraine to continue to defend the territory that it
claws back, and to deter Russia in the future. So I think there
is a medium- to long-term requirement.
The challenge, of course, is even if it was a short-term
requirement, we couldn't get it to them immediately anyway, and
we don't assess that it is the highest short-term priority.
And, by the way, neither do the Ukrainians. The Ukrainians'
priorities are air defense systems, so they are integrated air
and missile defense systems, artillery and fires, armor and
mechanized. And because every dollar you spend on one is a
dollar you can't spend on another, there are real tradeoffs.
Obviously, Ukraine is going to continue having
conversations with us. As I said, President Zelensky discussed
this with President Biden in Kyiv last week. Zelensky has had
similar conversations with our U.K. and French allies. The U.K.
has announced an interest in starting to do some training, so
we will see where that leads.
There are other countries in NATO--the Netherlands,
Denmark, Norway, I think--that have talked about potentially F-
16s, that they may be offloading as they upgrade to F-35s. So I
do think this conversation will continue.
I just--as I sit in the Pentagon, I have to say, what does
Ukraine need right now to stay in the fight and turn the tide
against the Russians in the first half of this year, which I
think is going to be decisive for the conflict. It is just hard
for me to tell any Member of Congress or the American people
that the best use of that dollar spent right now is on F-16s.
Ms. Escobar. Thank you so much, Dr. Kahl. And I only have a
few seconds left, but I am wondering, in terms of the
replenishment of U.S. stocks, is the Department looking to
utilize critical technology such as additive manufacturing to
fill some of those gaps?
Dr. Kahl. I think the short answer is yes, but I think it
is probably better for us to arrange a briefing by our
acquisitions and sustainment folks to really go through the
kind of the multilayered approach that they are taking to this,
because they are the real experts on that.
Ms. Escobar. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Fallon, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fallon. Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, our aid
packages to Ukraine have included light tactical vehicles like
Humvees. I have been a staunch supporter of the Humvee upgrade.
You know, when we had to retrofit the Humvees because of the
risk of IEDs [improvised explosive devices], of course that
made it top heavy, but we have ABS [antilock brake system] and
the ESC [electronic stability control] rollover kits that
prevent that. And we have lost too many men and women to
rollovers, and a lot have been injured as well.
So at the beginning of this fiscal year, approximately
40,000 Humvees that are either new or like new were in our
fleet, hadn't received the anti-rollover technology.
And my question for the witnesses is, we are sending
Humvees to the Ukraine, and where are they coming from? And
more to the point, are we sending Humvees that have already
been fully upgraded with the anti-rollover technology? Or are
we sending Humvees that are slated to get this upgrade? Or are
they coming from the demilitarized vehicle stockpile?
Dr. Kahl. I might ask General Sims if he--I don't actually
know the answer to that question, but D.A. may or we may have
take it to come back to you.
General Sims. Sir, I will have to come back to you. We will
bring that answer back to you. I am not quite sure.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 139.]
Mr. Fallon. Okay. Because we have Red River Army Depot that
does a lot of this work, and they are starving at the vine, and
we have got 40,000, you know, units that need this upgrade and
I would really like to get that, because it saves about $12
billion rather than buying brand-new ones to retrofit the ones
we already have. So we want to always be good stewards of
taxpayer dollars.
So for the witnesses as well, one of the initiatives we
have been working on in our office with our colleague, our
friend from California, Mr. Panetta, is our Ukraine Human
Rights Policy Act, and this legislation would take concrete
steps to hold Russia accountable for their atrocities they are
committing in Ukraine.
So what evidence of war crimes have you seen in Ukraine,
including any committed by the Wagner Group? And as the war
rages into its second year, what can be done to hold Russia
accountable for their actions? And then what can be done during
reconstruction?
Dr. Kahl. You know, I think our colleagues at the State
Department would probably be better at cataloguing all of the
horrors, but we have all seen it. There has been a systematic
targeting of civilians in Ukraine, clearly a callous disregard
for civilian welfare, but, you know, this winter the targeting
of critical infrastructure, literally intending to starve and
freeze tens of millions of people for no military purpose other
than to try to compel the Ukrainians to give up, but certainly
in violation of the laws of armed conflict.
We have seen Russian troops engage in terrible atrocities,
killing civilians, killing detained forces, and of course we
have also seen the deportation of Ukrainian children back to
Russia, which is among the most heinous of war crimes.
Mr. Fallon. Doctor, how many are we talking, do you think,
roughly?
Dr. Kahl. Thousands, but beyond that, I don't have the
numbers in front of me. I would encourage you to get a brief
from the State Department. They have catalogued all of that.
Mr. Fallon. General, as far as the Wagner Group goes, do
you know any more specifics on that? Could you shed some light?
General Sims. Sir, I don't. Again, as Dr. Kahl said, I
think the State Department could answer that better. But as you
and the rest of the country have seen, we are certainly
concerned with what we see reported in the news. And just as--
and I don't mean to segue, sir, but there was a comment earlier
about the--about Russian atrocities, Russian acts.
I think, you know, what separates our military, what
separates Western military certainly from the Russians, is our
concentration on treating people, you know, the way they should
be treated, with dignity, on the laws of armed conflict that
Dr. Kahl mentioned. And I know that--I know that we work hard
to talk to the Ukrainians about the same things.
Mr. Fallon. Is Russia a signator, General? Do you know? Is
it a signator to the Geneva Convention?
General Sims. Sir, that is a great question.
Mr. Fallon. Just kind of thought about that. I don't know.
Dr. Kahl. So they are. And even if they weren't, the Geneva
Conventions are treated as customary international law, and so
binding even on states that don't abide--you know, sign up to
them.
Mr. Fallon. And, General, is it your professional opinion
that the Wagner Group is something you would be more concerned
about because they are not Russian military regulars?
General Sims. Sir, I think the Wagner Group has given
plenty of reason to be a concern. I mean, you know, the fact
that they are recruiting members from prisons certainly gives
an indication of what kind of character that they are willing
to recruit.
Mr. Fallon. But, General, they say they are not doing that
anymore.
General Sims. Yes, sir.
Mr. Fallon. Should we believe them?
General Sims. You know, sir, I am not sure I would trust
the words that are coming from the Russian side right now.
Mr. Fallon. So you are saying, in effect, that
authoritarian regimes should not be taken at their word,
regardless of whether it is, say, in Beijing or in Moscow?
General Sims. Sir, I would agree that, you know, we have a
system in which I would trust, and they don't have that same
trust.
Mr. Fallon. I hope all Members of Congress just heard you.
Thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Before we go to the next questioner, I want to remind
everybody that we have a hard stop at 12:30 to go to the
classified portion of this hearing.
The gentleman from Maine, Mr. Golden, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Golden. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to start by
looking back to May of last year and point out that a
bipartisan group of Members of Congress, including members of
this committee, have sent the administration letters, and that
has gone on since April of last year, all the way right up to
right now, calling for the supply of advanced military
capabilities to Ukraine quite consistently. So 10 months ago, a
number of us called for anti-ship missiles, HIMARS, Abrams
tanks, as well as training on and transfer of F-16s.
About 5 months ago, once again, a bipartisan group of
members of this committee called for a long-term defense
commitment to Ukraine, to include surface-to-air missiles, MLRS
[Multiple Launch Rocket System], anti-ship missiles, howitzers,
and, again, training on and transfer of advanced aircraft such
as the F-16. In my opinion, these letters represent differing
opinions--policy opinions--about the speed at which the United
States should seek to deliver advanced fighting capabilities to
the battlefield in Ukraine.
Now, I really appreciate the conversation that has been
going on. Just thinking about things such as F-16 or ATACMS
[MGM-140 Army Tactical Missile System] or previously Abrams or
HIMARS, I think what we have seen is that there are sometimes
policy questions and debates and differing opinions. Then there
are logistical challenges, maintenance, and the training and
capabilities of the Ukrainian fighters themselves, different
than policy opinions of a differing nature.
And, of course, I respect the opinion brought forward by
Dr. Kahl about authorizations, appropriations, and how do we
get the greatest ROI [return on investment] on the money that
you have in hand right now to meet the top priorities of the
Ukrainian military. But, certainly, given enough money, they
would prefer to have their top 5 or top 6 or top 10 needs or
capabilities met.
And the conversation about authorizations and
appropriations is really I think a question for Congress as
opposed to questions of policy or logistical concerns and
challenges.
Of course, over the weekend the President, the President's
national security team, said now is not the right phase of the
war for providing Ukraine advanced aircraft. That sounds like a
policy decision. And they have also pointed out that the
assessment of military commanders advising the President is
that we need to focus on tanks, armored personnel carriers, and
infantry fighting vehicles, and such.
I don't think anyone disagrees with that, sir. And you have
articulated, really, that this is about how much money do we
have now, what is the greatest need that they have. But Ukraine
has articulated a desire to advance their long-range fighting
capabilities in the form of ATACMS and F-16s.
So just about over a week ago, the Supreme Allied Commander
of Europe, U.S. European Command, briefed Members of Congress--
Senate and House reportedly--and said that he believed we
should send aircraft, drones, ATACMS, to enhance the deep fight
capabilities of the Ukrainian military.
Setting aside all the concerns about logistics or
maintenance, or the readiness of the Ukraine military, General
Sims, would you agree with his assessment that this would help
Ukraine to win the war ultimately?
General Sims. Sir, I have no doubt that the continued
provision of advanced conventional weapons would help Ukraine
on the battlefield. No doubt. And I certainly have been
extraordinarily impressed, as most have, with General Cavoli's
work in Europe.
On this side of the Atlantic, the conversation continues to
be around--certainly about policy decisions, but----
Mr. Golden. Sure.
General Sims [continuing]. In our conversations with the
Ukrainians, as recent as yesterday with General Zaluzhny and
the chairman, we do hold fast to the view that what they need
right now are the things in front of them--that F-16s is a good
example, would not help them today; but things like air
defense, artillery, fighting vehicles, tanks, is what we need
to ensure we are providing.
Mr. Golden. So you don't agree with the EUCOM [U.S.
European Command] commander that possession of F-16s and ATACMS
and other long-range capabilities would help them to win the
war.
General Sims. No, sir. I think that advanced conventional
weapons would help anybody win a war.
Mr. Golden. Yeah. Absolutely.
General Sims. Yes, sir.
Mr. Golden. Is there a policy objection to giving them
longer range fires at this time?
Dr. Kahl. So I think both the F-16s and the ATACMS issues I
think are slightly different animals in the field.
Mr. Golden. Slightly different; but in general, is there a
policy objection?
Dr. Kahl. No. Because the F-16s issue is less about a long-
range capability. I think there is a general recognition that
it will make sense for them over time to transition to fourth-
generation aircraft. It is more about the tradeoffs. The ATACMS
question----
Mr. Golden. Just a few more seconds. But just, with that, I
would just point out, why not expand this conversation beyond
the near term and the limits of the dollars that you have in
your possession now and come to Congress with a plan that
includes near term, medium term, and long term, given that
whether they win the war now or it drags on for several more
years, the Russian threat will still remain. So I just think we
have got to expand the conversation.
Dr. Kahl. Happy to brief you on that. And, frankly, if you
come to the classified session, we can also provide some more
details on it, because we have done some analysis on kind of
the future Ukrainian force and what that might look like.
Mr. Golden. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from South Carolina,
Ms. Mace, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Smith,
for hosting this very important hearing.
And I want to thank the gentlemen who are here today as
well to take all of our very important questions. We are here
to address a critical matter of national security and foreign
policy in regards to Ukraine, the need for oversight of assets,
weapons, munitions, and other aid, lethal aid, being provided
to Ukraine.
The invasion of Ukraine by Russia has highlighted the
critical need for rapid aid and support that we are providing
to that region. The conflict has resulted in heavy losses for
both sides, but we have seen the Ukrainian forces--they have
demonstrated their resilience and ability to conduct offensive
operations, I believe, over the last year to everyone's
surprise.
There is no price for resiliency and their belief in their
freedom and their fight for freedom. They have been on the
world stage, I think have encouraged and inspired many folks
around the world. However, their capacity to defend their
sovereignty and security is dependent on receiving timely and
effective assistance.
In particular, we have seen a troubling pattern of delays
and bureaucratic hurdles, policy decisions that have slowed the
delivery of aid to Ukraine. I have witnessed this first-hand. I
have witnessed the State Department slow rolling in some cases,
particularly at the beginning of the invasion of Russia into
Ukraine. And it is my belief in the meetings I have had, both
publicly and privately, and in the SCIF [sensitive
compartmented information facility], that Ukraine just doesn't
have a lot of time. And we want to make sure that our
investment in their fight, that they are going to win.
It is more important than ever, seeing what Russia is
trying to do. They want to now take away Poland's borders and
other countries. Ukraine can't lose this fight, in my
estimation.
The situation in Ukraine demands urgent action, a
commitment to ensuring the lethal aid and support be provided
expeditiously. Congress and DOD need to take the steps to
remove any hurdles or address them to ensure the necessary
resources are available to fight--for Ukraine to fight for
sovereignty and security.
Failure to do so would not only endanger Ukraine but also
undermine global stability, global security, and it is my
estimation Ukraine is just, I believe, under the gun and just
does not have very much time left in this endeavor.
My first question is for Under Secretary Kahl. I am
concerned about the time it took for the U.S. to fully leverage
some of our existing processes, like convening the Senior
Integration Group for Ukraine, SIG Ukraine, to disperse
military aid to Ukraine.
And thinking ahead, China and Taiwan, we all know that
China is watching. Are there any specific improvements you
would make to the Department's decision-making process to
ensure the U.S. is proactively readying this important partner
rather than simply reacting with support? Some of the lessons
learned? How long did it take to stand up SIG Ukraine? Some of
what you learned over the last year in this process.
Dr. Kahl. Thank you for that, and I will just say we share
your sense of urgency. And there is always going to be red
tape, but we have blasted through a lot of it. And if you had I
think told us a year ago that we could have executed on $31.7
billion in security assistance to anybody, I would have said
that was bureaucratically impossible, and it is precisely
because we tried to blast through as much red tape as possible.
Most of that assistance has come through PDA, Presidential
drawdown authority. And typically because we pre-position
things and get our ducks in a row, a lot of that equipment
starts flowing in within days of the President signing the PDA,
and Lieutenant General Sims can talk to you more about that.
In terms of our internal processes, we have two. We have
something called the cross-department working group, which is
essentially the group that my office runs, but it has got
stakeholders from all the services, the Joint Staff, the
combatant commands, et cetera, to rack and stack Ukrainian
priorities and figure out the priorities for various PDA and
USAI packages.
So that is really about kind of teeing up for the Secretary
ultimately these recommendations that then go over to the White
House. We then have the SIG process, which you----
Ms. Mace. How long did it take to stand up the SIG?
Dr. Kahl. You know, I would have to get back to you on the
exact date. I think the SIG was stood up within a couple of
months of the war.
[The information referred to can be found in the Appendix
on page 139.]
Ms. Mace. Is that fast enough in your opinion?
Dr. Kahl. Well, I think that we have--I mean, we have stood
up a lot of processes that are new.
Ms. Mace. Do you think that Taiwan has a couple of months
if they----
Dr. Kahl. We already have a SIG for Taiwan. So to your
point, so----
Ms. Mace. Set up and ready to go? So it is all----
Dr. Kahl. It meets----
Ms. Mace. It is there?
Dr. Kahl [continuing]. It meets monthly, chaired by the
Deputy Secretary of Defense.
Ms. Mace. Excellent. And then on the working group, their
cross-department working group, is that working better now than
it has been before because of the urgency with Ukraine? Have
you all learned over the last year how to improve some of the
red tape? I guess, what red tape was removed to make it work
better, faster, more, in this case?
Dr. Kahl. Well, just traditionally, we did not provide--you
know, Presidential drawdown authority has been used to provide
things in the amount of, you know, hundreds of billions of
dollars at the upper end, not----
Ms. Mace. Yeah.
Dr. Kahl. [continuing]. Tens of billions of dollars. So
there was a lot of learning curve. Essentially, what we figured
out was to make sure all of the stakeholders were involved, you
had an iterated process that culminates in a four-star meeting
that I chair about every 10 days, and then that pushes
recommendations up to the chairman and the Secretary, who then
push those recommendations over to the White House.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina----
Ms. Mace. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman [continuing]. Mr. Jackson for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. General Sims, good
afternoon. I was wondering if you could help me--help me paint
a picture for my folks back home of what life would look like
for Ukrainians were we to step aside, were we to withdraw our
support, were the coalition that we lead to crumble upon our
withdrawal of our support, and then were the Russians to gain a
decisive advantage on the battlefield, what that would mean?
And I ask you because based on your remarks, you said that
the fighting has replicated the conditions that we saw during
the First World War. There was a recent conversation about
plentiful examples of war crimes that have been committed, and
I think it is important for me in explaining my support to
folks back home, to give them a sense of what it would look
like if our effort no longer existed. Could you help me do
that, please?
General Sims. So, sir, I will leave the geopolitical
conversation to what Dr. Kahl was mentioning earlier, and I
would tell you a couple of things. First would be, as an
American, this is what we do. This is what we do. This is what
we have fundamentally done for decades.
When people are wronged, we stand up for them. And in this
case, the invasion of Russia, everyone has said it was illegal.
Everybody says it was wrong, and that is what we do. And in
this case, we came together with the allies in Europe in a way
that we haven't done, really, haven't done in the past 50, 60
years.
I mean, I was--so a year ago today, sir, we talked about a
year ago on the 24th was the invasion, a year ago today I
deployed with my division headquarters as the division
commander 1st ID [Infantry Division] to Central Europe. And I
spent a lot of time in Europe--battalion commander, brigade
commander--and so I have worked a number of times with our
allies.
I had never worked with our allies where the desire, the
intent to work together, was as firm as it was in the time I
was deployed. That has not changed. I have been back multiple
times.
We were talking earlier about the contributions of our
partners. There is more than dollars, I would argue, that is
part of this. We have partners that have skin in the game, and
so they may not be dedicated in--you know, dedicating the same
percentage of GDP, but in some cases are dedicating individuals
who are making critical, really important, contributions to
what we are doing in terms of security assistance,
intelligence, working in terms of advising and training with
our partners.
That is what we do. We are Americans. And when somebody
says this is--you know, this is how the world should be, and it
is not, we say no.
Dr. Kahl has talked about the rules-based order. Why is
this important? Because after the Second World War, we came
together with the majority of the world and said this is--this
last 5, 10 years, is not how we wish to live in the world. And
we established the geopolitics that exist today, and we need to
tell people, we need to do something when people go in the
wrong direction.
Why is it important to Americans? Because we believe in
this group in here, sir, in this oversight process, I--no
politics. I am an Army guy. No politics. American politics,
field of study at the Academy. And I would tell you watching
the oversight here, watching what has occurred in DC, all the
way to the young man or woman in Poland who is transitioning
that equipment forward to a Ukrainian who plans to use it, that
is what we exist for. That is why it matters, sir.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. Now that last piece I would
like you to expand on. Could you help us visualize what it
looks like when we make the decision to send them light
tactical vehicles, all the way to that material being fielded.
Give us a sense of what that process looks like, how quickly it
is now moving.
General Sims. Well, sir, and as Dr. Kahl was talking with
Representative Mace earlier, we are learning all sorts of
lessons. I mean, listen, where we were a year ago today and
where we are now, it is a lightyear's difference, and it is
because we have smart, capable men and women who are working to
make the processes more effective and efficient.
What we have done in terms of moving, it is literally--I
will say literally moving mountains. If you were to stack up
all of the things that we have provided, we have literally
moved mountains, from not just the United States but from
places that we have that we are working with partners around
the world.
And we have moved that incrementally across oceans, in the
air, with hundreds and hundreds of aircraft and ships, moved
that to Europe and then it is moved further by our partners and
by men and women that we all are so proud to have there, all
the way to a point where a Ukrainian man or woman takes it and
brings it forward to use it.
And I know a number of you have seen that, sir, but it is
pretty impressive.
Mr. Jackson of North Carolina. My time is over. It has been
an extraordinary logistical accomplishment on top of other
accomplishments.
The Chairman. Chair now recognizes our final questioner
before we go into classified brief, and that is the gentleman
from Wisconsin, Mr. Gallagher.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Lieutenant General
Sims, to what degree do the operational plans within DOD rely
upon the assumption that we would be only forced to defeat an
adversary in one theater and deter an adversary in another
theater?
General Sims. Well, sir, not to jump into the policy side,
but, I mean, that is what we are saying we are doing. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gallagher. So given the growing no-limits security
partnership between Beijing and Moscow in the year since
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, can we reasonably argue that
planning for a confrontation with only one adversary is
becoming an increasingly dangerous presumption?
General Sims. Sir, I would argue that the fact that the
Chinese and the Russians are having conversations about ways
that they can improve their connections is dangerous to all of
us as Americans, but I think the current work that we are doing
takes into account where we are around the world.
Mr. Gallagher. If Xi Jinping makes the foolish decision of
arming Russia with weapons, what is on the table in terms of
our response?
General Sims. Sir, that one I will definitely leave to Dr.
Kahl.
Mr. Gallagher. Dr. Kahl. You could make news here.
Dr. Kahl. So, first of all, I don't think China's
leadership wants their intentions and plans to be made public.
So one of the things we have made clear to them is if we
have information that they are doing this, we will make it
public. And this actually, it matters because, as you know,
China is on a bit of a charm offensive to get back into good
graces of Europe. That is not going to work, I don't think,
period, but certainly not if they are providing large amounts
of lethal assistance to Russia.
We have also signaled, Secretary Blinken with his
counterpart at the Munich Security Conference and through other
channels, that there would be significant costs.
I am happy, in the classified session, to talk about what
some of that might look like, but it would be the similar tools
we have used to impose on others that have violated U.S.
sanctions.
Mr. Gallagher. So we are actively trying to deter the CCP
[Chinese Communist Party] from providing lethal assistance to
Russia.
Dr. Kahl. Yes.
Mr. Gallagher. And, of course, at a broader level, we are
actively trying to deter the CCP from invading Taiwan by force,
if necessary.
Dr. Kahl. Yes.
Mr. Gallagher. I think this is a perfect example--and I
know you have talked--well, I just came back from 4 days in
Taiwan, and I was struck by the--all the national security
leaders there talked about this increasing strategic
convergence between Russia and China. I am curious if you see
it in the same way.
It is sort of my contention that increasingly Putin is Xi's
junior partner in a de facto alliance against the West, and I
think we initially understood the no-limits partnership to be a
piece of paper, and increasingly it is something real. But I
would love to get your comment on how you see these two problem
sets as connected.
Dr. Kahl. Yeah. I think that is insightful and on the
money. I think, basically, you know, Russia for a long time has
not wanted to be China's junior partner, and I think that held
alive the dream in Washington that you could drive a wedge
between these two actors.
I think the war in Ukraine has essentially ended that
proposition as realistic in the foreseeable future, because
Russia is going to have to turn to China for technology, for
economic assistance, to help them reconstitute their military
after the war, and they are already turning to them now.
But, by the way, this same calculus is driving them--them,
the Russians--to have greater convergence with Iran and North
Korea as well. And so I do think because of how attrited the
Russian military has been, they have no choice but to, you
know, move closer to some of these other actors.
Mr. Gallagher. You have said recently, I believe, though,
that you don't see a PLA [People's Liberation Army] invasion of
Taiwan as imminent within the next 2 years.
Dr. Kahl. Yeah, I think that is right. I just see no
indications that Xi Jinping thinks his military is ready or
that the PLA thinks they are ready. I think he has put a date
on the dartboard for them to be ready--that doesn't mean they
have made the decision to do it--and that is 2027.
I think in the interim period, I do not see indications
that they are likely to make a leap to invade the island of
Taiwan.
Mr. Gallagher. But just so I understand, your assessment is
based on the absence of evidence that--you don't see an
indication that they are getting ready to invade. I guess----
Dr. Kahl. Actually, this would be a really interesting
thread of the conversation for us to talk about in the
classified setting.
Mr. Gallagher. Got it.
Dr. Kahl. Because it is not just about that.
Mr. Gallagher. Interesting. And just out of curiosity, did
you--2 years ago, did you view a Russian invasion of the rest
of Ukraine as imminent?
Dr. Kahl. As imminent, I did not. But, of course, we had
indications and warnings, first in April, and then of course in
the fall, that it was a possibility. And, you know, my
assessment is based on the information and intelligence that I
have at the moment. If information and intelligence change,
then my assessment----
Mr. Gallagher. Sure.
Dr. Kahl. [continuing]. Would be updated.
Mr. Gallagher. And so you disagree a lot of time with
General Minihan's recent assessment that 2025 is the danger
zone.
Dr. Kahl. I do.
Mr. Gallagher. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
We will start questioning in the classified portion with
those members who haven't been recognized for questions in the
public portion.
So right now we stand in recess for 5 minutes, as we move
to 2212 for the classified portion of this hearing.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the committee proceeded in
closed session.]
=======================================================================

A P P E N D I X

February 28, 2023

=======================================================================

PREPARED STATEMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 28, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

DOCUMENTS SUBMITTED FOR THE RECORD

February 28, 2023

=======================================================================

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

=======================================================================

WITNESS RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS ASKED DURING

THE HEARING

February 28, 2023

=======================================================================

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY DR. DESJARLAIS

Mr. Storch. The DOD OIG is conducting evaluations at several
logistics nodes in Europe to assess accountability for equipment as it
is transported by the DOD to Ukraine, including through ports, rail,
and air transfer locations. The DOD OIG is also conducting evaluations
of the DOD's end-use monitoring and enhanced end-use monitoring (EEUM)
of selected equipment once it has been transferred to Ukraine. Bi-
lateral agreements between the U.S. and Ukraine require Ukraine to
provide timely loss reports to U.S. Office of Defense Cooperation-
Ukraine representatives. In December 2022, the U.S. and Ukraine signed
a Concept of Operations that requires Ukraine to provide loss reports
for U.S. EEUM defense articles within four days. We expect to issue
several reports that will address the DOD's accountability for
equipment in transit to Ukraine, and EEUM for defense articles after
they are transferred to Ukraine.   [See page 26.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. HOULAHAN
Dr. Kahl. We continuously evaluate Ukraine's near- and long-term
needs and prioritize our support accordingly. As of right now, in close
consultation with the Ukrainians, our top priorities remain air and
missile defense and interceptors for these systems, fires, and armored
capabilities, as well as sustainment and maintenance.   [See page 39.]
______

RESPONSES TO QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. FALLON
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]   [See page 47.]
Mr. Storch. We defer to the Department to provide details on the
specifications of the HMMWVs provided to Ukraine.   [See page 47.]
______

RESPONSE TO QUESTION SUBMITTED BY MS. MACE
Dr. Kahl. The Deputy Secretary of Defense established the Senior
Integration Group-Ukraine on May 11, 2022.   [See page 51.]

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MEMBERS POST HEARING

February 28, 2023

=======================================================================

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. ROGERS

Mr. Rogers. How has the Department of Defense leveraged commercial
publicly available and open-source data to share valuable operational
information with Ukrainian and NATO forces without violating policies
surrounding intelligence sharing? Are there specific lessons-learned
and/or use cases from a year of war in Ukraine where these tools could
augment traditional intelligence or data sources to provide real-time
situational awareness in operation centers during complex emergencies
or a crisis--particularly internationally where the United States might
lack ``boots on the ground''?
Dr. Kahl. Allies have repeatedly noted the importance of the United
States sharing intelligence regarding Russia's invasion of Ukraine,
particularly in the early days of the conflict. Commercially available
data, including imagery, has played a significant role in enabling the
United States to better inform the public of the war in Ukraine and to
counter disinformation. Continued transparency and sharing with Allies,
in line with current policies and procedures, in the days since has
played a crucial role in continued Alliance unity.
The United States also leverages various open-source and publically
available data in its efforts to help Ukraine and NATO Allies better
understand the regional environment, but I am unable to comment on the
specific types and sources of information that the United States shares
with Ukraine or specific lessons learned in an unclassified setting.
The Department will provide a more detailed response through classified
channels.
Mr. Rogers. A growing point of contention between Congress and the
Biden administration remains over the White House's decision not to
designate Russia as a state-sponsor of terrorism. While this was an
interagency process the Secretary of State ultimately decides whether
to designate a government as a state-sponsor of terrorism. Does DOD
believe that Russia meets the criteria for designation as a State
Sponsor of Terrorism?
Dr. Kahl. DOD defers to the Department of State, as the Secretary
of State has the authority to make such a determination.
Mr. Rogers. Russia has traditionally used the tactic of blaming
adversaries for attacks they have not carried out. In the past, this
has included accusing Ukrainian forces of preparing to blow up a
fertilizer storage facility so that the Ukrainians could then accuse
Russian forces of having launched a chemical weapons attack.
Given the frequency of these accusations by the Russians, does the
Department have any evidence to suggest that Russia has used chemical
weapons or riot control agents on the battlefield in Ukraine?
Dr. Kahl. The Department has seen the media reports from Russian
and Ukrainian sources that the Russian military has employed riot
control agents on the battlefield in Ukraine. Likewise, both Russian
and Ukrainian sources allege chemical weapons use on the battlefield by
the other side, but the Department has not corroborated these claims.
Additional information on this question will be provided in
classified channels.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. SCOTT
Mr. Scott. After 20 years of warfare in either Iraq or Afghanistan,
the United States has created the premier treatment for wounded
warriors especially in regards to double, triple and even quadruple
amputees. What more could the United States do to help treat Ukraine's
severely injured wounded warriors and innocent civilians especially in
regards to prosthetics? What is the current DOD policy on treatment of
Ukrainian wounded warriors and civilians? What DOD policy requires
Ukrainians to pay for their non-medical expenses?
Dr. Kahl. The Department is committed to doing everything within
our authorities to provide timely medical support to care for Ukrainian
servicemembers, to aid their fight in defending Ukraine against
Russia's illegitimate war. We continue to explore options to best
support the Ukrainian armed forces as part of our close and continuous
contact with Ukrainian counterparts and European Allies, and other
stakeholders. This includes leveraging DOD best practices in advanced
combat casualty medical care to wounded soldiers.
We'd also like to highlight the extensive efforts of USAID and the
Department of State's Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration
(State/PRM) to aid Ukrainian civilians with acute medical needs.
Through implementing partners, the State/PRM has supported emergency
medical teams in Poland, Hungary, Slovakia, and Moldova to assist with
trauma care.
DOD has played a supporting role to our European Allies,
particularly Poland and Germany, who lead medical support to wounded
Ukrainian soldiers. DOD would consider deploying military medical
capabilities to Poland, but to date Poland has not made such a request.
Nevertheless, we are coordinating with Poland to determine where
specialized assistance is needed. In response to a Ukrainian request to
NATO for medical support in 2022, Germany established the Multinational
Medical Coordination Center to facilitate medical support. If Germany
or Poland cannot provide support, then patients can be referred through
the Secretarial Designee Program, which authorizes treatment by DOD
personnel at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center in Germany. This program
covers treatment for members of the military and national security
forces of Ukraine for a class of conditions sustained in conflict on a
non-reimbursable basis. The program allows for inpatient and outpatient
medical treatment for Ukrainian servicemembers, including those who
have severe injuries that puts preservation of life, limb, or eyesight
in jeopardy. The program does not appropriate funds for non-medical
expenses, but to date these expenses have been largely borne by both
U.S. and European NGOs facilitating medical treatment.
Mr. Scott. Have you noticed any reluctance by the Ukrainians to ask
for medical supplies since they might not be as high of a priority as
some weapons systems?
Dr. Kahl. No. Ukraine has requested medical supplies from a variety
of U.S. government partners. The bulk of Ukraine's requests for U.S.
medical and humanitarian aid committed to support Ukraine are fielded
by the State Department and USAID.
However, DOD has also provided a number of medical supplies as part
of multiple security assistance packages in response to validated
requirements from Ukraine's Armed Forces. This has included equipment
like first aid kits, bandages, and monitors, as well as larger items
like armored treatment vehicles and HMMWVs configured for medical
evacuation.
In addition, Ukraine has requested support from several NATO Allies
and partners. To date, more than 40 countries are providing support for
Ukraine's urgent lethal security requirements, with a majority of those
countries also providing non-lethal assistance to include significant
amounts of medical supplies to Ukraine.
Mr. Scott. How has been the partnership between the Department of
Defense and the Department of Health & Human Services in terms of
providing medical supplies and training to Ukraine?
Dr. Kahl. The Department actively engages with counterparts at the
Ministry of Defense and the Ukrainian Armed Forces General Staff to
best understand Ukraine's urgent priorities. This includes providing
training and key medical supplies to Ukrainian counterparts from DOD's
existing stocks.
The Department is able to provide this assistance using its own
authorities and does not rely on its partnership with the Department of
Health and Human Services for this purpose.
Other agencies like the Department of State and USAID have played
the primary role in providing Ukraine the humanitarian aid it needs to
care for the broader population.
Mr. Scott. What internal U.S. Government processes need to improve
to better support NATO and non-NATO partners?
Dr. Kahl. In line with the National Defense Strategy, early and
continuous consideration, engagement, and--where possible--
collaboration with Allies and partners in planning is essential for
advancing our shared interests. The Department will continue to
leverage current processes and procedures to ensure the necessary flow
of communication and the releasability of information to Allies in
order to ensure continued engagement and collaboration.
Mr. Scott. Have you noticed any reluctance by the Ukrainians to ask
for medical supplies since they might not be as high of a priority as
some weapons systems?
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. Scott. What internal U.S. Government processes need to improve
to better support NATO and non-NATO partners?
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. GALLAGHER
Mr. Gallagher. Whether it were HIMARS, Patriots, Phoenix Ghosts,
and now finally Abrams tanks--hesitancy from the administration has
left Ukraine repeatedly on their heels. If you could turn back time,
would you have sent these weapons when they were first asked for?
Dr. Kahl. Regular consultations with the government of Ukraine
inform the capabilities that ultimately are included in U.S. security
assistance packages, alongside other key considerations like U.S.
readiness and resource trade-offs. As developments on the ground in
Ukraine have changed, so too have Ukraine's most pressing requirements.
Through Presidential Drawdown Authority and the Ukraine Security
Assistance Initiative, the Department continues to provide Ukraine the
types of equipment, arms, and munitions it needs for the fight today
and to be able to defend itself well into the future.
When Russia's full-scale invasion began, the Department surged
Stinger air defense and additional Javelin anti-tank missiles. These
capabilities were suited to the terrain and nature of the fight, making
best use of the available security assistance resources at the time and
were critical to Ukraine driving Russia back from Kyiv in the early
days of Russia's war.
As the war shifted to the south and east, it presented a new need
for long-range fires and loitering munitions. High Mobility Artillery
Rocket Systems and artillery helped Ukraine take the momentum from
Russia, alongside Unmanned Aerial Systems like Switchblade and Phoenix
Ghost.
When Russia increased its air attacks in the fall of 2022, air
defense became more important and we committed critical systems,
including a Patriot air defense battery, along with counter-Unmanned
Aerial System capabilities and other air defense assets.
Going into the spring and summer months, we have been laser-focused
on getting Ukraine more armored maneuver capability, enabling them to
retake more territory.
We will continue working in close consultation with Ukrainian
counterparts to ensure we are providing the most relevant and critical
capabilities to support Ukraine's efforts to push back on Russia's
unprovoked war of aggression.
Mr. Gallagher. Our botched withdrawal from Afghanistan was quickly
followed by failed deterrence in Ukraine--can you describe what forces
within the Department that you assess to be paralyzing our ability to
respond to aggression in a way that deters conflict?
Dr. Kahl. Regarding the statement that deterrence failed in Europe,
President Biden made clear from the outset that our core military
deterrence objective was to deter an attack on the United States or
NATO. We have thus far been successful in sustaining and strengthening
deterrence in support of this objective.
To your question about deterring conflict, we made integrated
deterrence a cornerstone of the National Defense Strategy (NDS). We are
aligning the Department's policies, investments, and activities to
sustain and strengthen deterrence--tailored to specific competitors and
coordinated to maximum effect inside and outside the Department.
Integrated deterrence is enabled by combat-credible forces prepared
to fight and win, as needed, and backstopped by a safe, secure, and
effective nuclear deterrent.
The Fiscal Year 2024 budget proposal is a prime example of the
Department's full commitment to providing the right mix of capabilities
to achieve the vision of the NDS. DOD is modernizing the Joint Force,
with a focus on building a future force that is lethal, sustainable,
resilient, survivable, agile, and responsive.
Mr. Gallagher. LTG Sims, to what degree do operational plans within
the DOD rely upon the assumption that we would only be forced to defeat
in one theater and deter in another?
Given the growing ``no limits'' security partnership between
Beijing and Moscow in the year since Russia's invasion of Ukraine, can
we reasonably argue that planning for a confrontation with only one
adversary is becoming an increasingly dangerous presumption? How does
DOD plan to respond should China deliver weapons systems for Russia to
use against Ukraine?
To what extent has the failure of deterrence in Ukraine
demonstrated to the DOD the pressing need to arm Taiwan to the teeth to
prevent a similar failure in the Indo-Pacific?
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. LALOTA
Mr. LaLota. According to recent public sources, the United States
has provided approximately $76.8 billion in aid to Ukraine. Conversely,
our European allies have provided approximately $35.02 billion--less
than half as much. At the same time, the U.S. is currently $31 trillion
in debt--a number that is 125 percent of our gross domestic product.
Michael Mullen, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff famously
warned, ``the most significant threat to our national security is our
debt.'' Given the significant price tag of our debt and the ongoing
crisis in Ukraine, how can the administration and or Congress assist
with encouraging our European allies to share more of the financial
burden of this ongoing conflict?
Dr. Kahl. The United States has committed approximately $31.7
billion in security assistance since February 24, 2022 to help
Ukraine's ability to push back on Russia's unprovoked war of
aggression. At the same time, Secretary Austin has led an effort to
coordinate international support for Ukraine through the Ukraine
Defense Contact Group. This brings together some 50 nations in support
of Ukraine on a regular basis to coordinate assistance, sustainment,
and training.
Contributions from Allies and partners have contributed key
capabilities to Ukraine, totaling more than $19 billion in direct
security assistance, and often providing unique capabilities to Ukraine
the United States may not have in our own inventories. This has
included Leopard tanks, infantry fighting vehicles, 152mm ammunition,
and multiple launch rocket systems.
When measured as a share of GDP, the generosity of Allies like
Estonia and Latvia--which have made donations worth more than 1 percent
of GDP--as well as other frontline states such as Poland, Slovakia, and
Bulgaria is clear. By this metric, the United States ranks as the ninth
largest donor.
As the Department continues to work hard to get Ukraine the
capabilities it so urgently needs, the Secretary and others across
government will continue urging Allies and partners to provide Ukraine
with additional means to counter Russia's ongoing aggression.
The $31.7 billion in support has contributed to significant
degradation of Russia's military without directly involving U.S. or
Allied forces.
Mr. LaLota. According to recent public sources, the United States
has provided approximately $76.8 billion in aid to Ukraine. Conversely,
our European allies have provided approximately $35.02 billion--less
than half as much. At the same time, the U.S. is currently $31 trillion
in debt--a number that is 125 percent of our gross domestic product.
Michael Mullen, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff famously
warned, ``the most significant threat to our national security is our
debt.'' Given the significant price tag of our debt and the ongoing
crisis in Ukraine, how can the administration and or Congress assist
with encouraging our European allies to share more of the financial
burden of this ongoing conflict?
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Mr. LaLota. According to recent public sources, the United States
has provided approximately $76.8 billion in aid to Ukraine. Conversely,
our European allies have provided approximately $35.02 billion--less
than half as much. At the same time, the U.S. is currently $31 trillion
in debt--a number that is 125 percent of our gross domestic product.
Michael Mullen, former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff famously
warned, ``the most significant threat to our national security is our
debt.'' Given the significant price tag of our debt and the ongoing
crisis in Ukraine, how can the administration and or Congress assist
with encouraging our European allies to share more of the financial
burden of this ongoing conflict?
Mr. Storch. We defer to the Department to explain its efforts to
encourage partners and allies to provide assistance to Ukraine.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY MR. MOYLAN
Mr. Moylan. Mr. Kahl, given that the Ukraine war offers the United
States an opportunity to practice military logistics, are efforts being
made to ensure that the lessons currently being learned in Europe can
be applied to the Indo-Pacific theater given it's different geographic
and political challenges.
Dr. Kahl. I can confirm that the Department is continually
reviewing lessons learned from the war in Ukraine, including how these
lessons can be applied to the Indo-Pacific theater both before and
during a crisis.
______

QUESTIONS SUBMITTED BY DR. MCCORMICK
Dr. McCormick. LTG Sims, many constituents and other folks I've
spoken to worry about how sending significant quantities of materiel to
Ukraine may hurt our own readiness for a major conflict. When
identifying munitions and ammunition to deliver to Ukraine, is it DOD
policy to, where possible, send materiel closer to its expiration date
so that we retain materiel with the greatest remaining shelf life?
If not, can you speak to measures we're taking to maintain
sufficient stockpiles while being fiscally responsible?
What other criteria and standards are we using to identify
platforms, systems, and other material eligible for shipment to Ukraine
besides them just being surplus and/or antiquated?
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Dr. McCormick. LTG Sims, for better of worse, it appears to me that
our involvement in Ukraine offers an opportunity to see how our weapons
systems measure up to Russian systems and how they function in that
environment. Do we have the capability to track outcomes and collect
performance data once Ukrainian forces have taken possession of those
systems? If not, do you think we have the capability to collect that
data without detracting from Ukraine's combat effectiveness? What
insights have we garnered regarding the performance and resilience of
our communications and command & control systems against Russian
cyberattacks?
General Sims. [The information is classified and retained in the
committee files.]
Dr. McCormick. In recent months, President Zelenskyy has removed
several officials from national and regional-level offices presumably
due to instances of graft and corruption. How is the DOD assisting the
Ukrainian government in preventing poor governance, rooting out
corruption, and ensuring that the aid we deliver to Ukraine reaches its
intended destination? Are you aware of instances where our aid and
materiel has been diverted from its intended destination? What measures
are in place to ensure that weapons and munitions we deliver aren't
diverted to an illicit market where they could potentially fall into
the hands of adversarial state and non-state actors?
Mr. Storch. We defer to the Department to respond as to how the DOD
is assisting the Ukrainian government in preventing poor governance and
rooting out corruption. With regard to ensuring that the aid the U.S.
delivers to Ukraine reaches its intended, in late January 2023, I
traveled to Germany, Poland, and Ukraine with the leaders of the State
and USAID OIGs. The purposes of this trip were to obtain the latest on-
the-ground perspective of the evolving security and non-security
assistance provided to Ukraine; to build on our coordinated, whole-of-
government approach to oversight of the United States' significant
investment in this effort; and to deliver an unambiguous message to
both American and Ukrainian stakeholders about the expectations for
accountability for such assistance. In Kyiv, my colleagues and I
personally and forcefully delivered this message in meetings with the
Ukrainian Prime Minister, the Minister of Defense, the Minister of
Finance, the Prosecutor General, and other key Ukrainian leaders and
counterparts.
The DOD OIG is engaged in a comprehensive set of audits and
evaluations examining the full range of issues relating to the DOD's
train and supply mission, including ongoing examinations of security
and accountability controls for defense items transferred to Ukraine
within the U.S. European Command area of responsibility, the ground
transportation of equipment to support Ukraine from port to transfer
locations, land-based security controls for equipment bring transferred
to Ukraine, and our third in a continuing series of reviews of the
DOD's enhanced end-use monitoring of defense articles provided to
Ukraine. This work will examine the DOD's efforts to track American
security assistance provided to Ukraine, including the tracking
technology that has been deployed by the United States and Ukraine and
the DOD's ability to conduct remote site visits within Ukraine. Based
on our completed work, the DOD OIG has not substantiated any instances
where American aid and material has been diverted from its intended
destination.

[all]
